=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/CreationDate: D:20180206110424+09'00'
/ModDate: D:20180206110424+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
Meeting of the Board  
27 February - 1 March 2018  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  15 GCF/B. 19/ 22/Add.0 6 
6 February 2018  
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VI 
Funding proposal package for FP064  
 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Promoting risk mitigation 
instruments and finance for renewable energy and energy efficiency 
investments”;  
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or  focal  
point(s); and  
c) Environmental and social report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme Title:   Promoting risk mitigation instruments and finance for  
renewable energy and energy efficiency investments  
 
Country/Region: Argentina  
 
 
Accredited Entity: Inter -American Development Bank (IDB)  
 
 
Date of Submission: January 26, 2018


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section  A PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section  B FINANCING / COST  INFORMATION  
 
Section  C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section  E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT  CRITERIA  
 
Section  F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section  G RISK ASSESSMENT AND  MANAGEMENT  
 
Section  H RESULTS MONITORING AND  REPORTING  
 
Section  I ANNEXES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”  • Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal  document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed  50. Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
BICE  Banco de Inversión y Comercio Exterior S.A.  
CAMMESA  Compania Administradora del Mercado Mayorista Electrico 
EE Energy  Efficiency  
ENRE  Ente Nacional Regulador de la  Electricidad 
ESI Energy Savings  Insurance  
ESTP  Energy Services and Technology  Provider  
FODER  Fondo para el Desarrollo de las Energias  Renovables 
GCF  Green Climate  Fund  
GDP  Gross Domestic  Product  
GHG  Greenhouse  Gas 
GWH  Gigawatt -hour 
IDB Inter-American Development  Bank  
INDC  Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
LFI Local Financial  Institution  
MINEM  Ministry of Energy and Mining (Ministerio de Energia y Mineria) 
NDA  National Designated  Authority  
NDB  National Development  Bank  
OR Operational  Regulations  
SE Sustainable  Energy  
SME  Small and Medium Sized Enterprise 
tCO 2eq Tons of Carbon Dioxide  equivalent  
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
USD  United States  Dollar


---
*Page 5*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 64  
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme title  Promoting risk mitigation instruments and finance for 
renewable energy and energy efficiency investments1 
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  Argentina  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Ministry of Economy and Public Finances  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  Inter -American Development Bank (IDB)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☐ Direct  ☒ International  
 
 
 
 
 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) – Component 1 
Banco de Inversión y Comercio Exterior S.A.(BICE) – 
Component 2  
 
Beneficiaries in Argentina:  
• Small and Medium Sized Enterprises investing in  eligible 
technologies (b iomass, biogas and energy  efficiency),  
• Sector market actors (technology service  providers, 
installers, project  developers)  
• Local Financial  Institutions  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐ Micro  (≤10)  
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐ Small  (10<x≤50)  
☐ Large  (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☒ Mitigation  ☐ Adaptation ☐ Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  January 26, 2018  
 
 
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details   
Contact person, position  Gloria Visconti , Climate Change Lead Specialist, Climate 
Change and Sustainability Division  
Maria Netto , Lead Financial Markets Specialist, Capital 
Markets and Financial Institutions Division  
Organization  Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)  
Email address  GLORIAV@iadb.org / MNETTO@iadb.org  
Telephone number  +1 202 -623-3360 / +1 202 -623-2009  
Mailing address  1300 New York Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20577, 
USA 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power  generation  
(E.g.  on-grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
 
 
1 The project is complementary to the IDBG project FP 030 Catalyzing private investment in sustainable energy in  
Argentina – Part 1  approved during B.15 by covering different mitigation technologies to support the structuring of 
viable RenovAr projects for biomass and potentially biogas projects, as well as promote the financing of energy 
efficiency investments. Thereby the proposed project ensures synergies with the aforementioned approv ed project by 
targeting additional energy demand sectors and reaching a wider set of private actors through the financial sector.


---
*Page 6*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 64  
 
 
☐ Low emission  transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)  
☒ Buildings, cities and industries and  appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐ Forestry and land  use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
Most vulnerable people and communities  
☐ (E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses,  etc.) 
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructur e and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
☐ Ecosystem and ecosystem  services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 
 
A.2. Project Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. The proposed Project aims at mobilizing concessional finance from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) to promote the 
efficiency  in the production  and use of energy  in Argentina,  in order  to contribute  to the reduction  of greenhouse  gas 
(GHG) emissions and the creation of a more conductive financing environment for investing in sustainable energy 
(SE) projects in the long  term.2 
2. GCF reimbursable resources will be channeled through a sovereign loan to the Republic of Argentina and will be 
executed  by the Banco  de Inversión  y Comercio  Exterior  S.A.(BICE)3, Argentina’s  national  development  bank  (NDB), 
and blended  with BICE’s  own resources  to provide  financing  at adequate  terms  and conditions  for small  and medium 
enterprise (SME) 4 sub-projects in specific SE technologies (biomass, biogas and energy efficiency). This 
concessional  line of financing  will be delivered  through:  (ii) first-tier local financial  intermediaries  (LFIs);  and (ii) where 
adequate, direct sub -project funding to jumpstart the evolving market, specifically where LFIs do not t ake senior 
positions5. Non -reimbursable GCF grant resources (USD 3 million) will finance technical assistance activities to 
support  the structuring  of various  mechanisms  that will complement  the provision  of loans  and improve  LFIs and SME  
technical capacity and knowledge of the Project and the type of investments it promotes6. GCF grant funding will be 
complemented by in -kind resources from BICE (USD 600,000) including staff hours, logistics and office space, and  
 
 
2 Henceforth, renewable energy (RE) and energy efficiency (EE) investments are encompassed by the collective term 
Sustainable Energy (SE) investments, where not otherwise specified. In the context of this Project, SE refers to the 
subset of biomass, biogas and demand -side EE investments  (sub-projects).  
3 The IDB, as lender (acting as Accredited Entity of the GCF) will enter into a loan agreement with the Republic of 
Argentina to finance Component 2 of the Program. The sovereign loan contract determines the responsibility of the 
Republic of Argentina in its capacity as borrower. No third -party guarantee is required. BICE will be the Executing 
Entity, and as such will sign the sovereign loan contract. BICE and the Republic of Argentina will enter into an 
agreement whereby BICE will agree, a mong others, to execute the program as contemplated in the loan agreement.  
4 For the purpose  of this Project,  the definition  of SME  will follow  Argentine’s  government  classification  of SMEs , as per 
Resolución  General  103-E/2017  of the Secretaría  de Emprendedores  y de la Pequeña  y Mediana  Empresa,  under  the 
Ministry of Production. Under this resolution, firms are classified by size based on their level of sales, with distinctions 
by economic  activity.  SMEs  are firms  with sales  of up to $760  million  Pesos  or $250  million  Pesos  for the industrial  and 
services sectors, respectively. Within this range, small firms constitute those with sales up to $64 million Pesos or $21 
million Pesos, for the industrial and services sectors,  respectively.  
5 It is expec ted that direct  lending  will only apply  to individual  sub-loans  larger  than USD  5 million.  Only biomass  projects 
are expected to potentially be this large (see Table  F2.1).  
6 These  lessons  and case  studies  will serve  in capacity  and awareness  raising  events,  as well as during  sales  by energy 
services and technology providers (ESTP) and loan discussions by LFI to target bankable SMEs. The promotion 
channel for the program is two -fold and based on the premise that local actors know their clients: 1) ESTP s develop a 
strategy to target their existing and new clients and 2) LFIs actively search their existing client base for financing 
opportunities, conscious about their debt  capacity.


---
*Page 7*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 64  
 
 
additional IDB grant resources (USD 250,000). Non -reimbursable GCF grant resources will be executed by the IDB, 
in coordination with BICE.  
3. The Project is expected to play a critical role in filling the long -term financing gap and mobilize funding from the 
private sector, providing necessary support to SE investment projects unable to obtain suitable financing in the 
existing  market.  The Project  including  the impact  of the revolving  account  (see paras  6 and 107) could  reduce  energy  
consumption  by 229 GWh,  generate  8,842  GWh,  and reduce  greenhouse  emissions  by about  9.1 million  tCO 2eq over 
the Project’s lifetime.  
4. Over  time,  the Project  is expected  to have  a positive  demonstrative  effect  on private  sector  financing  and local capital 
markets players, as well as technology providers and energy consumers, improving their capacity to analyze, select 
and implement  SE projects  and increasing  credit  appetite  to finance  and invest  more  under  evolved  market  conditions 
in the  future.  
5. The Project is in line with Argentina’s government objective to increase RE share in the energy matrix to 20% and 
reduce energy consumption in 5.9% by 2025. It is also consistent with the country’s submitted Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC)7, which sets the goal to  reduce GHG emissions by 15% in 2030 with respect to 
projected business as usual (BAU) emissions for that year and includes actions related to EE and RE. The project 
has received the No -Objection letter of the Argentinean NDA following a thorough review by  Argentinean authorities 
which included the programme prioritization by the Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers ( Jefe de Gabinete de Ministros ) 
(See Annex 1 and Section  E.5).8 
6. BICE is expected to use all GCF reimbursable funding for providing sub -loans for s ub-projects in any of the SE 
technologies eligible for the Project (biomass, biogas and EE, see Section F.2). GCF funds will be transferred and 
managed by BICE exclusively for the execution of the Project in a dedicated revolving account9. BICE will mainta in 
the level of co -financing throughout the duration of the GCF loan issued from the account for the portfolio of sub - 
loans (see C.7). Returns from sub -loans, including payments, prepayments, cancellations or terminations of sub - 
loans shall be used to fi nance new sub -loans consistent with the objectives of the Project (see para 107) and up to 
the tenor of 20 years. In the long term, it is expected that once these investments have demonstrated their viability 
and profitability, BICE and LFIs will be willin g to commit additional funding from other sources to continue in this line 
of business.  
7. Furthermore, the Project is aligned and complementary in scope to the IDBG GCF Project FP30 “ Catalysing  private  
investment in sustainable energy in Argentina ”10 approve d at GCF B.15  and the IDBG  Green Financing Facility  
project with Banco Galicia . 
 
7 The INDCs are public outlines of climate actions countries intend to take under the new international agreement 
adopted in December 2015 at the Conference of the Parties (COP21) in Paris. UNFCCC, 2016.  
8 For the EE sector, the Project applies the Energy Savings Insurance (ESI) mechanism (see Annex 11 Micale et al. 
(2015)  Global  Innovation  Lab for Climate  Finance  Lab),  currently  piloted  in several  countries  in LAC,  includin g Colombia 
and Mexico. The projects in Colombia, with Bancoldex, and in Mexico, with FIRA, have launched their respective ESI 
credit lines. As of March 2017, the Mexican programme has validated eleven technology service providers, is in the 
process of vali dating three sub -projects with about USD 1.9 Million investment volume, and expects thirty projects to 
be financed in 2017. The Colombian programme is currently in the promotion phase and expects at least six projects 
for a potential of USD1.2 Million to b e financed by the end of  2017.  
9 The use of a dedicated revolving account will enable longer -tenor resources from the GCF to finance new sub - 
projects,  once  maturity  of the first round  of sub-loans  has been  reached.  The team  estimates  that the use of a revolving 
mechanism can produce a more than two -fold increase in the number of beneficiary sub -projects. Results and impact 
calculations for the Project are shown throughout the FP with and without the effect of the revolving  account.  
10 The following tabl e presents a comparison of the scope of this proposal with the approved FP30:  
Concept  Project proposal  FP30  
Sub-projects  EE and small biogas and biomass  
projects (<5 MW)  Large scale wind and solar PV projects (average 80  
MW)  
Sectors  SMEs  Large -scale developers  
# sub -projects  2,645  5 
Energy takers  Self-supply and PPAs (renovAr)  PPAs (renovAR), grid connected  
Objective  Engage local banks in financing these  
types of projects by SMEs  Help structure and complete long -term debt packages  
of large scale projects, engaging commercial banks  
The two projects  will be implemented  by overlapping  teams  within  IDBG  with the cooperation  of the GCF  focal  point  of 
the IDB. The two projects have synergies in terms of the financial channels and capacity building and knowledge 
sharing efforts. While FP30 provides direct financing through project finance structures to large RE projects, the IDBG 
project team intends to share lessons learned with the LFI community. The proposed project will conduct joint 
knowledge sharin g and capacity building events to inform the LFI and technology provider community where project 
finance  structured  are concerned.  The project  teams  will be attentive  when  sharing  and disseminating  experiences  and


---
*Page 8*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 64  
 
 
A.3. Project Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  April 30, 2018  
IDB will obtain its internal approvals within the period specified in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA)  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Within 12 months after all the relevant agreements between IDB and 
the GCF have finalized  
 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: August 2018  
End:  August 2023  
Project/programme lifespan  Five (5) years  
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project  
8. The Project involves investments in biomass, biogas and EE sub -projects (see Section F.2) for a total amount of USD  
430.64  million.  This includes  USD  100 million  of GCF  financing  from the Project  in a revolving  account,  thus financing 
multiple  projects  with the same  GCF  resources,  USD  60 Million  co-financing  by BICE  provided  for the same  tenor  as 
the GCF  resources,  USD  3.85 in grants  (including  in-kind contribution)  for technical  assistance  (see Table  B1.1),  plus 
an estimated USD 128 million of leveraged finance corresponding to private SME capital (see Table  E6.5.1).  
9. The Project  is designed  with the objective  of providing  adequate  financing  to viable  SE projects,  in order  to help fund 
the existing financing gap for these investments in Argentina. It also aims at catalysing additional investment by 
generating a track record of successful projects and building capacities among agents of the industry to address 
barriers to investment, thereby improving  employment  opportunities.  
10. GCF  funding  will contribute  to lowering  the cost of financing  resulting  from high perceived  risks  of these  relatively  new 
technologies  in the current  context  of the country,  helping  adjust  the terms  of the available  financing  to the cash  flows 
of participating  sub-projects.  By working  via the NDB  BICE,  the project  will also be able to leverage  funding  from this 
institution and other participating financial entities, while at the same time creating support mechanisms and skills to 
assess and implement these projects in the  future.  
11. The total amount of GCF reimbursable resources will be channelled to BICE in order to provide financing for private 
investment in SE projects, either through first -tier operations (for sub -loans larger tha n USD 5 million) or via LFIs. A 
grant  element,  to be executed  by the IDB in coordination  with BICE  is requested  to support  the implementation  of the 
proposed lending activities and provide technical assistance, including for bridging information asymmetries, ensure 
bankable project structuring, and enable dissemination and capacity building activities to address non -financial 
barriers (see Tables B1.2 and B1.3 for a full description of the components). With this in mind, two components are 
envisio ned for the Project, as shown  below.  
 
Table B1.1. - Indicative Project cost breakdown by component, expenditure type and funding source  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[a] Technical assistance includes activities to support Project implementation, training and capacity building, advisory services  for the design of risk 
mitigation mechanisms, workshops, activities and marketing campaigns to raise public awareness and strength ening of the country’s regulatory 
framework to facilitate financing and implementation of EE projects (see Tables B1.2 and B1.3) to be executed by IDB in coord ination with BICE. [b] 
BICE funding for Component 1 will be provided in -kind, including staff hou rs, logistics, office space for events and consultants, and the like. [c] Total 
includes in -kind resources. SMEs’ own capital invested in the projects financed (expected to be in the range of 20% to 30% of total proje ct cost), albeit  
 
knowledge to distinguish the size of targeted projects and therefore the diverse audiences within the LFI community,  
i.e. to differentiate between SME company finance vs. project finance teams so as to ensure the whole spectrum of 
project sizes and investors/SMEs are included.  
Component  Expenditure 
type GCF  
funding  Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient  Co-financing 
Public (BICE)  Co-financing 
Public (IDB)  Total (for 
entire 
Project)[c] 
1. Implementation costs and 
technical assistance 
activities[a] Grant  3 million USD  
($) 0.6[b] 0.25 3.85 
2. Financing adapted to RE and 
EE projects  Loan  100 million USD  
($) 60.0 0 160.0  
Total Project   103  60.6 0.25 163.85


---
*Page 9*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 64  
 
 
required for eligibility, is not committed ex ante and will only be computed when calculating total leveraged resources. Ensu ring equity contributions is 
a regular practice in the banking sector in order to assure client’s financial solvency and commitment. Additional co -financing could be provided by 
commercial banks acting as LFI in latter stages of the Project, but will not be a c ommitment for the Project.  
 
12. The Project budget by Component and Activity is presented in Table B1.2. (See Table B1.3 and Annex 9 for a more 
detailed description of activities)  
 
Table B1.2. - Project Budget by Component, Activity and Sub -Activity (in mil lion USD)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a] BICE funding for Component 1 will be provided in -kind, including staff hours, logistics, office space for events and consultants, 
and the like.  
Component  Activity  GCF  
Proceeds  BICE[a] IDB Total  
 
 
 
 
 
Component 1 : 
Implementation 
costs and 
technical 
assistance 
activities  1.1. Develop financial and 
non-financial instruments, 
including standard 
performance contract, 
insurance policy covering 
energy savings and validation 
methodologies to account 
energy savings and generation   
 
 
1.05  
 
 
0.21  
 
 
0.16  
 
 
1.42 
1.2. Strengthen capacity of 
BICE, LFIs, ESTPs, project 
developers and validators for 
SE project development. Seed 
incentives and Knowledge 
sharing   
 
1.49  
 
0.31  
 
0.09  
 
1.89 
Contingencies  0.13 - - 0.13 
Component 2 : 
Financing 
adapted to RE 
and EE projects  2.1 Increase medium and 
long-term credit line for SE 
projects provided to SMEs   
100  
60  
0  
160 
Project 
Management 
Costs  PMU - Project Management 
Unit - Establishment at BICE 
of a business unit dedicated  to 
Green  financing   
0.33  
0.08  
0  
0.41 
Total Project financing  103 60.60  0.25 163.85


---
*Page 10*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 64  
 
 
Table B1.3. - Component and activity description  
 Component 1. Implementation costs and technical assistance activities.   
 Activity 1.1. Develop financial and non -financial instruments. This activity will support the development of a 
ready -to-use strategy that blends financial and non -financial instruments to promote investment by SMEs. These 
instruments include: standard performance contract, insurance policy covering energy savings and validation 
methodologies to account for energy savings.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.1. Development of market assessment. Two detailed interview -based in -depth market 
assessments for (i) biomass and biogas, and (ii) EE technologies. This will include a gender -disaggregated 
baseline  setting  study  of financial  services  for women -led SMEs,  and for the participation  of women  in project - 
specific  technologies,  so as to identify  a set of adequate  gender -sensitive  indicators  and definitions  to monitor 
women’s participation in Project activities.  
• Sub-activity  1.1.2.  Development  of a standard  performance  contract.  A standard  performance  contract  model 
for risk sharing  between  SMEs  and ESTPs  will be developed  by legal  consultants.  As part of the development 
of these  contracts,  stakeholder  feedback  will be incorporated.  The contract  will be available  and disseminated 
among ESTPs, SMEs, LFIs and local insurers. The proposed Project introduces a contractual arrangement 
between  a potential  client  (e.g. SME)  and ESTP  in which  the risks  associated  with achieving  expected  energy 
savings – or energy generation in the case of biomass and biogas – are transparently and efficiently shared 
by both parties in the contract, providing confidence to the SME that the ESTP will deliver as promised, and 
also providing the ESTP with the incentive to del iver the contracted energy savings or generation. 
Furthermore, the existence of a standardized contract allows LFIs to process loan applications in a 
standardized manner, reducing their transaction costs and allowing them to develop standardized 
approaches  to assessing the risks associated with SE  projects.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.3. Develop a procedure/methodology to facilitate SMEs participation in the renovAR 
program11. For biomass and some biogas sub -projects, the Project foresees to develop a mechanism to 
check the eligibility  and feasibility  of participating  in the renovAR  program.  This activity  will evaluate  existing 
regulation and develop together with SMEs a standardized procedure to identify and support small projects 
to participate in the renovAR  program.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.4 Develop standards and validation methodologies for sub -project level accounting and 
proposal design validation. This will include the development of methodologies for accounting for 
technology/sub -project energy savings/generati on, validation procedures, protocols, formats and reporting 
and monitoring  procedures.  Methodologies  and templates  will be developed  and readily  available  for project 
developers (ESTP and SMEs) and validators to verify and monitor energy savings/generation . Independent 
validation procedures will be carried out by an independent third party with strong credentials on EE 
normalization and certification processes, and biomass/biogas project engineering design, respectively. Its 
role will include: a) validation  of the ability of each sub -project to deliver expected and contracted energy 
savings/generation; b) validation of the capacity of the ESTP to realize the contracted sub -project and to 
realize necessary service; c) verification that the equipment has been installed according to the sub -project 
proposal and that the old equipment has been properly decommissioned and disposed of to avoid GHG 
emissions leakages and other negative environmental impacts, where applicable; d) verification of realized 
energy  savin gs/generation;  and e) arbitration  in case  of conflict  between  the SME  and the ESTP  on the actual 
energy  results.  
It is important to note that the design of the formats, protocols and methodologies which will be developed 
by the independent  technical  validator  for each  of the technologies  eligible  under  the program,  with feedback 
from BICE,  the IDB, and local stakeholders  will be based  on international  best practices  and standards,  and, 
as applicable, on the local technical regulations on EE, biomass and biogas, at the outset of the  Project.  
• Sub-activity  1.1.5.  Development  of financing  structuring  and risk mitigation  instruments  (ESI for EE) and sub- 
project  supporting  resources  strategy.  For EE, an insurance  policy  covering  energy  savings  will be developed 
by a legal consultant, following the Energy Savings Insurance (ESI) model12. As highlighted in the Global 
Innovation Lab for Climate Finance Analysis (Annex 11) and the EE Project Evaluation and  Implementation  
Flow (Annex 12), and piloted in othe r countries, a financial risk mitigation instrument in the form of a  surety  
 
11 Please refer to ¶36 of this Funding Proposal for a description of the RenovAR program.  
12 The ESI mechanism is a set of instruments consisting of a standard contract with a contractual retention, validation 
methodologies  and activities,  and the insurance.  The retention  can be structured  as an escrow  account,  as an individual 
and as a pooled retention fund which sits with the insurance company. The costs and legal requirements  of each of 
these options varies. In the economic and financial analysis we contemplate a conservative high cost of 5%, which in 
reality should be  lower.


---
*Page 11*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 64  
 
 
 that partially covers the energy  saving commitment made by the ESTP under the contract would help 
minimize the performance risk of the project for industrial firms and their potential financiers. To that effect, 
local insurance/surety  firms  will be engaged  in the Project,  and these  firms  are likely  to reinsure  their policies 
with international re -insurance companies. The insurance has a similar expected positive effect on the trust 
and on the access to finance barrier as the standardized contract. The ESI mechanism promotes financing 
for energy savings projects where end -beneficiary clients (SMEs) repay the project loan through the 
monetized energy savings of the project. A standard performance contract will be established between a 
ESTP  and the end-beneficiary,  which  contemplates  a retent ion fund to be managed  by an insurance  company 
or via a separate escrow -type bank with the ESTP as the account owner and the bank with a power of 
attorney. The decision between these two options will be based on feasibility of implementation including 
costs. The inclusion  of the retention  fund means  that only part of the 100%  of project  costs  for the exchange 
of inefficient  with efficient  equipment  will be paid by the client  to the ESTP.  A share  of the project  costs  goes 
into a retention fund managed by the  insurance company. The retention fund will be paid out to the ESTP 
once energy savings have been realized. If there is a lack of energy savings, the share of the retention fund 
will be paid to the client to cover the lack of energy savings. If the lack of  energy savings goes beyond the 
coverage of the retention fund (first loss), the insurance that has been signed at the beginning of the project 
pays the remaining share to cover the lack of energy savings.13 The grant will enable to support the surety 
comp any to structure  a suitable  market  product  based  on an additional  business  line to their surety  products. 
The insurance  company  relies  on the technical  due diligence  of the third-party  validator,  while  the insurance 
company does conduct their own financial  due diligence of the ESTP companies to be  covered.  
The insurance policy will be developed incorporating stakeholder feedback; it will be available and 
disseminated with ESTPs, SMEs, LFIs and local insurers. The insurance policy will be a financial risk 
mitigation  instrument  in the form of a surety  that partially  covers  the energy  saving  commitment  made  by the 
ESTP  under  the contract.  It will help minimize  the performance  risk of the project  for firms  and their potential 
financiers.  To facilitate  access  to guarantee  instruments  such  as the Sociedad  de Garantia  Reciproca  (SGR), 
this component  aims  to support  the standardization  of evaluation  of sub-projects  and firms.  For biomass  and 
biogas,  a sub-project  supporting  strategy  will be developed  to reduce  risks of small -scale  project  engineering 
studies.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.6. Development and implementation of a Promotion and Execution Plan for the Project. A 
business plan with budget, human resources, timeline and milestones will be identified and approved 
internally in BICE for the Project’s execution and promotion. The business plan primarily addresses a key 
obstacle to SE investments, the lack of prioritization of these investments by SMEs, and generally by key 
economic actors. By connecting relevant acto rs, the strategy aims to close the existing information gap on 
the opportunities  for creating  economic  benefits  through  SE measures  and providing  information  on realistic 
cost savings  that SE investments  would  entail.  Potential  investors,  i.e. industrial  firms in different  sub-sectors, 
in particular SMEs, and LFIs, will be particularly targeted and  connected.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.7. Development of a Project Pipeline. The Project will develop and implement a strategy to 
prepare an initial pipeline of technically -robust, bankable SE projects. The “Incentive for Engineering of the 
project” aims to reduce the risk perception of this phase by covering part of the costs (up to 50 percent) 
associated  with the engineering  and project  preparation  phase.  The incentive  is part of sub-project  loan that 
will be converted to a grant if the project is not executed. (Sub -activity 1.1.7.). To increase the credibility of 
the engineering study in case it is performed by the project developer, an engineering firm will review the 
quality of the projects according to international standards. These mechanisms will help to reduce the risk 
perception that banks and investors have on the planning phase. (Sub -activity 1.1.7.). The independent 
engineering firm will also ensure that all envir onmental and construction permits have been obtained, or are 
in process,  so as to provide  investors  and LFIs with the sufficient  confidence  that the project  is on track.  (Sub - 
activity  1.1.7.).  Training  on financial  project  structuring  with SMEs,  LFIs,  and investors  will provide  enhanced 
and practical experience for sub -project design. (Sub -activity  1.2.1.)  
• Sub-activity 1.1.8. Strengthen the regulatory framework, including lessons learned, good practices and 
discussing  with public  authorities  on barriers  and effective  implementation  and the provision  of an enhanced  
investment environment.   
 Activity 1.2. Strengthen capacity of BICE, LFIs, ESTPs, project developers and validators for SE project 
development. The Project will strengthen the capacities of EST Ps to develop a new line of business, namely, the 
sale of guaranteed energy savings rather than just the sale of technologies. For biogas and biomass sub -projects,  
the Project aims at increasing access to incentives for engineering studies. Also, the Project is expected to support  
 
13 See also Annex 12 Energy Service Insurance Project Flow diagram cycles.


---
*Page 12*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 64  
 
 
 the development and dissemination of information on new risk mitigation products, such as the standard 
performance contracts, insurance products and the monitoring, reporting and verification methodologies, among 
relevant  stakeholders.  As part of this activity,  there  will be training  and dissemination  of information  to LFIs,  ESTPs 
and validators  on Project  mechanisms  and methodologies,  as well as dissemination  of generated  knowledge  at the 
local and regional  level.  
For this activity, consultants will be hired to conduct capacity building activities and Project information 
dissemination. The profile of these consultants will be both financial and technical, to cover the capacity building 
aspects of the Project on financial and non -financial mechanisms as well as the awareness raising and training. A 
series of capacity buildi ng events will be undertaken with BICE, LFIs, ESTPs, project developers and validators.  
• Sub-activity 1.2.1. Training of project developers, ESTPs, validators, SMEs about Project  mechanisms:  
o Sub-activity 1.2.1.1 Training for BICE staff (at least 20% women) 14 on Project mechanisms and 
methodologies  to improve  its promotion  and execution.  This activity  will include  workshops  and seminars  to 
train on SE investments and the financial and non -financial mechanisms of the  Project.  
o Sub-activity 1.2.1.2 Training for  LFIs. This activity will inform and train ten (10) LFIs and its staff (2 per LFI) 
on financing SE projects. As with 1.2.1.1, this activity will include workshops and seminars to learn on SE 
investments and the financial and non -financial mechanisms of the  Project.  
o Sub-activity 1.2.1.3 Training for technical validators. At least two (2) local technical validators (total of 30 
staff)  (of which  at least  20% women)  will be trained  about  Project  methodology  so that they can support  the 
Project quality control procedures. Capacity building workshops are included under this  activity.  
o Sub-activity  1.2.1.4.  Training  for ESTPs.  Thirty  (30) technology  solution  providers  (at least  20% women)  will 
be trained on Project15 mechanisms. Informed and trained ESTPs can promote and identify sub -projects to 
participate in the  Project.  
o Sub-activity 1.2.1.5. Training for SMEs and project developers. Targeted firms will be provided technical 
support with workshops and knowledge dissemination activities to provide information on the Project’s 
financial and non -financial mechanisms to promote SE  investments.  
• Sub-activity  1.2.2.  Establishment  at BICE  of a business  unit dedicated  for SE financing.  A dedicated  business 
unit will be created in BICE to execute the Project, including necessary budget and human resources. This 
will be coupled with training activities of BICE staff (sub -activity 1.2.1.1), as well as the establishment of the 
electronic registry system (Sub -activity 1.2.3). The business unit will support in the selection a nd launching 
of sub -projects.  
• Sub-activity 1.2.3. Establishment of electronic registry system for monitoring and evaluation of sub -projects 
and Project’s results. The monitoring and evaluating system of BICE should be based on an electronic 
registry system  capable of collecting/indexing information stemming from supported sub -projects financed 
by first tier LFIs and financed directly (for example, in the case of larger biomass projects). 16 BICE 
monitoring and evaluation system will track: i) SME investment s in promoted technologies stemming from 
the financing  strategy  developed;  ii) their energy  savings;  and iii) their respective  GHG  emission  reductions.  
• Sub-activity 1.2.4. Seed incentives for projects (pipeline development resources). This activity provides 
support  in the form of coverage  of initial  sub-project  engineering  design  costs  and sub-project  validation  cost, 
following the incentive strategy developed under activity  1.1.5.  
• Sub-activity 1.2.5. Management and monitoring of the Project. This ac tivity covers the management, 
monitoring,  reporting  and evaluation  of the Project,  including  mid-term and final impact  analysis,  and lessons 
learnt for scale -up in the  country.  
• Sub-activity 1.2.6. Knowledge dissemination. This activity includes the development of six (6) 
products/publications,  knowledge  sharing  events,  country  market  reports  published,  and/or  webinars,  with 
national and regional expert interest and participation.   
 Component 2. Financing adapted to RE and EE projects.  
 Activity 2.1. Increase medium and long -term credit to SMEs for biomass, biogas, and EE projects. This 
activity involves the provision of medium and long -term credit lines to first -tier LFIs so that they can on -lend those  
 
14 See Annex 10 for the Gender Action Plan  
15 The training and outreach events for ESTPs will be made through existing BICE’s promotion systems and capacity. 
16 Such registry should also have clear format, templates and methodologies for collecting, maintaining and analysing 
data.  The system  should  rely also on publicly  available  data systems  and other  relevant  information  needed  to evaluate 
impacts,  in particular  the national  emissions  factor,  the national  energy  generation  plan and matrix,  as well as promoted 
technology standards. The IDB will track the development and establishment of the monitoring and evaluation system 
and compliance  with best practices  and the Project’s  requirements,  in order  to collect  and maintain  data relevant  to the 
financing strategy being promoted.


---
*Page 13*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 64  
 
 
 resources  to SMEs  interested  in financing  eligible  sub- projects.  For larger  biomass  projects,  where  LFIs do not take 
senior positions, the Project foresees that BICE will channel funds directly to sub -project beneficiaries.17 The credit 
line will be co -financed by GCF’s reimbursable resources (USD 100 million) and BICE resources (USD 60 million). 
In order to also ensure higher participation of firms in the Project, medium and long -term financing will be 
complemented with pipeli ne development resources and project -specific technical assistance (see Component 1). 
Also,  concessionality  of GCF  loan resources  will be passed  onto final beneficiaries  through  concessional  conditions 
to stimulate and develop a market for SE investments a nd hence generate a powerful demonstration effect in the 
local credit market. The specific conditions of the credit line and sub -loans will be established in each contractual 
agreement, taking into account the costs and returns of each sub -project and tech nology, ensuring that tenors  are 
sufficiently long so as to match the sub -project cash flow.   
 
13. The budget breakdown for GCF grant resources (Component 1) by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, 
travel, goods and services) is presented in Table  B1.4:  
 
Table B1.4. Project Budget for Grant Component by Expense type (USD)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. The implementation of the Project promotes an efficient and flexible mechanism for preparing and approving SE 
lending  operations.  It is considered  an effective  instrument  because  it: (i) provides  a programmatic  multisector  
financing framework through which IDB can respond effectively to the needs of various sub sectors, using all of its 
customary instruments; (ii) establishes an intervention framework for the IDB  and BICE, so that local experience and  
 
17 The proposed project aims to provide suitable financing for RE projects (biogas and biomass) and to crowd -in 
private investment. Crowding -in of private investment occurs through both Tier 1 (BICE’s direct lending) and 2 
(BICE’s lending through LFIs) financing. In Tier 1 lending, BICE can together with LFIs finance up to 70% of total 
project costs excluding VAT in syndications, up to a limit for BICE’s share of AR$80 Million (USD 4.1 Million) per 
syndication . LFIs participate in syndications as they do not have sufficient funding resources to finance alone, thus 
BICE will have the option to finance the underlying project through syndications in a senior/junior position. BICE’s 
participation in syndications he lps to jumpstart the market and to incentivize entry by LFIs through a crowding -in 
effect. As BICE offers both tier 1 and tier 2 financing, this is an optimal strategy to support the RE financing market 
development for RE projects such as biomass and bioga s. In summary, BICE has the option to finance biomass 
projects (i) through LFIs, (ii) through their first tier operation/syndications with LFIs. The decision of LFIs to participat e 
in the financing of projects as well as which position to take junior/senio r depends on (i) the LFI’s experience with the 
underlying project type, (ii) the size in relation to the overall LFI’s portfolio (diversification strategy), and (iii) the 
expected profitability of the project. It is expected that over time LFIs will learn through their experience by directly 
financing, syndicating, and to a lesser extent by being informed about other projects being financed, and calibrate 
their risk and return understanding of these projects. Similarly through experience, BICE will understa nd better the 
actual risks of these technologies which will enable them to increasingly negotiate their bargaining power with LFIs on 
these projects.  
Expenses by type (GCF Grant)  USD  
GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds   
Consultants  2,397,150  
Workshops  140,100  
Materials and supplies  148,000  
Travel  189,750  
Contingencies  125,000  
Total GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds excluding PMU  2,667,500  
  
Project Management Unit - (Consultants)  332,500  
Total GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds including PMU  3,000,000  
  
GCF Reimbursable Funds   
Sovereign Loan  100,000,000  
GCF Reimbursable Funds  100,000,000  
Total GCF Funds  103,000,000


---
*Page 14*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 64  
 
 
capacity can be strengthened; and (iii) allows the IDB to deploy its extensive international knowledge of climate 
finance markets through a network of financial institutions via a local development bank with proven institutional 
capacity within the country.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing   
(a) = (b) + (c)   
163.85  million USD  
($)  
  
(i) Senior Loans   
100.0   
million USD    
 (ii) Subordinated  …………………  ($)   
 Loans  …………………  Options  20 years  0.75%  
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  * …………………  
…………………  Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD    
 (vi) Grants *  3 ($)   
 Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)   
103 million USD  
($)  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
  
Senior  
Loans  
Grant  
Grant   
60.0(a) million USD  
($) 
million USD  
($) 
million USD  
($)  
BICE   
 
20 years   
 
0.75%   
 
pari passu  
(c) Co - 
financing 
from recipient  0.60(b) 
0.25 BICE 
IDB    
 ……………  ………………     
 Lead financing  institution: BICE. Additional funding from commercial banks acting as LFIs could be used 
in the sub -projects financed, although this will not be a commitment prior to the Project approval18. Grant 
co-financing from BICE will be provided in -kind (see Secti on B.1).(a) Loans to be provided by BICE to 
LFIs and/or SMEs. (b)In-kind contribution.  
(d) Financial  
Not applicable. The IDB will deploy the GCF financing directly to the recipient (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the IDB, acting as AE), in the proposed financial 
instrument and terms as described in part (b). See Section C.7  terms  
between  
GCF and AE  
(if applicable)  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
15. General Overview . Argentina’s economy has a long history of crisis and contraction, including the most recent -1.8% 
recession in 2016. But important progress has been made over the past year to restore macroeconomic stability, 
sustained and equitable growth and boost job creation. In f act, projections already show a rebound in Argentina’s 
economy to a 2.7% growth in 2017, and close to 3% over the medium term19. 
 
18 Sub loans will be financed from GCF and BICE resources pari -passu.  
19 Article IV Consultation with Argentina . IMF, 2016.


---
*Page 15*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 64  
 
 
16. Nonetheless, debt financing is still quite insufficient to fund investment and consumption and the economy is yet to 
achieve greater integration with global financial markets. Partly due  to the prevailing financial repression of the last 
decade, levels of financial intermediation in Argentina remain low. An underdeveloped (small and mostly 
transactional)20 financial  system,  combined  with limited  access  to international  capital  markets,  affects  competitiveness 
of local  firms21. 
17. According  to its most  recent  Informe  de Estabilidad  Financiera  (BCRA,  2016),  Argentina’s  financial  system  has become 
robust,  showing  limited  risks on its overall  activity,  good  levels  of liquidity  and solvency  (liquid  assets  are equivalent  to 
47% of deposits  and non-performing  loans  below  2%), and with regulatory  and supervision  frameworks  that are in line 
with international  standards.  A renewed  stability  of the system  sets a funding  base  for expansion  of the intermediation 
activity so as to achieve the depth levels comparable to those in other emerging markets of the region. The growth in 
the amounts  of credit  and in volume  of deposits,  although  moderate,  shows  some  signs of  recovery  in that sense.  
18. Argentina’s  financial system consists of 63 banks and 14 finance companies. Bank assets (USD176 billion) as of 
December 2016, accounted for 98% of total system assets. Argentina’s financial system is relatively liquid but lacks 
depth.  Of those  USD176  billion  in bank  assets,  USD75  billion  (42%)  are in the loan portfolio.  From  a sector  perspective, 
primary activities account for 12% of total loans, industry (15%), wholesale commerce and services (35%), 
consumption (34%), others (4%). Consumer lending has risen steadily in recent years as a result of the recovery in 
the domestic  economy.  
19. However, lending interest rates are significantly high (rates have grown continuously from below 20% in 2013 to over 
25% in 2016)  and large  intermediation  spreads  of the banking  system  (over 10% in 2016),  in part due to high levels  of 
operational and administrative costs of the system, need to be monitored. As of 2015, the ratio of domestic credit to 
private  sector  (as a % of GDP)  stood  at 14.7%,  well below  peers  in the region  such  as Colombia  (47.1%),  Peru  (37.4%) 
and Chile  (111%)22. 
20. Lack  of long  term  credit . The main  indicators  of Argentina’s  financial  system  performance  show  that it has performed 
well in recent  years.  Despite  its substantial  progress,  the financial  system  still has structural  weaknesses  that prevent 
it from meeting  the demand  for credit  among  domestic  productive  sectors.  The unmet  demand  for medium  and long- 
term credit is particularly acute despite gradual increases in the loan portfolio of LFIs. Firms, and especial ly SMEs, 
require considerably more financing than the amount effectively available in the financial  sector.  
21. An analysis of loan maturities in the financial system reveals that by the end of 2016, 92.8%23 of the portfolio is 
concentrated  in loans  of up to one year,  6.7 % of one to four years,  and longer -term loans  (more  than 4 years)  account 
for 0.5 % of total portfolio.  These  indicators  show  steadiness  as to previous  years,  as long-term credit  has maintained 
these level since 2011, when it represented 0.6 % of total credit. Despite the improvements in the financial system, 
the deposit structure still restricts medium and long -term lending by intermediary LFIs, both to individuals and 
businesses, as a way to control the risk of term mismatches on their balan ce sheets. By the end of 2016, 0.01% of 
deposits displayed a maturity over 2 years, 0.7% between 1 -2 years and 99.3% of deposits had maturities of less 
than one year24. The same patterns are observed since 2011. The financial system does not meet the need for 
productive lending, especially long -term, defined as credit with maturities longer than one year. The financial sector 
offers less attractive instruments, adjusted for inflation and with variable rates, and long -term lending is  scarce.  
22. In keeping  with their conservative  risk management  policy,  and in line with the Central  Bank  regulatory  guidance,  the 
banks  in the system  have  elected  to maintain  high liquidity  levels,  in part to prevent  the deleterious  effects  of previous 
recurrent financial crisis. This liquidity, however, is generally only short -term, given the structure of the terms of  
deposits (see above). Nevertheless, the supply of long -term funding remains very limited and is closely associated 
with long -term liabilities. Loans from private banks have an average total portfolio in arrears of  1.57%.  
23. The lack of availability of long -term credit directly undermines firms’ capacity to invest in new projects. The financing 
needs  of Argentina’s  private  sector  are equivalent  to about  17% of GDP,  of which  only 16% is provided  by the financial 
sector.25 In the case of the technologies targeted by the proposed Project, incremental risks of these relatively 
unknown  SE investments  produce  even  greater  deficiencies  in the availability  of adequate  financing  for SMEs  across  
 
20 IMF Working Paper 16/5 . IMF, 2016. The 2013 Country Rankings of Financial Development place Argentina in the 
position 65 out of 183 countries analysed. In terms of financial market depth, the countr y underperforms significantly, 
reaching  only the 103rd position.  The methodology  provides  an index  of development  which  combines  data from depth, 
access and efficiency of financial institutions and financial markets.  
21 Country Report No.16/347 . IMF 2016.  
22 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator , accessed on February 2017.  
23 This distribution of the loan portfolio by maturity was estimated from data on disbursements by the system. Only 
disbursements  to firms were  considered  in order  to obtain  values  more  closely  linked  to productive  investment  (in local 
currency, which represents 90% of total  disbursements).  
24 “Deposits by residual term at maturity”. Financial Entity Report. Central Bank of Argentina (BCRA).  
25IMF, World Bank and Ministry of Labor - Observatory of Employment and Business Dynamics (OEDE).


---
*Page 16*
---

B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 64  
 
 
all sectors of the economy. There is usually an incompatibility between the time it takes for SMEs to see a return on 
longer -term investments and the structure of the conditions offered by the banking system, generating mismatches 
in loan amortization periods for those SMEs. In addition, interest rates tend to be higher due mostly to t he lack of 
capacity or experience with SE lending in local financial institutions, who often have limited comprehension of the 
risks and opportunities of these projects and are hesitant to offer these loans. Capacity building is challenged by a 
lack of inf ormation, risk assessment skills, and track record for SE projects within the investor community; a lack of 
network effects (investors, investment opportunities) found in established markets; and a lack of familiarity with and 
skills related to project -finance structures.  
24. The lack of investment  also translates  into low competitiveness,  especially  for SMEs,  which  have  very limited  access 
to credit, face high transaction costs, and in many cases, lack appropriate collateral to comply with banking 
requirements. As these SMEs employ approximately 65% of the country’s labor force, the lack of credit has a direct 
impact on creation on new employment, as insufficient investment funding has an impact in productivity, innovation, 
equipment obsolescence, a nd capital stock. Inadequate access to finance is a critical obstacle to  narrowing  
technology gaps and boosting productivity and growth.


---
*Page 17*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 64  
 
 
C.1. Strategic Context  
25. The energy  sector  is essential  to the proper  functioning  of any modern  economy.  As economic  activity  grows,  more 
and better availability of energy is required. Governments in all emerging economies are currently facing the 
complexities  of securing  a supply  to cover  increasing  demands  for energy  while  maximizing  their system’s  efficiency. 
Factoring sustainability into this equation has acquired an increasingly important role in the face of global climate 
change, as energy generation and consumption, while important contributors to growth, are two of the main sources  
of CO 2 emissions.  It is estimated  that over 70% of global  GHG  emissions  come  from the energy  sector26, making  it a 
critical part of any solution aimed to address the threat of climate change. The key lies in making efforts to decouple 
economic  growth  from the rising  rates  of energy  use and the environmental  impacts  of energy  production.  Investments 
in power generation  from clean sources play a large role in this process, contributing to diversifying the countries’ 
energy matrixes and mitigating the negative environmental impacts of fossil fuel technologies. Likewise, promoting 
consumption patterns that allow for the us e of energy in more efficient ways, can also have a significant impact in 
reducing emissions in the long  term.  
26. According to the results of Argentina’s Third National Communication on Climate Change, GHG emissions are 
estimated to be of the order of 429 M t on CO 2e for the last national inventory of GHG emissions (an 80% increase 
from the 238.7 million Ton CO 2e reported in the Second National Communication in 2000); 43% of those emissions  
come from the energy  sector27. 
27. Argentina’s goal, set forth in their 2016 first revision of the 2015 NDC, is to reduce GHG emissions by 18% by 2030 
with respect to projected BAU emissions for that year28. The goal includes actions related to EE and RE, as well as 
others such as the promotion of sustainable forest management , nuclear power biofuels and transport modal shift29. 
Furthermore, Argentina considers they could increase its reduction goal to up to 37% GHG reduction by 2030 if (i) 
adequate and predictable international financing becomes available, (ii) support for tra nsfer, innovation and 
technology  development  and capacity  building,  and (iii) support  to the creation  of capacities  to spread  good  practices 
and effectively implement the proposed measures are  provided.  
Figure C1.1. - Argentina’s GHG emissions scenarios by 2030  
 
Source: Republic of Argentina: First Revision of its Nationally Determined Contribution. UNFCCC, 2016.  
 
 
26 World Resource Institute (WRI), Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT) 2.0. 2014. Washington, D.C.  
27 Argentina’s Third National Communica tion to the UNFCCC: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/argnc3s.pdf . . 
28 Republic of Argentina, First Revision to its Nationally Determined Contribution: 
http://www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/PublishedDocuments/Argentina%20First/Traducci%C3%B3n%20NDC_Argentina.p  
df 
29 The criteria for sele cting the actions include the potential for reducing emissions, potential co -benefits, and the 
viability of using nationally developed technologies.


---
*Page 18*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 64  
 
 
28. Through its Ministerio de Energia y Mineria (MINEM), the government of Argentina set goals for the period 2015 - 
2019, which include: (i) normalizing regulatory agencies and energy markets operation; (ii) improving energy access 
and efficien t use by households and productive sectors; (iii) ensuring energy supply; and (iv) diversifying energy 
supply incorporating renewables to the country’s energy matrix. This Project addresses specifically goals (ii) -(iv) 
through its implementation.  
Renewable  Energy  
29. The Latin American and the Caribbean (LAC) region has seen outstanding increase in total investment in clean 
energy  generation  projects  in the period  2009 -2014  and has become  one of the greenest  regions  in the world  in terms 
of power generation. At  a country level, however, Argentina lags significantly behind other large economies in the 
region,  with total accumulated  investments  in RE reaching  only USD1.8  billion  during  2009 -2014,  compared  to much 
greater values such as USD8.5 billion in Chile and USD11.7 billion in Mexico (KPMG,  2016).  
 
Figure C1.2. - Total accumulated investments in renewables by country 2009 -2014 (USD billions)  
 
Source: Development of renewables. Latin American context and the Argentine case. KPMG, 2016.  
 
30. As of end of 2016, the share of RE sources in Argentina accounted only for 2% of total generation30, compared to 
18% in Brazi l, 13% in Chile and 24% in Uruguay, for example. Almost 66% of the generation matrix of the country 
still comes from fossil fuels and 26.5% is large hydropower (the remaining 5.6% is nuclear). In terms of installed 
capacity, also around 2% of the 33.8 GW t otal capacity of the system corresponds to RE (1.4% of which is small 
hydro).  
Figure C1.3. - Renewable power generation in Argentina by source and share of supply (2015 -2016, in GWh)  
 
Source: Informe Trimestral de Coyuntura Energética, Tercer Trimestre 2016 . MINEM, 2016.  
 
30 RE for this graph includes wind, solar PV, small hydro, biogas and biomass.


---
*Page 19*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 64  
 
 
31. Argentina’s government has embarked on a comprehensive plan for improving and developi ng regulation that 
promotes the expansion of RE technologies and the long -term development of the market. The recently enacted  
National Law 27.191  (approved in September 2016) sets national targets for the share of RE in total energy 
consumption  at 8% by 2018  and 20% by 2025  (see figure  C.1.4).  The law also introduces  competitive  and transparent 
market rules and contract mechanisms (including government tendered power purchase agreements (PPA), private 
PPAs  and self-generation  projects,  as well as fiscal  incentives  to independent  power  producers  (IPP)  and local supply 
chain, and creates a sector specific trust fund ( Fondo para el Desarrollo de las Energias Renovables , FODER), 
managed by BICE, to provide guarantees and debt financing to  projects.  
32. Regarding taxation, IPP projects can benefit from fiscal incentives established by Renewable Energy Law 27.191 
(see Section C.1), including: (i) exemption of import duties for equipment, pieces, replacement parts, component 
parts and raw materials until December 31s t, 2017; (ii) accelerated fiscal depreciation; (iii) advance value added tax 
(VAT)  return;  (iv) exemption  of minimum  presumed  income  tax; (v) exemption  of dividend  tax for the re-investment  in 
infrastructure; (vi) tax deduction of all financial expenses wh en calculating the income tax; and (vii) issuing of fiscal 
certificate for inclusion of local  content.  
33. Worth  noting  are some  specific  regulations  related  to technologies  and sub-sectors  identified  in the feasibility  analysis. 
For example,  several  provinces  have  a sound  framework  regulating  sanitary  aspects  in the pig sector,  which  requires 
farms  to have  a formal  system  for animal  waste  treatment  in place31. Thus,  pig farms  investing  in biogas  plants  have 
a two -fold benefit. On the one hand, they comply with  applicable regulatory requirements related to animal waste, 
and on the other,  energy  and gas produced  can be used  in the farm processes.  In addition,  they can also benefit  from 
the RenovAr program, which allows them to sell their excess energy to the netw ork at competitive  prices.  
34. The Compania Administradora del Mercado Mayorista Electrico (CAMMESA) is the administrator of the wholesale 
electricity market. Its main function is the overall coordination of the operation and dispatch of electricity, price 
calculation in the spot market and commercial transactions carried out throughout the Sistema Interconectado 
Nacional (SIN). CAMMESA’s goal is to guarantee sufficient and quality supply to cover the demand of electricity at 
the minimum possible cost.  
35. The Ente Nacional Regulador de la Electricidad (ENRE) is the national sector regulator. As an i ndependent entity 
created  in 1993  within  the Energy  Secretariat,  it is responsible  for regulating  the electricity  sector  and controlling  that 
all sector firms (producers, transmitters, distributors) are in compliance with their obligation as established in  the 
regulatory  framework  and concession  contracts.  ENRE  is in charge  of regulation  and overall  supervision  of the sector 
under federal control, while provincial regulators control the rest of the utilities. ENRE and the provincial regulators 
set tariffs and supervise compliance of regulated transmission and distribution entities with safety, quality, technical 
and environmental  standards.  
 
Figure C1.4. - Argentina’s RE national targets 2018 -2025  
 
 
Source: MINEM 2016  
 
31 http://www.senasa.gov.ar/cadena -animal/porcinos


---
*Page 20*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 64  
 
 
 
36. The government’s goal to replace fossil fuels with renewables in the powe r generation matrix demands for an 
estimated increase in RE capacity of 2 to 3 GW in the next two years. The 2025 target (20% of the share of the 
generation matrix) represents a total addition of RE to the system of between 9.4 and 11.3 GW, which MINEM 
estimates equivalent to some USD15 billion in investments (MINEM, 2016)32. In the path to meet these targets, the 
government  has already  started  its plan for public  tenders  under  the framework  of the program  called  “RenovAr”.  The 
first stage of the plan (Ronda 1) had the objective to issue public tenders for RE projects to produce 1,000 MW of 
energy (an aggregated investment between USD1.5 and USD1.8 billion), which the government estimates would  
reduce carbon emissions by arou nd 2 million tons of CO 2 annually33. In September 2016, 123 offers were received  
for Ronda 1: 49 wind, 58 solar, 11 biomass and biogas34, and 5 mini -hydro, distributed throughout all regions of the 
country and adding a total capacity of over 6 GW. Ronda 1 awarded 29 projects for a total capacity of 1,142 MW 
(over -achieving the initial target of 1 GW)35. The awarded projects include 12 wind, 4 solar, 6 biogas, 2 biomass and 
5 mini hydro, distributed among 14 different provinces (see  RenovAR Ronda 1. October 2016 – Bid and awarded 
projects) . As a result of the great interest generated by the public tendering process and immediately following this 
first round,  the program  launched  a second  bid (Ronda  1.5) exclusive  to wind and solar  projects  not awarded  in Ronda 
1, providing them with an opportunity to improve their offering conditions. Ronda 1.5 resulted in additional 10 wind 
and 20 solar projects awarded (a total of 1,281 MW of capacity), with a significant improvement in comparison with 
Ronda  1. 
37. The successful  implementation  of projects  awarded  in Ronda  1 and Ronda  1.5 are expected  to increase  the share  of 
RE in the mix to 5%. By mid -2017, Ronda 2 of the program is expected to be  launched.  
38. The project is complementary to the IDBG project FP 030  Catalyzing private investment in sustainable energy in 
Argentina – Part 1  approved during B.15 by covering different mitigation technologies to support the structuring of 
viable RenovAr projects for biomass and potentially biogas projects, as well as promo te the financing of energy 
efficiency investments. Thereby the proposed project ensures synergies with the aforementioned approved project 
by targeting  additional  energy  demand  sectors  and reaching  a wider  set of private  actors  through  the financial  sector . 
Energy Efficiency  
39. In most countries in the LAC region, national strategies, policies, regulation, standards and the developing of 
capacities for EE programs are still lacking. On the private side, EE equipment and service markets are still 
underdeveloped  and private actors are not yet sufficiently informed of energy saving opportunities in the different 
business sectors (CEPAL, 2010). Particularly for Argentina, there are also important opportunities for improvement 
in the field of EE, as the country stil l has the highest levels of energy intensity among its counterparts with similar 
income levels in South  America.  
Figure C1.5. - Estimated energy intensity and consumption per capita by country in 2015 (tons of oil eq)  
 
Source: Eficiencia energetica en Arge ntina: Identificacion de oportunidades . CAF, 2016.  
 
32 A similar  amount  of investment  (some  USD16  billion)  is needed  in other  technologies  such  as hydro  and nuclear,  as 
well as close to USD5 billion in thermoelectricity and USD5 billion in transmission, in order to meet government’s 
projections of power demand by  2025.  
33 Other co -benefits include the creation of between 5,000 and 8,000 jobs and USD 300 million annual savings in fuel. 
34 The specified  projects  in Ronda  1 could  not gain access  to adequate  financing,  as confirmed  by the MINEM.  Biomass 
bidding capacity for subsequent rounds is judged favourably at 1,018 MW (more than 80 projects by 17 proponents in 
5 states) and biogas bidding capacity at 175 MW (more than 190 projects by 35 proponents in 12  states).  
35 Initially  only 17 projects  were  awarded,  but other  12 projects,  having  offered  a price  over the maximum  applicable  for 
each technology, were added after agreeing to cut down their price when invited to do so by  CAMMESA.


---
*Page 21*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 64  
 
 
 
40. In this context, the government has set ambitious goals in terms of EE policy. According to the alternative scenarios 
projected for the period 2015 -2025, potential impact of policies related to EE and savings would result in a reduction 
of end consumption of 5.9% by 2025. Among these effects, the highest impact would be found in the electricity 
demand, for which savings are projected to reach levels in the order of  15%36. 
41. Along  with these  established  targets,  the Federal  Government  is actively  working  on setting  clearly  defined  rules  and 
competitive mechanisms, which will provide more appropriate legal and economic framework to attract private 
participation in the sector. There are already ongoing programs and policies for the development of EE, specifically 
directed towards the industrial sector. Particularly for SME, the MINEM has implemented a program ( Diagnosticos 
Energeticos ) to support  firms  in carrying  out energy  diagnostics  to determine  their potential  for savings  from adopting 
EE measures.  The government  provides  90% of the financing  for these  studies,  which  produce  recommendations  on 
a case by case basis for the installation/substitution of different technologies including lighting, refrigeration, heating 
and motors. These diagnostics so far show there is an estimated saving potential of 20% in the firms  evaluated.  
42. In addition, a joint initiative by the MINEM and the Ministry of Production (through its Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo 
de la Micro, Mediana y Pequeña Empresa , FONAPYME) is already providing loans to SMEs for their investments in 
EE (see  FONAPYME Eficiencia Energetica  and Fondo Argentino de Eficiencia Energetica , FAEE ). Funding is 
provided for up to 70% of the total cost of th e project, loans ranging from ARS100,000 to ARS4  million37. 
Barriers to RE and EE development  
43. A significant change in the energy matrix to incorporate RE as set forth in the government goals requires large and 
long-term investment. Financial sector barrier s to the development of RE in Argentina38, and throughout the LAC 
region in general, involve macroeconomic risks related to political instability, unfavorable currency exchange 
movements, and overall credit worthiness, which may lower investor confidence. On a national level, the market 
capitalization is low (9.6% of GDP, compared to 27.6% in Brazil, 29.4% in Colombia and 79.1% in Chile, data from 
the World  Bank  indicators,  2015),  compounded  by the lack of adequate  financial  products  in the form of special  credit 
lines or grants. The local financial sector is also underdeveloped, lacking the capacity and/or willingness to provide 
credit for these projects (see Section  B.3).  
44. RE and EE projects normally have a payback period that exceeds the tenors at which de bt financing is available. In 
a country where interest base rates are already high, these become prohibitive when financial products that do not 
correctly assess and address inherent risk are offered. This is due mostly to the lack of capacity or experienc e with 
RE and EE lending in local financial institutions, who often have limited comprehension of the risks and opportunities 
of RE and EE, and are hesitant to offer these loans.39 Capacity building is challenged by a lack of information, risk  
 
36 Prospectiva 2025 . MINEM, 2016.  
37 Target subsectors of the beneficiaries of these loans include SMEs in the services, industry, commerce and 
agriculture subsectors.  
38 An important component is the provision of suitable financing for RE projects (biogas and biomass). In Argentina 
there  is lack of suitable  financing  for this kind of projects  so that medium -sized  farms/enterprises  cannot  access  capital 
in adequate conditions despite their available positive credit history. There is no long -term financing, a nd the lack of a 
track record by LFIs with these projects leads to a high -risk perception and high -interest rates, which make these 
projects  currently  unbankable.  Biogas  and biomass  projects  face difficulties  in accessing  international  funding  sources 
due to high transaction costs and the preference of international financial institutions in larger projects. Thus biomass 
and biogas projects exclusively rely on local financial  sources.  
If long-term finance  becomes  available,  medium -sized  farms/enterprises  will not have  difficulties  to access  finance  due 
to their historical credit capacity and track record with LFIs. Where medium -sized farms/enterprises do have a limited 
credit capacity and face high collateral requirements, credit guarantee agencies (SGR – Sociadades de Garantía 
Reciproca) can support local companies to facilitate access to credit. For biomass and biogas projects that sell 
electricity to the grid under the RenovAr program, FODER (The Fund for the Development of Renewable Energy) can 
guarantee  the payment  of the underlying  PPAs.  Both SGR  and FODER  are existing  complementary  instruments  to the 
proposed project design and the participation of FODER or SGR will not be a condition Sine qua non for the provision 
of loans from the credit  line. 
39 RE projects present different financial and non -financial investment requirements and risks than EE projects from 
the perspective of investors. RE projects are investments made to new installations which will be typically be rather 
made by medium enterprises.  From analysis undertaken in the market assessment prepared for the Project, the firms 
that could invest in RE may have credit history and access to credit, but consider the CAPEX and payback of these 
investments  as relatively  high and not find financing  conditions  in the market  to adequately  cover  the CAPEX  and long 
payback.  This barrier  is covered  by the offer of concessional  long term finance  through  the BICE  credit  line. In addition,


---
*Page 22*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 64  
 
 
assessment skills, and track record for these projects within the investor community; a lack of network effects 
(investors, investment opportunities) found in established markets; and a lack of familiarity with and skills related to 
project -finance structu res. 
45. Attracting more investments to the sector requires both financial engineering and improved market conditions. The 
government is committed and advancing in addressing the issue through policy development that enables private 
actors  to become  active  players in the market,  but access  to finance  is crucial,  considering  the higher  upfront  cost of 
some RE and EE technologies when compared to their conventional  alternatives.  
46. A feasibility  analysis  is presented  to support  the Project  proposal  (see Section  F.2 and Annex  2 Feasibility  Analysis  - 
Green financing program for BICE, for more detail), which includes a bibliographic review of the principal studies, 
reports,  and documents  available  on potential  for SE40 in different  sectors  in Argentina,  including  their current  status, 
opportunities, and perspectives. In addition, interviews were carried out with experts, public actors and ESTPs with 
the objective  of validating  and gathering  perceptions  of the market,  as well as to identify  main  opportunity  areas.  The 
information  collected  was fundamental  to assess  and refine  the technologies  and subsectors  where  potential  business 
opportunities could exist for the Project more specifically, as well as to gather statistical data that could help in 
evaluating its potential  scope and impact. Based on the information collected, an evaluation matrix was designed to 
evaluate the different opportunity areas following a pre -established set of criteria. This analysis produced a list of 
technologies  and subsectors  that the Project  is likely  to support  based  on their potential.  This list will serve  as a basis 
to develop  a pipeline  of sub-projects  as well as estimations  of results  indicators  and potential  impacts  for the Project.  
Public and private sector roles in the development of RE and EE projects.  
47. The conditions presented above result in the inexistence of financing options for developers, especially SMEs. 
Moreover,  lack of knowledge  and absence  of a performance  record  negatively  affects  investors  and financiers  in more 
subtle  and permanent  way. State  plays  a key role in promoting  the environmental  dimension  as a part of public  policy. 
A well -designed and robust regulatory framework can create incentives to scale up private sector initiatives. But an 
effective  engagement  of the private  sector  also calls for appropriate  finance  mechanisms  and promotion  of capacity - 
building and information exchange.  
48. Financing is necessarily dependent on a “bankable” project but financial institutions do currently not understand the 
economics  of these technologies  and do not evaluate  the feasibility  of the projects,  accentuating  their perceptions  of 
risk. As a result, financing is unavailable or becomes too expensive and projects rely exclusively on scarce and 
expensive capital resources, slowing down or precluding investment in the  sector.  
49. From a public perspective, NDBs across LAC have progressively increased their role in filling major financing gaps 
and developing long -term financing. Furthermore, when economies weaken, NDBs provide counter -cyclical finance, 
by supporting investment and mobilizing broader financial resources. As NDB lending in capital intensive industries 
is usually  co-financed  by private  lending  and investing,  and is also susceptible  to securitization,  it can also contribute 
to the development of financial markets (IDB, 2013). NDBs can offer financial instruments that match the funding 
needs  of these  projects,  attracting  more  private  actors  into the market.  In this context,  Argentina  can tap into existing 
public  concessional  resources  to reduce  the costs  and risks  of such  investments,  mobilizing  private  funds  via financial 
instruments made available by a local NDB (i.e. BICE). Capacity building and training in project financing and risk 
assessment can also reduce adversity to RE and EE and have positive spillover effects to other SE projects and 
other local financial  institutions.  
C.2. Project Objective against Baseline  
50. The objective  of the Project  is to contribute  to improve  the efficiency  in the production  and use of energy  in Argentina, 
by increasing investments in EE and power production from RE sources to reduce GHG emissions . The 
Project intends to scale up private investment in biomass, biogas and EE by making available financing instruments 
tailored to  meet the specific needs of these projects, channeling funds through a local NDB and its network of LFIs. 
All baselines are subject to available aggregated data from the country. The baseline in Argentina indicates an 
installed renewables capacity of 709 M W (17 MW in biogas and biomass not reported) according  to the Informe  
mensual 2017, MINEM, February 2017 . The baseline for energy efficiency indicates a lack of aggregated data and 
can be considered marginal accounting for the projects of the FAEE and other initiatives (see Annex 13).  
 
another  important  barrier  of RE projects  is related  with the project  preparation  phase,  where  the investor  currently  bears 
all the risk of the financing decision, and without adequate mechanisms, investors would prefer to invest in other 
investment opportunities where they perceive that they could control the risks better, all else equal. Some of the most 
relevant risks in the planning phase include the engineering design, construction and environment permits, financial 
structuring, the reliability of the technology solution  provider.  
40 In this feasibility analysis, sustainable energy is defined as RE and EE.


---
*Page 23*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 64  
 
 
51. A significant potential for biomass, biogas,  and EE (above USD 2 billion potential demand) was identified in the 
industrial sector of Argentina (see Annex 2), linked to: a) technological modernization and productivity gains through 
the installation  of efficient  equipment;  b) the replacement  of equipment  that is outdated,  obsolete  and inefficient,  most 
of which  is considerably  over 10 years  old; and c) the substitution  of energy  sources,  through  biomass  and biogas.  
52. In order to address sector barriers and encourage private investment, a dedicated financing line will be created to 
promote  new business  models  for EE and RE. The Project  has an important  transformational  impact  as it is expected 
that LFIs will be encouraged to develop business lines for this type of investments, as those financed by the Project 
begin to demonstrate the viability and profitability of the sector, lowering risk perceptions and encouraging 
stakeholders to actively participate in these  markets.  
53. The proposed  Project  is not only complementary  to the aforementioned  Government ’s initiatives  already  in place  (see 
Section C.1) by providing necessary additional funding to sustain and expand the work initiated, but also can collect 
information and knowledge gained through these experiences. Furthermore, the inclusion of financial s ector actors 
into the design  of this proposal  aims  at: (i) capitalizing  from the NDB  and LFIs knowledge  of their business  which  may 
contribute to minimize risks and (ii) integrating the financial system into this new line of business which will help 
markets to develop and the SE sector to evolve and become sustainable by guaranteeing funding without public 
support in the long term. The IDB considers this an effective structure to mobilize continued financing for the 
development of these projects: due to its multi -project approach, the Project is expected to also contribute to a 
progressive  structural  change  of the economy  towards  the establishment  of more  efficient  patterns  of production  and 
consumption  of energy,  by producing  a shift in risk perceptions  and creating  awareness  on the benefits  of these  types 
of projects.  
 
Table C2.1. - Key barriers addressed by each project component, activity, and sub -activity41 
  
Component   
Activity   
Sub-Activity   
Barrier   
 Component 1: 
Implementation costs 
and technical 
assistance activities.  1.1. 
Develop financial 
and non -financial 
instruments.  1.1.1 Development of market 
assessment and gender baseline 
studies.  Lack of market information regarding accurate financial 
returns, identify market segment priorities (size and 
business opportunity), key technology providers/developers 
and characteristics.  
   Lack of sex -disaggregated data on Women -led SMEs and  
female participation in project technologies  
  1.1.2 Development of a standard 
performance contract.  Lack of trust by investors and financiers in the returns and 
technical performance of Biomass, Biogas and EE projects 
and in the ability of project developer/technology provider 
to guarantee the technical performance of projects.  
  1.1.3 Develop a 
procedure/methodology to 
facilitate the SMEs to participate 
in the renovAR program  Limited technical capacity and knowledge of small projects 
(clients and providers) to participate and benefit from the 
renovAR auctions.  
  1.1.4 Develop standards and 
technical validation 
methodologies for projects and 
project developers.  Limited technology understanding and lack of local 
standards regarding biomass, biogas and EE projects.  
This increases the technical risk perception of the project 
and technical capacity of developers  
  1.1.5 Development of financing 
structuring and risk mitigation 
instruments (ESI for EE) and 
project incentive strategy.  Limited technical understanding and availability of suitable 
financial strategies:  
No experience by LFIs and SMEs in the risks and returns 
associated with these projects.  
  1.1.6 Development and 
implementation of a Promotion 
and Execution Plan for the 
Project.  Limited experience and lack of understanding of the 
economic benefits of biomass, biogas and EE projects in 
Argentina, and the opportunity that renoAR presents for 
SMEs.  
 
 
 
41 A detailed budget and description of each activity and sub -activity by component are presented in Tables B1.2 and 
B1.3, respectively.


---
*Page 24*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 64  
 
 
   1.1.7 Development of a Project 
Pipeline.  Lack of visibility of business opportunities by LFI. Market 
need to assimilate and own the proposed BICE program   
1.1.8. Strengthen the regulatory 
framework  Limited uptake of EE investments potentially linked to 
evolving EE regulatory landscape. Potential for enhancing 
and strengthening the EE investment environment to 
incentivize EE investment.  
1.2. Strengthen 
capacity of BICE, 
LFIs, ESTPs, 
project developers 
and validators for 
SE project 
development. 
Seed incentives 
and Knowledge 
sharing.  1.2.1.1 Training of BICE staff  Limited local technical capacity and knowledge of BICE to 
effectively promote the Project and support the 
development of the market for EE financi ng. Support to  
implement the financing program.  
1.2.1.2 Training activities for 
LFIs.  Limited local technical capacity and knowledge on 
biomass, biogas and EE investments by LFIs:  
Inertia on the demand side and lack of knowledge and 
awareness on investment opportunities.  
1.2.1.3 Training of technical 
validators.  Lack of national technical standardization, which generate 
lack of trust in the market.  
 1.2.1.4 Training of ESTPs.  Lack of understanding on how to finance these projects 
and offer risk mitigation instruments that create trust 
between client and technology provider (ESTP)  
 1.2.1.5 Training of SMEs and 
project developers.  Limited local technical capacity and understanding on 
biogas/biomass and EE investments by SMEs:  
  Inertia on the demand side and lack of knowledge and 
awareness on these technology investment opportunities.  
 1.2.2 Establishment at BICE of a 
business unit dedicated for SE 
financing.  Limited technical capacity of BICE to effectively promote, 
evaluate  and support the development of the market for 
biogas, biomass, and EE financing.  
 1.2.3 Establishment of electronic 
registry system for monitoring 
and evaluation of projects and 
program’s results.  Limited experience on evaluating the performance of the 
projects and monitoring and evaluation of these projects 
and program’s performance:  
 1.2.4 Seed incentives for projects 
(pipeline development resources)  Lack of understanding and priority on these types of 
investments. High risk perception. Initial  project phase 
(engineering phase) has a very high -risk perception and  
many SMEs prefer not to invest because of lack of 
understanding.  
 1.2.5 Management and 
monitoring of the Project.  Limited technical capacity and resources of BICE to 
develop and implement the program  
 1.2.6 Knowledge dissemination.  Limited knowledge of biogas, biomass and EE investment 
opportunities and engagement of SMEs at the national and 
regional level.  
 Component 2: 
Financing adapted to 
RE and EE projects.  2.1 Increase medium and long -term credit for SMEs for 
biomass, biogas, and EE sub -projects.  Lack of suitable financing support to this type of projects.  
Lack of long term financing (<5 years), very high interest 
rated for SMEs.  
 
C.3. Project Description  
54. The Project  will provide financing in suitable conditions through the Argentine national development bank, BICE, to 
promote  the investments  needed  for accelerated  development  of biomass,  biogas  and EE projects,  helping  to ensure 
a more diversified energy supply and expand the use of these technologies over the medium and long  term.  
55. The Project  is designed  to optimize  the use of funding  available  in terms  of leverage  and sustainability,  investing  
concessional resources optimally to enable adequate financing and creating market instruments to manage risks 
among market actors. In order to access financing from the Project, SMEs will always be required to take on risk via


---
*Page 25*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 64  
 
 
minimal capital requireme nts. As described in section B.1, the proposed Project shall be executed via two 
components:  
56. For Component 1: Implementation costs and technical assistance activities, GCF grant resources will finance third 
party  expertise  to provide  technical  assistance  and develop  non-financial  mechanisms  to support  the implementation 
of the loans  and reduce  risks for developers,  energy  service  and technology  providers  and LFIs.  These  resources  will 
help guarantee a sound and efficient Project, while also ensuring local capacity building so that a permanent 
mechanism remains in place beyond the availability of donor support. Resources for bridging information 
asymmetries,  bankable  project  structuring,  dissemination  and capacity  building  activities  and other  associated  minor 
costs are also considered under this component. IDB will be the Executing Entity in coordination with  BICE.  
57. For Component 2: Financing adapted to RE and EE projects, GCF resources are requested in the form of a 
concessional loan to be blended with BICE’s own resources for financing eligible projects. BICE will use GCF loan 
resources  along  with its own resources  to provide  financial  support  to SMEs  either  directly  or via LFIs.  By channeling 
GCF  resources,  BICE  will increase  its ability  to provide  financial  conditions  consistent  with biomass42, biogas  and EE 
investment  costs,  risks,  cash  flow profile  and expected  returns  to make  these  ventures  successful.  Based  on this, the 
Project intends to develop a portfolio of bankable projects, familiarizing market actors (developers, SMEs, banks, 
technology  and ESTPs)  with this type of investments,  leveraging  additional  financing  from the private  banking  sector, 
and mobilizing capital to grow the industry in the long term (demonstration effect). BICE will be the Executing Entity 
for this  component.  
Table C3.1. - Summary of activities under the Project by component43 
 Component  Activities and sub -activities   
 Component 1: Implementation 
costs and technical assistance 
activities  1.1. Develop financial and non-financial instruments, including standard performance 
contract,  insurance  policy  covering  energy  savings  and validation  methodologies  to account 
energy savings and generation  
1.1.1.  Market  Assessment  
1.1.2.  Development of a standard performance contract for risk sharing  between SMEs 
investing and ESTPs  
1.1.3.  Development of a procedure to participate in the renovAR  program  
1.1.4.  Develop standards and validation methodologies for project level accounting and 
project proposal design  validation  
1.1.5.  Development  of financing  structuring  and risk mitigation  instruments  (ESI for EE) 
and project incentive  strategy  
1.1.6.  Development and implementation of a promotion and execution  plan 
1.1.7.  Development of a Project  Pipeline  
1.1.8 Strengthen regulatory framework (lessons learned, good practice s and discussing 
with public authorities on barriers and potential solutions to the current regulation)  
 
1.2. Strengthen capacity of BICE, LFIs, ESTPs, project developers and validators for SE 
project development. Seed incentives and Knowledge  sharing  
1.2.1.  Training  of project  developers/technology  solution  providers/LFIs/Validators/SMEs 
(at least 20% women) about Program  mechanisms   
 
42 The main factors determining the design of the biomass power generation units will be(i) supply, sourcing, and 
availability  of fuel waste  type,  (ii) site location  and general  layout  including  proximity  to transmission  line, (iii) plant  size 
and design features (demand for steam, heat, or process steam) (iv)compliance with Regulatory permits, restrictions, 
and obligations  (e.g. disposal  of agricultural  waste)  Huajie  et al (2015).  Agricultural  Waste , (v) overall  project  economics 
and bankability including – electricity sales price/RenovAr price which is higher for smaller scale RE projects such as 
biomass/biogas,  and (vi) technology  selection.  The biomass  used  for power  generation  will be sourced  from agricultural 
and industrial waste. As the fuel yard is situated on private property no long -haul transportation GHG emissions are 
expected. Please see the following reports on the availa bility of agricultural waste sources in different regions and 
provinces in Argentina. German -Argentinean Chamber of Commerce (2015). Zielmarktanalyse Argentinien 2015 - 
Biomasse und Biogas mit Profilen der Marktakteure  (page 48), Argentinean Ministry of En ergy and Mines (2009) 
Analysis of the Energy Balance derived from biomass energy in Argentina [Analisis del Balance de Energia derivada  
de Biomasa  en Argentina]  FAO (2016)  Spacial  analysis  of the energy  balance  derived  from biomass  for the Argentinean  
province of Salta [Análisis espacial del balance energético derivado de  biomasa].  
43 See Table B1.3 for a detailed description of activities and sub -activities under each component.


---
*Page 26*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 64  
 
 
  1.2.2 Establishment at BICE of a business unit dedicated to SE financing  
1.2.3.  Establishment  of electronic  registry  system  for monitoring  and evaluation  of projects 
and program’s results  
1.2.4.  Seed incentives for projects (initial project design costs, project validation  cost)  
1.2.5.  Management and monitoring of the  Project  
1.2.6.  Development of six (6) products/publications, knowledge sharing events, country 
market reports published, and  webinars   
 Component 2: Financing 
adapted to RE and EE projects  2.1 Increase medium and  long-term credit line for SE projects provided to SMEs  
Support of an estimated total of 2,645 end -beneficiary SMEs (based on average sized sub - 
projects) to finance eligible SE projects (biomass, biogas, EE)   
 
58. The intended  beneficiaries  of the Project  will be SMEs  investing  on biogas,  biomass  and EE projects.  Eligibility  will 
be determined  by BICE  and the IDB, according  to a pre-established  set of conditions  to be specified  in the program’s 
Operational Regulations (OR) (see Section C.7).44 Improved effi ciency in the use and production of energy will also 
enable energy consumers to benefit from greater and better availability of cleaner energy at competitive prices, and 
may allow the government to downscale existing subsidies for fossil -fuel based generat ion. Finally, communities as 
a whole  should  benefit  from positive  externalities  associated  to environmental  and economic  impacts  of the Project.  
59. While the Project targets private -led projects, it will be supervised by the public -sector arm of the IDB, through its 
Capital  Markets  and Financial  Institutions  Division  (IFD/CMF),  with a sovereign  guaranteed  loan component  from the 
Republic  of Argentina.  The IFD/CMF  division  has significant  experience  in the design  and implementation  of financial 
instruments,  particularly for climate finance, as well as a well -funded partnership with NDBs across  LAC.  
 
Figure C3.1. - Proposed Project scheme  
 
 
 
Source: IDB Project team  
 
 
 
 
44 The OR is expected to be finalized subsequent to GCF Board Project approval. Please see section C.7. for details 
on the content and criteria of the OR.


---
*Page 27*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 64  
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
60. Origin and Mandate. The executing entity of the Project will be BICE. BICE, owned by the Argentine Federal 
Government, focuses mainly on promoting investments and foreign trade through export and import financing and 
operating as a second -tier banking institution, channeling its transactions through com mercial banks. Since October 
2003, it also grants loans directly to companies. BICE is currently acting as the trustee for the FODER (see Section 
C.1) and as such  has been  developing  its own capacity  to carry  out its mandate  efficiently.  This mandate  is a sign of 
the confidence of the government in BICE’s capabilities to manage resources specifically directed towards clean 
energy  initiatives.  
61. Objective. BICE promotes economic development and job creation. Its objectives are fulfilled by channeling loan 
resources  targeted  to investment  projects  for SMEs  through  LFIs and through  their first-tier operations.  BICE  aims  to 
extend credit, in any form, to complement the funding structure of the first -tier financial intermediaries, cooperatives 
and other financial entities created by law, and enable the implementation of short, medium and long -term 
development  programs,  with internal  or external  funds  from loans  guaranteed  by the Republic  of Argentina,  donations 
from third  parties,  endowment  budget  funds,  own capital  and funds  obtained  from the issuance  of bonds.  BICE  does 
not have a deposit  mechanism.  
62. Recent  financial  situation.  As of December  2016,  BICE  had USD  761.9  million  in assets  with a loan portfolio  totaling 
USD 461.2 million (60.5% of its assets),  of which 30.3% corresponds to its second -tier operation. BICE operations 
are funded by shareholder´s equity (32.3%), negotiable bonds (18.2%), multilateral loans (17.3%), national budget 
lines (10.2%)  and institutional  deposits  (9.2%),  and other  liabilities  (12.8%).  BICE  currently  accounts  for 0.46 % of all 
the Argentine financial system assets.  
63. Operations. The creation of BICE was intended to mitigate the structural flaws verified in market terms in order to 
spur economic development and promote job creation. Through BICE’s provision of long -term finance, it helped 
lengthen loan terms in the system. Longer terms allow SMEs to make larger and long -term investments, thereby 
promoting job creation and higher competitiveness. Despite the extension in the tenor of credits, BICE’s funding is 
nevertheless insufficient to meet the growing structural needs of Argentina’s productive sector, in a context of a 
sustained cycle of economic growth and despite annual fluctuations related to the effects of external  shocks.  
64. Over  its nearly  25 years  of operation,  BICE  has succeeded  in becoming  a source  of long-term financing  in Argentina’s 
financial system, offering terms that are considerably longer than the average for the system. It has significantly 
expanded  its lending  activities,  demonstrating  with its supply  of long-term financing  to the financial  system  that there 
is a demand for that type of product and that the participating LFIs have been able to allocate it effectively and 
responsibly.  
65. Thus,  BICE,  as a NDB , is in a unique  position  to engage  LFIs and private  investors,  align  development  financing  with 
national priority mitigation actions, and canalize international climate funding as well as mobilizing national financial 
resources to promote scaled up investments in SE  projects.  
66. BICE has an extensive range of financial instruments to facilitate the development of initiatives in various sectors; 
notwithstanding, given the existing barriers to investments in RE and EE, the pool of financial instruments needs to 
be supplemented by additional innovative instruments to address those specific barriers. The aim of the proposed 
Project is to support BICE in the structuring of innovative instruments to achieve the Project  objective.  
67. The institution  is deemed  to have  sufficient  capacity  to perform  activities  of financial  management  and administration 
of the resources  under  the proposed  Project.  It is customary  for the IDB to perform  an institutional  analysis  of all their 
potential  executing  agencies  before  presenting  programs  for approval  by the IDB Board,  to confirm  that they maintain 
a satisfactory level of development, low fiduciary risk and a low risk for project implementation. Based on this, 
institutional capacity analysis for BICE has been concluded p ositively and approved by the  IDB. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
68. Energy and financial markets face a series of barriers that impede the expansion of the sector in a sustainable way. 
Given  the high initial  capital  investments  and the expected  payback  times  of RE and EE projects,  long-term financing 
is needed for projects to be viable. The domestic banking sector in Argentina is currently not able to deliver suitable 
financing  for these  projects  and international  financing  is very limited.  Furth ermore,  project  finance  structures  – which 
allow private developers to fund projects off balance sheet – still need to develop further in order to increase  private  
participation in the sector. At the same time, capital markets have not progressed to meet the large funding needs of 
infrastructure or smaller industries’ EE projects (see Sections B.3 and C.1).


---
*Page 28*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 64  
 
 
69. A feasibility analysis 45 has identified significant investment opportunities for  biomass (in particular, agricultural, 
forestry  residues,  timber  and paper  industry),  biogas  (feedlots,  pig farms,  food processing)  and EE in energy -intensive 
industry (specifically chemicals, food processing, dairy and plastics) in Argentina, which are cu rrently hampered by 
financial and non -financial  barriers.  
70. According to this analysis, the requested amount of USD100 million reimbursable resources from the GCF, in 
combination  with BICE’s  co-financing  (see Table  B1.1)  could  finance  some  8% of the potential  investments  identified 
for biogas and biomass and 10% of identified SMEs for EE projects. While the theoretical internal rate of return of 
these projects is generally attractive, at 9% -18%, in practice the long pay -back periods require special fu nding 
conditions,  which  are not currently  available  in the market.  Furthermore,  adequate  support  for project  structuring  and 
pipeline generation activities is virtually non -existing in the  market46. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
71. All sub -projects financed under the Project will be subject to local laws and regulation and to IDB’s internal policies, 
including environmental and social safeguards. Relevant gaps identified between IDB’s requirements and local 
regulation shall be covered and agreed upon between the IDB and BICE before approval by the IDB. If necessary, 
technical assistance may be provided to BICE or public local entities for the provision of IDB requirements that go 
beyond local regulations (e.g. environmental and social management plans, gender plans,  etc.).  
72. The recently  enacted  National  Law 27.191  (approved  in September  2016)  sets national  targets  for the share  of RE in 
total energy consumption at 8% by 2018 and 20% by 2025 (including biogas and biomass). The law also introduces 
competitive and transparent market rules and contract mechanisms that include self -generation, as well as fiscal 
incentives to IPPs and local supply chain, and creates a sector specific trust fund (FODER), managed by BICE, to 
provide guaran tees and debt financing to projects. Furthermore, the law 27.191 provides a robust package of fiscal 
incentives for these  technologies.  
Permits and licenses required as part of public tenders (as per RenovAr’s program) include:  
73. Environmental permit that au thorizes the development and operation of the project from the date of signing of the 
PPA without the need to process any further environmental authorizations. In normal circumstances, the issuing 
authority will be the relevant provincial agency of the pro vince where the project is  located.  
74. License to operate as a generator, co -generator or self -supply agent in the wholesale energy market, issued by the 
MINEM. Filing needs to be completed by the time of presenting the proposal under the tender process and a pproval 
needs to be secured before signing the Commercial Operation Date  (COD).  
75. Law 24467 defines and establishes the framework for the SGR. The SGR is an economic instrument that provides 
guarantees or collateral to SMEs, to supplement its guarantees, the reby enabling a greater ability to  borrow.  
76. Resolution  1542/2010  establishes  new minimum EE  standards  for split and compact  air conditioners.  The resolution 
requires air conditioners to comply with the Class E efficiency requirements of standard IRAM  62406:2007.  
77. From  a macroeconomic  perspective,  some  aspects  like foreign  exchange  regulation  may have  an impact  on financial 
stability and deepening related to the sustainability of the Project. Since December 2015, the government has been 
progressively eliminating previously established foreign exchange controls that were limiting convertibility and 
transferability of foreign currency and thus hindering investment. This is expected to enhance conditions for foreign 
currency financing of these projects in  the future.  
78. Specific additional policies may be required and reviewed for sub -projects during the due diligence process to be 
carried out by BICE or the lending  LFI. 
Instruments and initiatives47 
79. FODER,  Argentina’s  RE Fund  Guarantee,  aims  to reestablish  private  investor  confidence  in Argentina  and contribute 
to mobilize  USD  3.2 billion  overall  investment  into the Argentine  RE sector.  Under  the RenovAr  Program,  CAMMESA, 
will be the off-taker  and signatory  of the corresponding  PPAs  when  awarded  to the proposed  developers.  The primary  
financial instruments developed under FODER have been payment guarantees to be implemented through escrow  
 
45 The results  of this analysis  and the potential  sub sectors  identified  have  been  used  for building  an assumed  pipeline 
of sub -projects to be financed by the Project, as well as estimations on the results and impacts of the Project. The 
figures presented should be taken merely as  indicative.  
46 Presently,  the electricity  price  in Argentina  is subsidized.  The govern ment  foresees  a trajectory  to phase  out electricity 
subsidies over time, which would decrease the payback time of EE projects. Nonetheless, without long -term finance 
these projects will not be implemented. A breakdown of the potential market and the scope of the proposed financing 
line can be found in the Feasibility study in Annex  2. 
47 The Project is aligned and complementary in scope to the Project financed under the IDBG GCF Project FP30 
“Catalysing private investment in sustainable energy in Argentina ” approved at GCF B.15  and the IDBG  Green  
Financing Facility project with Banco Galicia .


---
*Page 29*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 64  
 
 
accounts ( Cuenta de Garantía and its sub -accounts) that are designed to cover: (a) ongoing PPA paym ents (i.e. 
liquidity support); and (b) payment obligations emerging from the rights held by the project developer to sell their 
project to FODER, if specific macroeconomic or sector risks materialize.48 
80. The PROBIOMASA program started in 2013, and aims to boost production, management and sustainable use of 
biomass for energy  purposes.  
81. In December 2007, the government launched the National Program for Rational and Efficient Use of Energy 
(PRONUREE). The PRONUREE included short and long -term objectives to imp rove EE in industry, transport, the 
household  sector  (10%  energy  savings  target  for 2016)  and the services  sector  (12%  energy  savings  target  for 2016), 
as well as in public buildings (10% energy savings target for  2016).  
82. The Fondo  Argentino  de Eficiencia  Energetica  was developed  under  a World  Bank  EE program  in 2009.  The objective 
of this six -year project was to increase EE use through the promotion and sustainable growth of EE services 
contributing to the reduction of energy costs to consumers and long-term sustainability of the Argentinean energy 
sector. The aim was to reduce GHG emissions by eliminating regulatory, financing and information -related barriers 
that limit activities and investment in EE and energy conservation. This project includes t he creation of the energy 
efficiency fund (2.18 million USD) to support the development of energy audits and implementation of feasibility 
studies for investment in EE, as well as the development of the energy efficiency fund itself. The fund provided low 
interest loans for EE projects by SMEs and was operating under the scope of the National Fund for Development of 
Micro, Small and Medium sized companies.  
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
83. Component 1 will be executed by IDB, which will act  as the Accredited Entity and Executing Entity for the GCF non - 
reimbursable resources. IDB will implement this component in coordination with BICE, which will provide in -kind 
resources to support its implementation. For Component 2, IDB, in its capacity a s Accredited Entity, will enter into a 
sovereign  loan agreement  with the Republic  of Argentina.  The IDB, as lender  (acting  as Accredited  Entity  of the GCF) 
will enter  into a loan agreement  with the Republic  of Argentina.  The sovereign  guarantee  of the loan contract  consists 
of the responsibility of the government in its capacity as borrower. No separate guarantee contract with the 
Argentinean Republic nor a third -party guarantee is required. BICE will be the Executing Entity for Component 2. 
BICE will sign the sovereign loan agreement to confirm its legal capacity and its capacity to fulfil the execution 
obligations assigned to it under the loan agreement. BICE and the Republic of Argentina will enter into an 
implementation agreement whereby BICE will agree,  inter alia, to execute the program as contemplated in the loan 
agreement.  The loan agreement,  as well as the implementation  agreement  will enter  into effect  upon  its signature  by 
the parties to such agreements. No congressional approval is required for ei ther agreement.  
84. The IDB, will act as Accredited  Entity  and in line with the Accreditation  Master  Agreement  (AMA)  signed  between  the 
IDB and the GCF, will (a) administer and manage the use of GCF Proceeds; (b) incorporate provisions in the 
Subsidiary Agreements requiring that management, implementation and supervision of the Funded Activity be in 
line with the Accredited Entity’s own internal policies and procedures; and (c) be responsible for the supervision, 
monitoring, evaluation and reporting respo nsibilities as set forth in the  AMA.  
85. For Component  2, GCF  funds  will be transferred  to the Republic  of Argentina,  which  in turn will transfer  them  to BICE, 
for BICE to manage and use them exclusively for the execution of this component in a dedicated revolving account. 
BICE will be required to maintain its co -financing level while sub loans financed with GCF Proceeds are being 
approved. Failure to do so will trigger repayment of GCF reimbursable  resources.  
86. In its capacity of Executing Entity for Component 2, BICE will be expected to implement sub -projects under its own 
organizational structure, and responsible for the timely provision of human and technical resources necessary to 
implement the financing of sub -projects under the Project. The provi sions governing eligibility of each sub -project to 
be financed  with funds  from the Project  will be established  in an Operating  Regulation  (OR)  agreed  between  the IDB 
and BICE49. Amendments  to the OR will have  to be approved  by the IDB. For each  individual  sub loan,  an agreement  
between the BICE or the LFI and each sub borrower will provide the precise terms and conditions (i.e. maturity, rates  
 
48 A backstop guarantee is provided by the World Bank.  
49 The OR is a document required under the loan agreement  between the IDB and BICE by which the executing entity 
formally  adapts  their internal  processes  to requirements  by the IDB for the execution  of a specific  Project.  As such,  the 
document  is prepared  and owned  by the executing  entity,  with supervision  from the IDB, and must  be approved  by the 
entity’s appropriate instances prior to the first disbursement of funds. The OR can be finalized at any time before the 
first disbursement and normally remains a work -in-progress throughout IDB program documents’ prepar ation and 
negotiations.


---
*Page 30*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 64  
 
 
and costs)  of the financing,  which  will depend  on the characteristics  of the sub-project  being  financed,  its internal  rate 
of return and its risk profile.  
87. For execution purposes of Component 2 and to ensure coordination with IDB regarding Component 1, BICE will 
designate an executing unit, within its current institutional structure, and a project coordinator, to be responsible for 
the overall  execution  of the project  and for interaction  with the IDB as an Accredited  Entity.  The proposed  project  will 
go through the IDB’s normal approval process and will result in a loan contract between the IDB and the Republic of 
Argentina, stipulating that BICE will be responsible to execute the Project on behalf of the Republic of Argentina. All 
IDB policies  and procedures  for disbursements,  procurement,  environmental  and social  safeguards,  external  auditing, 
as well as reporting, monitoring and verification of results would have to be  followed.  
88. The loan agreement between the Republic of Argentina and the IDB will require that BICE, as the Executing Entity 
for Component  2, to approve  specific  Operational  Regulations  in terms  acceptable  to the IDB, for the implementation 
of the Project activities contemplated in the loan agreement. The Operational Regulations will detail: (i) the eligibility 
criteria of the beneficiaries (LFIs and SMEs) and activities of Component 2; (ii) the terms and conditions to be 
complied by BICE and /or the LFIs when providing the sub -Loans to the SMEs; (iii) other parameters, requirements 
and/or restrictions that govern the use of resources by BICE, and the LFIs and/or SMEs, respectively; (iv) the 
methodologies to apply the concessionality of GCF Pro ceeds to LFIs and SMEs to ensure that SMEs sufficiently 
benefit from the Project; (v) methodologies to ensure that the ratio of the loan agreement and the cofinancing will be 
maintained at 1 : 0.6 for the portfolio of sub -loans provided to LFIs or SMEs und er Component 2 by BICE over the 
entire tenor of the loan agreement; (vi) production of audited reports on the financial activities using the GCF 
Reimbursable Funds, in accordance with relevant financial reporting standards; (vii) measure to prevent access to 
finance in case of failure to comply with (iv), (v) and (vi) in this paragraph; and (viii) the definition of corrective 
measures to be applied in case of non -compliance with (i), (ii) and (iii). The OR shall be approved by the Board of 
Directors  of BICE,  following  the non-objection  of the IDB, and this requirement  will be established  in the loan contract 
as prior condition for its first  disbursement.  
89. Following IDB Policies for Global Credit Loans, IDB will be supervising the BICE’s execution. As a co ndition for 
disbursing funds, IDB will be reviewing whether the portfolio of approved sub -loans fulfill the Project’s criteria and 
conditions, as well as progress reports regarding the overall Project execution and fiduciary criteria. If BICE, directly 
or through an independent auditor, encounters during the execution period that a sub -project does not comply with 
the eligibility criteria of the Project, it will need to take the sub -project out of the GCF -funded portfolio, and will have 
to assume  the costs  associated  with recouping  the concessionality  that was unduly  granted  to it. IDB and BICE  shall 
have planning meetings to estimate disbursements every year. IDB will maintain continuous tracking of execution of 
the program through a result -based electronic  system of  IDB. 
90. GCF funds will be kept in a dedicated revolving account under which any sub loan recuperations or re -payments 
made by first tier LFIs and SMEs receiving direct lending from BICE will be re -used to finance eligible projects. This 
revolving  account  will follow  the ORs in terms  of the eligibility  criteria  of the beneficiaries,  the terms  and conditions  of 
the sub -loans (interest rate, grace period, amortization), sectors or projects that can be financed by the credits, and 
other  parameters  and/o r restrictions  that govern  the use of the resources  of the loan,  as well as the local contribution.  
91. Apart from the IDB’s own initial assessment of BICE’s fiduciary capacity to execute the loan, BICE will have the 
obligation to provide, during the execution  period, semi -annual execution reports and an annual audited fiduciary 
report. This audited report will be produced by an internationally recognized auditing firm following relevant financial 
reporting standards. The independent auditing firm will also ver ify compliance with the Project’s eligibility criteria, as 
well as with the appropriate application of the methodology agreed with the IDB to distribute GCF’s concessionality 
among beneficiary firms. An interim and a final evaluation will also be  prepared.  
92. Transfer of GCF funds to the IDB: As provided for in the AMA, for the financing of the Program, GCF will enter into 
an FAA with the IDB. GCF funds will be transferred into the account specified in the FAA (GCF Account). As the EE 
for this Component, BICE will enter into the loan agreements with LFIs, which in turn would use those resources to 
finance  loans  to local SMEs.  BICE  may also directly  finance  SMEs.  Loans  to SMEs  may also be co-financed  by other 
co-lenders (which may enter into inter -creditor agree ments). For direct lending to SMEs (potentially biomass and 
biogas), co -lending options can involve multiple LFIs, and the participation of multiple SMEs as investors, also in 
project finance structures, where applicable. The OR will reflect these options.  Use of proceeds by BICE will also be 
subject to the terms and conditions of the OR approved by BICE and acceptable to  IDB.


---
*Page 31*
---

C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 64


---
*Page 32*
---

 
 
 
C.8. Timetable of Project Implementation  
Table C8.1. - Project timeline by component and activity (period  2018 -2023)   
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 64  
 
 
 
 
Component   
Activity   
Sub-Activity  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Component 1: 
Implementation costs 
and technical 
assistance activities   
1.1. Develop financial and 
non-financial instruments, 
including standard 
performance contract, 
insurance policy covering 
energy savings and 
validation methodologies to 
account energy savings and 
generation  1.1.1. Market Assessment including Gender Analysis                          
1.1.2. Development of a standard performance contract for risk sharing  
between SMEs investing and ESTPs                          
1.1.3. Development of procedure to participate in the renovAR program                          
1.1.4. Develop standards and validation methodologies for project level  
accounting and project proposal design validation                          
1.1.5. Development of financing structuring and risk mitigation  
instruments (ESI for EE) and project incentive strategy                          
1.1.6. Development and implementation of promotion and execution plan                          
1.1.7. Development of a Project Pipeline                          
1.1.8 Strengthen regulatory framework                          
 
 
 
1.2. Strengthen capacity of 
BICE, LFIs, ESTPs, project 
developers and  validators 
for SE project development. 
Seed incentives and 
Knowledge  sharing  1.2.1. Training of project developers/technology solution  
providers/LFIs/Validators/SMEs (at least 20% women)                          
1.2.2 Establishment at BICE of business unit dedicated to SE financing                          
1.2.3. Establishment of electronic registry system for monitoring and  
evaluation of projects and program’s results                          
1.2.4. Seed incentives for projects (initial project design costs, project  
validation cost)                          
1.2.5. Management and monitoring of the Project                          
1.2.6. Development of six (6) products/publications, knowledge sharing  
events, country market reports published, and webinars                          
 
Component 2: 
Financing adapted to 
RE and EE projects   
2.1 Increase medium and 
long term credit for SE 
projects provided to SMEs   
Support of an estimated total of 2,645 SMEs (based on average sized 
sub-projects) to finance eligible SE projects (biomass, biogas, EE)                          
Monitoring*                          
Mid-term evaluation**                          
Impact evaluation***                          
IDB reporting to GCF                          
* Overall Project execution will be monitored and reported by BICE to the IDB. These reports will provide information on outp ut and outcome indicators, as per IDB standards, and on characteristics of the sub -project portfolio, including compliance of eligi bility criteria.  
** To be conducted 24 months after the first disbursement of funds or once 50% of loan proceeds have been committed, whicheve r occurs first.  
*** Covering indicators in Section H1. To be conducted within a year of end of Project.  
                            
C


---
*Page 33*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 64  
 
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
93. As long as there remains a lack of a larger and more sophisticated banking system in the country, and given the 
levels of risks associated to Sustainable Energy (SE) projects, as well as the existing lack of knowledge that 
prevails, a concessionality element is considered necessary to structure funding model s that will make end 
beneficiary projects viable, influencing the characteristics and evolution of private sector participation. The GCF 
contribution supports the development of practices that will prevail in a more sophisticated banking  market.  
94. As describ ed in Sections C.1 and E.5, Argentina is already committed to the transformation of its energy sector 
based  on sustainable  principles,  promoting  a more  efficient  use and production  of energy  in the country.  While  the 
reforms  underway  are expected  to improv e conditions  for investment  in the sector,  this process  will likely  take time 
before it translates into investors and financiers building strong confidence in the sector, and some initial 
demonstration is considered meaningful to jumpstart the  market.  
95. Without  the GCF’s  combination  of grant  and concessional  loan contributions,  financing  by LFIs of local EE and RE 
investments will continue to be limited in  Argentina.  
96. The fundamental reason for the need of GCF concessional financing relates strictly to the  objective of the Project 
itself,  namely  to scale  up investment  in RE and EE. Without  this incentive,  the volume  and pace  of investments  in 
these sectors would remain well below the full potential. The concessionality of GCF resources allows for the 
structuring of a financing package that is essential to overcome the barriers faced by private sector investors 
through different channels, including creating frameworks that are more conducive to private sector participation 
in SE investments and increasi ng private actors’ access to finance per  se. 
97. GCF resources will reduce the risk of LFIs to participate in RE and EE investments with SMEs. Concessionality 
is critical  for sub-projects  to effectively  offset  the additional  cost associated  to the described  risks and barriers  and 
benefit from the financial effect of increased leverage that is fundamental for their competitiveness and financial 
viability.  
98. The following mechanisms are considered sufficient to mitigate the risk that the benefits of the concessiona lity 
can be unduly captured by BICE or  LFIs:  
• First, Operational Regulations will be developed and enforced to ensure that the spread charged by LFIs is 
aligned with the market, so that LFIs do not unduly capture the concessionality. Competition between LFIs will 
further ensure that rates from BICE and LFIs to beneficiary SMEs are  competitive;  
• Second,  semi -annual  reporting  and verification  of the beneficiary  SME  portfolio  and activities  financed  with GCF 
funds will be carried out. The reporting and verifi cation will specifically consider the appropriate application of 
concessionality; and  
• Third, corrective measures in cases of non -compliance with the previous provisions will be defined in the 
Operational  Regulations.  
99. The abovementioned  risk mitigation  mech anisms  are considered  sufficient  to ensure  that concessionality  of funds 
(i.e. concessionality in the form of reduced cost of funding to blend in rates and tenors) is not fully captured by 
BICE or  LFIs.  
100. As the Project creates a long -term financing market, the concessionality in the form of interest rate and tenor will 
enable  the financing  of sub-projects  that currently  are not being  served.  The interest  rates  are subject  to monitoring 
by the IDB via reporting of specific financial data on each beneficiary sub-project. By transfering concessionality 
to final beneficiaries of the sub -loans, LFIs ensure support to the demand for credit which is not viable without 
long-term finance.  
101. In the short term, grant money will help provide the necessary technical assist ance to develop support 
mechanisms, build capacities and support sub -projects, while concessional loans will help lower the cost of long - 
term financial resources needed by these investments. Even pooled with BICE’s and LFIs additional resources 
lent at ma rket rates, the financing terms of the blend will represent an enhancement of the financing available in 
terms  of costs  and maturities.  In this sense,  GCF  funding  can help source  the complementary  long-term financing 
available  through  the local financial  system,  under  conditions  that make  it possible  for these  institutions  to structure 
products suitable for RE and EE  projects.  
102. Financing to private projects via a NDB is not expected to crowd out any other sources of financing (in fact, the 
Project  is aimed  at sub-projects  for which  adequate  financing  is not available  in the existing  markets).  Conversely,


---
*Page 34*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 64  
 
 
 
the way in which  the Project  is designed  promotes  leverage  of additional  sources,  as each  beneficiary  sub-project 
would require a certain level of equity financing (in general, between 20% and 30% of total investment costs, 
depending  on the credit  risk and availability  of capital).  Normal  practice  in previous  similar  projects  led by the IDB 
is that NDBs  complement  program  funding  with their own resources  and may bring  other  financial  institutions  into 
the transaction  (commercial  banks  who would  not be willing  to finance  the projects  by themselves  in the absence 
of the program),  either  by working  as a second  tier bank  (channeling  funds  through  LFIs)  or syndicating  loans  with 
other banks or alone through Tier 1 operations if the size of the sub -project is large enough (> USD 5 Million) to 
allow for  this50. 
D.2. Exit Strategy  
103. GCF  resources  will enable  the provision  of financing  currently  not available  in the market.  Through  the generation 
of a track record and knowledge for SMEs, financial institutions and ESTPs, the perceived risks are ex pected to 
decrease and additional finance will be available to further develop the sector in  Argentina.  
104. Using the limited available funding to finance demonstration, by creating mechanisms that incentivize the 
participation of the private sector in the long term and generate new development partners and mechanisms, will 
reduce aid dependence to address the needs of the energy sector in a timely sustainable manner in the future. 
BICE will maintain a dedicated account for the execution of the Project (revo lving account). Returns from sub - 
loans financed by the Project, including payments, prepayments, cancellations or terminations of sub -loans shall 
be received in this account and used by BICE to repay the GCF loan to the IDB. Cumulative recoveries from the  
program that exceed the amounts necessary for service of the loan to the IDB shall be used to finance new sub - 
loans consistent with the objectives of the Project. This mechanism does not entail any incremental risks for the 
reimbursable portion of GCF fu nds, and is only intended to enable longer -tenor money from the GCF to finance 
additional sub -projects, once maturity of the first round of sub -projects has been reached. The Project is 
comprehensive in the sense that it seeks to jump -start/scale -up an inv estment process that should become self - 
sustaining in the longer term. Through the involvement of BICE and financing from third parties in the sub - 
projects, the viability of RE and EE projects is expected to be proven, and its financing and the risks inv olved 
therein better understood. Of course, without regulatory incentives to this industry already in place, it is difficult to 
predict where the limits to profitable ventures might be. That depends as well on the evolution of the 
technologies, the quality  and quantity of the RE and EE resources available, future conditions in the financial 
markets, and future prices of  electricity/energy.  
105. It is expected  that once  the GCF  financing  is repaid,  the transformation  impact  of the Project  should  allow  for 
financial institutions, service providers  and developers  to be more engaged in these types  of  projects, as they  
would have acquired experience, new instruments would be in place, business models would have been proven 
viable and markets would have evol ved51. At the same time, the Federal Government is currently demonstrating  
 
50 According to the IDB, countries showing a higher penetration of financial institutions for renewables are those that 
have provided public financial products. Study on the Deve lopment of the Renewable Energy Market in Latin America  
and the Caribbean , IDB, 2014.  
51 The continued  provision  of long-term finance  in the financial  system  depends  on multiple  factors,  some  of which  can 
be controlled by the Project, others that are exogenous to the Project such as macro -economic stability, low inflation 
rates, a healthy banking system supported by regulation and supervision, as well as contractual environment that 
protects the rights of creditors and borrowers. Further provision of l ong-term finance beyond the GCF will depend on 
BICE and LFIs capacity to match long -term assets (loans) vs. long -term liabilities (for instance deposits and bonds). 
The Project envisions to mobilize further private sector finance from LFIs, once these are comfortable with the project 
risks encountered in the co -financing of sub -projects with GCF support. By addressing the endogenous factors of the 
Project, it is expected that the perceived risks decrease through the generation of a track record and knowledg e by 
firms, LFIs and ESTPs, and additional finance will be available to further develop the sector in the country. Long -term 
sustainability  of the Project  is ensured  by allowing  relevant  economic  decision  makers  to better  assess  the risks of their 
investme nts (understanding clearly the actual risk/return profile of each technology package) and its impact on their 
cash flows, productivity and profitability. GCF funding will be used to provide tailored financial and non -financial 
instruments  that can spur private  investments  in these  technologies  the long-run. LFIs are incentivized  to broaden  their 
support to these investments as they also learn to shape their perceptions of risk associated to these projects. The 
expected benefits of this line of business f or these institutions is expected to foster replication of the model, gradually 
increasing its scope and consolidating the market for financing this  sector.


---
*Page 35*
---

D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 64  
 
 
 
strong and proactive wil l to overcome the structural problems that prevent the development of their financial 
markets, which should help create a more favorable environment to invest without the need of further incentives 
in the long -term.  
106. Nonetheless, the Project is not expected  to create distortions, as the terms of financing and key contractual 
requirements  will follow  market -based  parameters  and best practices,  and GCF  concessionality  will be targeted 
at overcoming short -term risk or cost barriers, thus allowing to phase out GCF support to achieve a self - 
sustaining  market.  
107. The Project delivers its structural impact because it makes more and better funding available and seeks to 
maximize the amounts leveraged. The underlying concessionality is seen as an incentive to accelerat e and 
multiply  the investment  process,  supported  by risk-reduction  instruments  that are expected  to become  widely 
used by private market  actors.  
108. Finally,  Project  activities  to develop  local capacities  are also expected  to deliver  long-term sustainability  for the 
financing of these projects in the future, thereby allowing GCF exit once the GCF loan resources have been 
repaid.  
109. Long -term sustainability of the Project is ensured by allowing relevant economic decision makers to better 
assess the risks of their investments (understanding clearly the actual risk/return profile of each technology 
package) and its impact on their cash flows, productivity and profitability. GCF funding will be used to provide 
tailored  financial  and non-financial  instruments  that can spur private  investments  in these  technologies  the long- 
run. LFIs are incentivized to broaden their support to these investments as they also learn to shape their 
perceptions of risk associated to these projects. The expected benefits of this line of busi ness for these 
institutions is expected to foster replication of the model, gradually increasing its scope and consolidating the 
market for financing this  sector.


---
*Page 36*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 64  
 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
110. The proposed  Project  seeks  a significant  transformational  intervention  by building  a track  record  of sub-projects  and 
providing the possibility to replicate successful outcomes in other sectors and increase commercial lenders’ 
participation. The Project also has a multiplier effect, as it is designed to optimize the use of funding available in 
terms  of leverage  and sustainability.  Continuing  these  efforts,  from both a public  and private  perspective,  can allow  
for the adjustment  of available  support  frameworks,  after demonstration  of the benefits  of investing  in these  projects 
has permeated the  economy.  
111. Due to the portfolio approach of the proposal and the diverse nature of eligible sub -projects, potential impacts will 
be presented in aggregated and disaggregated terms by technology. As the Project is designed to finance sub - 
projects on a first -come -first-served basis and specific sub -projects to be financed are not known ex ante, an 
indicative portfolio of  sub-projects and standard factors for each technology in this assumed pipeline will be used 
for estimations of indicators. A broad description of the methodology used for each technology in the calculation of  
expected CO 2eq reductions is presented below. Data will be updated with real values as the Project advances its  
implementation.  
Methodology for calculation of expected tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided  
112. Based on a thorough analysis of the market, the methodology star ts by constructing a sub -project profile for each 
of the subsectors identified in the feasibility analysis, namely, biogas, biomass52, and EE. Furthermore, for biogas 
technology the analysis expands to three different subsectors; a) pig farms, b) cattle in  feedlot farms and c) 
agroindustry (food processing) sector (see also Section F.1 and F.2). Each subsector sub -project profile is built 
based  on the characteristics  of a standard  venture  in this particular  subsector  (indicative  size, investment,  efficiency  
of the technology used, etc.). This profile then serves to calculate the expected amount of clean energy that each 
biogas or biomass sub -project could produce or the amount of energy that each EE sub -project could save53. A 
number  of expected  sub-projects  to be financed  by the Project  is estimated,  based  on a specific  share  of each  target 
subsector (determined by the feasibility analysis). For biogas and biomass, this number of sub -projects is then 
multiplied by the individual amount of energy produced by the profiled sub -project under each category. The total 
amount of energy produced by subsector, multiplied by a conversion factor (0.535 tCO2/MWh the case of 
Argentina54), leads to the potential of emission reductions under the biogas and biomass categorie s. In the case of 
EE, the expected  emission  reduction  per technology  is applied  to a mix of technologies  to be used  in the sub-projects 
financed (15% electric motors, 40% solar water heaters, 15% efficient boilers, 10% refrigeration systems, 15% air 
conditioning, 5% cogeneration) and then extrapolated using the amount of investment per technology and the total 
amount of financ ing available for this subsector in order to obtain a total amount of emissions reductions for the 
assumed mix of sub -projects. Finally, by adding those values to the ones obtained for biogas and biomass, we 
obtain an aggregated emission reduction value fo r the Project.  
 
52 Biomass sub -projects considered are limited in size to less than 5MW of capacity.  
53 Additional data used includes the standard emission reductions expected for each technology used and the historic level 
of usage of each technology in  the target market (see Annex 3 Economic and financial model).  
54 See Ministry of Energy and Mining Argentina Emission Factor Calculation 2015  (latest official data).


---
*Page 37*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 64  
 
 
Table E1.1. - Estimations of Project impact by eligible technology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[a] The gas produced is calculated by multiplying an average dung per cow (15kg/day) by the methane produced per dung (0.05 m3/kg ). The 0.35 
corresponds to the conversion factor from gas to electricity and 0.85 ratios correspond to capacity factor of the bioga s plant. See Annex 3 for 
details. [b]The production factor used is 0.8.  
 
113. The expected results include among others the  following:  
• Investments will mostly be in long -lived assets; thus, the Project will contribute to avoid locking -in of high - 
emissions. For  eligible sub -projects, energy savings vary between 5% to 60% compared to the baseline, 
depending on the (replaced)  technology.  
• The GHG emission reductions from the underlying sub -projects to be implemented are expected to be around  
21,346  tCO 2eq per million  of USD  invested  over the lifetime  of the Project.  This is based  on the assumption  that 
the initial USD 160 Million financing resources will be able to be re -utilized due to the revolving account for an 
estimated  total financing  of USD  298.75  Million  and resulting  in a total project  investment  volume  of USD  426.78 
Million. Dividing the total expected GHG emission reductions of 9.1 Million tCO2 by USD 426.78 Million results 
in a 21,346 per Million tCO2 reduction.(See also Footnote  72) 
• A total of  455,517 tons of CO 2eq are expected to be avoided or reduced annually. The aggregate expected 
reductions  are about  9.1 million  tCO 2eq over the lifetime  of the sub-projects,  including  the reduction  in methane  
emissions56. 
• The total estimated direct and indirect beneficiaries are based on expected beneficiary SMEs as well as new 
jobs created.  The proposal  is expected  to serve  more  than 2,600  (2,645)  SMEs,  and create  more  than 1,950  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 Including the reduction in methane emissions for pig farms and  livestock.  
56 Accounting for 20 years for biomass and biogas sub -projects and 10 years for EE sub -projects.  
 
 
Subsector   
 
Reference for calculations   
# of sub -projects 
to be financed  Total energy 
produced / 
saved (GWh)  Total CO 2 emission 
reductions (million 
tCO2eq)55 
without and [with revolving account effect]  
Biogas  
 
Pig farms  Energy produced per farm =  
Energy produced per pig in 
profile farm x # of pigs per farm   
449 [954]  2,046 [3,096]  2.87 [4.25]  
 
Livestock 
(feedlot)  Energy produced per farm = 
Gas produced per profile farm  
daily x 365 x 0.35 x 0.85 x # of 
cows per farm [a]  
20 [43]   
316 [479]   
1.23 [1.84]  
 
Agroindustry  Energy produced per plant =  
Average size of profile plant x 
365 x 24 x production factor[b]  
168 [357]  1,033 [1,562]  0.55 [0.82]  
 
Biomass  Energy produced per plant = 
Average size of profile plant x  
365 x 24 x production factor[b]  
12 [21]  2,473 [3,703]  1.32 [1.94]  
 
 
Energy efficiency  Emissions reduced per type of 
technology = CO 2 reduced per 
type of eligible technology x 
share of usage of this 
technology in the local market x  
share of total projects financed 
investing in this technology   
 
598 [1,270]   
 
118 [229]   
 
0.15 [0.27]  
Total   1,247 [2,645]  5,988 [9,071]  6.13 [9.1]


---
*Page 38*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 64  
 
 
additional green jobs. Green jobs created in the biogas and biomass industry a re estimated at 778 employees57 
and in the EE industry at 1,180 additional direct, indirect and induced jobs58. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
 
 
 
 
 
GCF  
core 
indicators   
Expected tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  455,517  
 
Lifetime59  
9,110,338  
 
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated  by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to  total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only)   
 
 
Total  The proposal is expected to serve 2,645 
SMEs, as well as create more than 1,950 
additional green jobs. Green jobs created 
in the biogas and biomass industry are 
estimated at 7 78 employees and in the 
EE industry at 1,180 additional direct, 
indirect and induced jobs.  
Percentage 
(%) Not applicable  
 
 
Other 
relevant 
indicators   
• 453,579  of MWh  produced/saved  annually  by sub-projects  financed  by the Project  for a total of 
9,071 GWh over 20  years.  
• 114 MW of newly installed RE  capacity  
• 2,645 end beneficiaries that obtain access to credit from the Project to invest in SE  sub-projects  
114. Indicators will be calculated over the base of the number of sub -projects financed as a result  of the activities by 
the Project.  Once  deployed,  sub-projects  financed  are expected  to produce  or save  energy  (in the form of  MWh)  in 
the long term. The energy produced/saved is then assumed to lead to emissions savings calculated in aggregated 
terms (in the case of energy produced, the assumption is that the net effect is a reduction in emissions, as the 
alternative would be to produce that same energy with less clean technologies), both annually and during the 
lifetime of the sub -projects, using the aver age displaced emissions factor for electricity in Argentina, standard load 
factors and savings ratios for each particular RE and EE technology, respectively60. Based on estimated  
reductions of CO 2 emissions over the course of the lifetime of sub -projects financed, and using indicative amounts  
for finance leveraged by the Project, the cost of abatement is estimated considering only GCF financing, and then 
considering total investment (GCF, BICE and equity from  SMEs).  
 
 
 
 
 
57 Highlights of socio -economic impacts from biogas in 28 target regions  (Intelligent Energy Europe, 2010). The reference 
is based on European values and the mid -point between Bodenhöfer H. -J., Wohlgemuth N., Bliem M., Michael A., 
Weyerstraß K. - Assessment of the economic impact of the support of green electricity in Austria, IHS Carinthia, 2004; 
updated in 2007: Employment effects of the green electricity generation in Austria and the lower bound of Danish 
employment in biogas. See also IRENA  and EESI 2015 Fact Sheet: Jobs in Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency  
(2015). Jobs  in construction are estimated at 454 and in maintenance at 325.  
58 Mid-point between Greenpeace  and EESI 2014 Fact Sheet: Jobs in Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (2014)  
based on an assessment of the US economy.  
59 For the purpose of calculating tot al GHG emissions reduced, assumed lifetime is 20 years for RE projects and 10 years 
for EE projects.  
60 For the purpose of calculating total GHG emissions reduced, assumed lifetime of projects is 20 years for RE projects 
and 10 years for EE projects.


---
*Page 39*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 64  
 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication  
115. The goal of the Project is to trigger investment in RE and EE in Argentina, helping SMEs overcome financial and 
non-financial barriers, creating increased confidence in the markets and advancing knowledge for financial 
institutions  so that a track  record  is established  and the potential  for expansion  of these  technologies  is unlocked. 
The Project inclu des a technical cooperation component (Component 1) that will ensure the building of capacity, 
particularly in the financing institutions and ESTPs, in order to guarantee the sustainability of the Project beyond 
donor  support.  
116. As explained in the sections above, through a combination of innovative financial support and implementation 
capacity building, supported by a deep level of country ownership, the Project will contribute to overcoming the 
binding  constraints  to develop  viable  EE and RE projects,  foste r multi -sector  approach  and bridge  the funding  gap, 
which will result in accelerated investment, market transformation and large -scale  impact.  
117. SE and generally clean energy financing in Argentina is still in a very early development stage and there are man y 
opportunities for improvement related to the financial sector. There are few local banks offering dedicated loan 
products or actively marketing the benefits of such investments. Further efforts to enhance private sector 
participation and to demonstrate t he benefits of SE financing are required from the public financial sector to reach 
a critical mass and upscale the commercial financing of these  projects.  
118. By addressing these barriers via channeling funds through BICE and LFIs, the Project intends to deliver results 
that will go beyond GCF funding support. At the same time, by directing Project activities to private participants via 
a public initiative, a greater convergence between the actors involved can generate new types of public -private 
relations hips in the sector.  This will serve  to enhance  traditional  sources  of financing  and build  capacities  to design 
innovative mechanisms for scaling up sustainable projects. With this, private actors could take advantage of new 
opportunities presented by the s ector while contributing to the objectives of public  policies.  
119. The Project’s theory of change (Figure E2.1) highlights the relation between components (and specific activities 
proposed for each component, detailed in Table B1.3), the main products or expec ted outputs from the 
implementation of the activities and the medium and long -term outcomes desired (results and impacts). Delivered 
efficiently, the actions proposed will produce tangible outputs that the Project should be able to measure and 
monitor in a ggregated terms. In the context described (see Section C.1), when proposing these outputs, it is 
assumed that the country will maintain a fairly stable framework and conditions conducive to sustaining investment 
and promoting financial instruments to suppo rt it. It is also assumed that the current demand for financing exceeds 
supply and that the government will continue to increase their will to support the sector in a sustainable  way. 
120. Industry associations will be informed and consulted during the developm ent of the market instruments (Sub - 
activities 1.1.1 - 1.1.8) to share these through their membership channels which allows also different industry 
sectors to be reached. Based on experience from other countries, industry associations have shown large inte rest 
as acting as an information bridge informing their members through calls and appropriate communications. The 
financed technologies will focus on the best locally available technologies, for which sufficient parts as well as 
local technological and mai ntenance support exist. The validation methodology (sub -activity 1.1.4) ensures that 
proposed and financed sub -projects always lead to an improvement relative to the baseline (the equipment to be 
replaced). It furthermore, ensures that technological innova tion is factored  in. 
121. Within  a stable  framework,  private  actors  are able to analyze  the financial  viability  of specific  sub-projects.  Hence, 
voluntary participation of the private sector under market conditions is considered to be indicative that the 
expected value of these projects will result in net financial profits (i.e. financial costs are lower than financial 
benefits from a private perspective) and that the desired results may be  achieved61. 
122. In the long term, accumulated results from effective operation of biomass, biogas and EE sub -projects financed by 
the Project are expected to lead to the achievement of more efficient patterns of production and use of energy 
(impacts) in the country. Although a direct causality would be too hard to establish , it is assumed that momentum 
for investment will be created as a result of the Project, and that larger and more developed markets for these 
investments may in fact be a consequence of the financing of demonstration sub -projects, combined with training 
and timely  dissemination.  
 
61 Before  implementation  of the Project,  any portfolio  used  to build  indicators  is indicative.  There  is no information  available 
on specific  sub-projects  until they are presented  when  applying  to funding  from the Project,  and in all cases  numeric  values 
of targets should be treated with  caution.


---
*Page 40*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 64  
 
 
 
Figure E2.1. - Project’s theory of change (as per IDB’s results framework for operations) (see Section H.1)  
 
* Risk mitigation measures are illustrated in Section G.  
123. Replicating Project’s success with the participation of other financial institutions will result from knowledge sharing 
led by the IDB, with the support of BICE and beneficiaries. Moreover, the experie nce can also be shared among 
peers in the international community, capitalizing on close relationships between the IDB and NDBs in other 
countries facing the same issues. The upfront engagement of technical assistance teams to deliver case studies, 
origina tion training and marketing efforts will help consolidate demand for the financial products offered and its 
proper execution, creating a track record of successful projects and lessons learned that will be essential for 
catalyzing the Project’s impact furt her. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
124. As the Project advances in its implementation, the IDB will generate and aggregate data so as to demonstrate 
results. These results are intended to capture and share lessons emerging from sub -projects and activities 
financed.  Experiences  will be shared  through  regular  knowledge  exchange  platforms  (webinars,  workshops  and 
trainings). The IDB regularly participates in conferences and events related to climate financing and is actively 
engaged with its local p artners in the development of publications and learning  events.  
125. The regional  scope  of IDB’s  work provides  an opportunity  to share  experiences  in a more  harmonized  manner  and 
to optimize  the use of all funding  available  due to potential  economies  of scale  with similar  ongoing  interventions.


---
*Page 41*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 64  
 
 
126. All results,  knowledge  material  and publications  will be shared  via the IDB dedicated  websites,  including  the IDB 
website, the  Financial Innovation Lab, and the  LAC Green  Finance .62 
127. In particular, the Project  will: 
a. generate knowledge (studies, webinars, presentations, newsletters and guidelines showing specific 
experiences in structuring the BICE Financing  Strategy)  
b. disseminate  knowledge  (organization  of national  and regional  events  with the financial  services  and 
technology provider industry in Latin America  including)  
c. provide  training  and outreach  through  BICE’s  training  and promotion  systems  for LFIs and relevant  market 
actors  
128. Knowledge  creation  and dissemination  will be complementary  and coordinated  with activities  under  the approved 
IDBG -GCF project in Argentina with a focus on knowledge for LFIs and ESTPs.  63 
129. All these knowledge and learning activities will adhere to best practices in incentivizing a balanced gender 
participation  and showcase  Project  experience  with female  participation  on the platform  through  webinars  and 
publications.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
130. Uncertainties  specific  to the sector  (such  as costs  of certain  technologies,  new regulatory  framework,  existence  or 
volatility of the resource, etc.) critically influence investment decisions in RE and EE. In this context, the 
demonstrative effect of public intervention becomes crucial in or der to detonate private investment and create a 
EE and RE investment and technology cluster supported by a carefully designed structure of incentives (including 
financial, technology validation procedures, and risk sharing mechanisms that facilitate the de velopment of 
successful projects, proper training and regulation) that is likely to mobilize the local potential of an industry that 
has been growing exponentially in other parts of the  world.  
131. To this end, GCF resources will facilitate the structuring of financial and non -financial mechanisms to create 
business  models  that will attract  investment,  increasing  private  stakeholder’s  confidence  (see Section  C.3).  This is 
expected to generate a critical mass that will result in more competitive costs for the technologies involved, and 
consequently make efficient use and production of energy more  accessible.  
132. With these incentives in place, the banking system will gradually gain a better understanding of the economics of 
these  technologies  and the sector  should  benefit  from better  investment  environments,  reduced  costs  of financing, 
longer terms for their loans, and coverage from the uncertainties associated with the development of these 
projects.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
133. Unless steps are taken to reduce GHG emissions, global temperatures are projected to rise by about 3 to 4 
degrees  Celsius  above  preindustrial  levels  by 2100,  with risks of more  severe  warming  and climate  instability. 
Both advanced  and developing  countries  are pledging  to reduce  emissions  in their NDCs  (see section  E.5.1).  
134. Through the provision of more and better financing for projects, the creation of financing capabilities and 
consequent  evolution  of the markets,  federal  and subnational  governments  may be incentivized  to develop  more  
 
 
62 In December 2016, the Green Finance in LAC Region online web Platform was launched ( http://greenfinancelac.org ). 
The site contains  all information  regarding  IDB’s  dedicated  green  finance  programs,  including  an interactive  Map with a list 
of all existing projects, beneficiary countries and specific project information. The platform is being continuously updated 
and maintained with publications, events and related news and activities, in addition to interactive tools such as webinars 
and eLearning.  The platform  is promoted  on regular  basis  to: (i) all national  development  banks  of the LAC region  through 
regional and national banking networks (such as ALIDE, FELABAN, etc.); (ii) global and regional partner institutions and 
initiatives such as Sunref from the French AFD, the Green Bank Network, OECD, IEA, among others (see: 
https:// www.greenfinancelac.org/related -initiatives/ ); and (iii) general public and specialized green finance experts through 
social media and dedicated baking and green finance communications means. Also, a private intranet was developed for 
the platform in which NDBs, donors and relevant participants can access information, acquire updated knowledge and 
interact through a live chat. The project expects to help LFIs discover and develop the full potential o f this new line of 
business and once the viability and profitability of these investments has been demonstrated, it is in the LFIs interest to 
promote it. Local partners are strongly encouraged to work with their potential borrowers using these platforms t o expand 
the scope of the demand for these loans to other SMEs and sectors, although the proposal is based on the premise that 
there is already a big enough group of identified firms interested in these instruments (see feasibility  analysis).  
63 FP30 “ Cata lysing private investment in sustainable energy in Argentina ” approved at GCF B.15.


---
*Page 42*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 64  
 
 
and improved policies in the energy, financial or other relevant sectors to mobilize additional private  funding and 
continue to create more established markets that contribute to the country’s economy in a sustainable way.  
135. The Project aligns and reinforces public policy priorities related to climate change, energy use, and productivity 
upgrading set by the Argentinean Government. With its focus on allowing access to climate finance and leveraging 
private finance, this Project is not primarily targeting domestic policy and regulation, but rather the mobilization of 
private sector investment for RE and EE acti vities. Concretely, the main contribution to the regulatory landscape is 
the standardized contractual arrangement, which promotes the EE market by addressing investor and financier 
uncertainties.  
136. The Project  is at the same  time fully aligned  with national  plans  and strategies,  energy  plans,  climate  policies  and 
measures and national contributions to international cooperative efforts submitted by  Argentina.  
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
137. There are far -reaching social and economic benefits for society that result from reducing carbon emissions and 
ensuring universal access to modern energy services. In general, access to affordable and non -polluting energy 
services is a prerequisite for achieving economic empowerment and poverty reduction. The following list is a set of 
co-benefits that is expected as a result of Project  implementation.  
138. Economic  co-benefits.  Positive  effects  of the development  of these  projects  have  been  reflected  on long-term net 
reductions on electricity consumer prices (relative to non -subsidized prices) and avoided costs due to a reduced 
dependency on fuel imports and fuel price volatility (particularly in Argentina, which has been a net importer of 
energy since 2011), savings in reduced infrastructure investments for energy supply, deferred investments in 
generation  capacity  and significant  savings  in electricity  subsidies,  estimated  at USD  96 Million  per year.  Specifically , 
in the case of SMEs that will be financing EE investments, their competitiveness may be also positively impacted, 
as their operation  will become  more  cost-efficient.  Where  sub-projects  include  trade -intensive  industries,  productivity 
gains could translate in increased inflows of foreign  exchange.  
139. Environmental  co-benefits.  The implementation  of RE and EE projects  has a range  of local and regional  air quality 
benefits, as air pollution from energy generation includes SO2, NOx, and Mercury (Hg), in addition to GHG 
emissions. Estimated annual reductions for the project are 4,752 t (SO2), 766 t (NOx), and 14 t  (Hg).64 
140. Social co -benefits. Developing the industry, via the trainings and capacity building activities of this Project, would 
help create  new sources  of employment  (at the preparation,  development  and operation  stages  of sub-projects)  and 
increase the country’s competitiveness in an evolving global industry. The total estimated direct and indirect 
beneficiaries are based on number of SMEs, as we ll as new jobs created. The proposal is expected to serve more 
than 1,200 SMEs, as well as create more than 1,950 additional green jobs: green jobs created in the biogas and 
biomass industry are estimated at 778 employees65 and in the EE industry at 1,180 additional direct, indirect and 
induced  jobs66. An increase  in fiscal  revenues  could  also result  from an increase  in the volume  of investments,  which 
would translate in the use of public funds for social  interest.  
141. Gender  development67. Development  of eligible  sub-projects,  supported  by promotional  activities  through  technical 
assistance, can contribute to encourage women’s interest in these sectors, together with facilitating access to 
information and training to achieve women’s technological literacy and thus, greater gender parity in the sector’s 
workforce. Currently 17% of energy -related jobs are occupied by women. The program thus expects at least 200 
additional  jobs to be created  for women.  Energy  projects  that support  the use of locally  available  sources  for 
productive uses can also provide opportunities for women’s entrepreneurship, for example, in local enterprises that  
 
 
64 CEC 2004  based on numbers from Mexico.  
65 Highlights of socio -economic impacts from biogas in 28 target regions  (Intelligent Energy Europe). The reference is 
based  on European  values  and the mid-point  between  Bodenhöfer  H.-J., Wohlgemuth  N., Bliem  M., Michael  A., Weyerstraß  
K. - Assessment  of the economic  impact  of the support  of green  electricity  in Austria,  IHS Carinthia,  2004;  updated  in 2007: 
Employment effects of the green electricity generation in Austria and the lower bound of Danish employment in biogas. 
See also  IRENA  and EESI 2015 Fact Sheet:  Jobs in Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency  (2015)  
66 Mid-point between Greenpeace  and EESI 2014 Fact Sheet: Jobs in Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (2014)  
based on an assessment of the US economy.  
67 For a detailed Project Gender Action Plan, please see Annex 10 and indicators in Section H.1.


---
*Page 43*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 64  
 
 
can deliver reliable energy services based on RE and EE technologies. In particular and to the extent possible, the 
Project will carry out:  
• A sex -disaggregated baseline setting study on financial servi ces for women -led SMEs and for the participation 
of women in project -specific technologies, to identify a set of adequate financial and non -financial gender - 
sensitive indicators and definitions to monitor women’s participation in Project  activities  
• Awareness raising, training and capacity building campaigns that are gender -sensitive and promote the 
participation  of women  in pre-construction,  construction  and operation  of sub-projects  for different  skill-levels  
• Internships promoting the participation of women in participating LFIs and sub -projects, where  appropriate.  
• A knowledge platform module to share experiences with financing women -led projects, SMEs, and ESTPs, to 
encourage female participation in the  sector  
• Awareness raising and capacity building  events will inform transparently about remuneration ranges in the 
sector to facilitate the achievement of equal pay  
• Reports on the requirement of gender -sensitive conditions such as the presence of sanitary facilities on 
construction and work  places  
• Event s organized to further the project will ensure the promotion of female  participation.  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Not applicable.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
142. As described above (see Sections B.1, C.2 and C.3), multiple issues have been identified as barriers related to 
availability  of adequate  and sufficient  financing  in the face of the development  of RE and EE projects  in Argentina:  
• High upfront  cost of technologies  and absence  of adequate  pricing  of financial  products  (interest  rate and tenor) 
to incentivize  investments  
• High perceived risk of EE and RE lending due to lack of market  knowledge  
• Insufficient experience and skills in originating commercially viable and bankable EE and RE  projects  
• Lack of awareness among stakeholders about the benefits of these projects, in terms of energy security, 
environmental benefits, health and livelihoods in  general  
• Lack of knowledge about how to  access loan products among end  borrowers  
• Limited  skills  and capacity  to design,  procure,  install,  operate,  maintain  and dispose  of RE and EE technologies.  
143. In order to deliver the desired products, the Project proposes activities under the two aforementioned components 
to address each set of barriers identified (see Table  C2.1).  
E.5. Country Ownership  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
144. The project  has received  the No-Objection  letter  of the Argentinean  NDA  following  a thorough  review  by Argentinean 
authorities  including  the Ministry  of Finance,  MINEM,  and the Ministry  of Environment.  The programme  received  the 
prioritization  by the Chief  of the Cabinet  of Ministers  (Jefe de Gabinete  de Ministros ) (see Annex  1) and is in line with 
Argentina’s climate and development targets in the NDC as well as  SDGs.  
145. The Paris agreement and the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) established for 2030 require a set  of 
actions to make energy generation and consumption sustainable towards the environment and natural resources. 
Argentina  ratified  the Paris  Agreement  on September  21st, 2016.  Moreover,  as a response  to the recently  heightened  
impacts of environmental eve nts, most countries in the LAC region are taking initiative to design policies specific to


---
*Page 44*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 64  
 
 
mitigation and adaptation68, for which priority sectors include energy, transport, agriculture,  forestry and waste 
management.  
146. The government of Argentina, via the MINEM, is giving impulse to the creation of platforms for dialogue and 
availability of more and better information, in order to envision a “sustainable energy sector for the future” and 
contribute to strengthening the state capacity to reflect this vision. Government initiatives seek to be in line with 
factors  key to the creation  of this vision,  including  the evolution  of international  energy  markets,  the evolution  of other 
sectors of the  economy, the dynamic nature of energy prices and advances in climate change  agreements.  
147. With all these  activities  ongoing,  local public  actors  are more  aware  of the interactions  between  the economy,  society 
and the environment,  including  the costs  of socioenvironmental  conflicts.  Policy  measures  are being  taken  to create 
a more conducive environment for investments in clean energy, and there is also a wide recognition of the private 
sector’s important role in deploying investments to support the countr y’s NDC and its potential to contribute to the 
paradigm shift to a low -carbon economy (for examples of some specific government initiatives in the sector, see 
Section C.1 above). However, the sector still faces several barriers that delay an increased part icipation of private 
actors in the market, including less -developed financial markets that do not cover the financing needs of perfectly 
viable  projects.  Medium  and long-term challenges  are heightened  by conjunctural  factors  such  as the recent  context 
of international recession, the impacts of which are only beginning to recede in the  country.  
148. Argentina  has participated  actively  in the process  of generation  and development  of the international  climate  regime, 
specifically  with respect  to the United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on Climate  Change  (UNFCCC)  and the Kyoto 
Protocol.  In fact, the country’s  capital,  Buenos  Aires,  hosted  two Conferences  of the Parties,  in 1998  and 2004.  The 
country has implemented voluntary national actions in mitigation and adaptation in different sectors, including the 
design  of a National  Strategy  on Climate  Change  and the creation  of a Governmental  Committee  on Climate  Change, 
for the participation of national and provincial state  representatives69. 
149. In 2015,  Argentina  presented  their NDC,  which  was revised  in 2016.  Argentina’s  NDC  is based  on studies  prepared 
within the framework of the Third National Communication (including an updated national GHG inventory) and a 
consultative process with different actors to determine the mitigation potential and adaptation measures. The 
country’s  unconditional  goal is to reduce  GHG  emissions  by 18% in 2030  with respect  to projected  BAU (see Section 
C.1) via a set of actions to be deployed based on criteria related to their potential fo r reducing emissions, potential 
co-benefits, and the possibility of applying nationally developed  technologies.  
150. Lessons learnt from project implementation will inform the regulatory discussion with demonstration examples from 
practice for regulators. To en sure alignment and support for regulatory activities, the Project grant budget 
contemplates a further detailed assessment of the current regulatory situation and continuous lessons learned 
activities, coordinated with the Ministry of Production and MINEM a nd other relevant government entities to give 
decision tools to the regulatory  discussion.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
151. Accredited Entity. The IDB is the main source of multilateral financing for LAC. Since 1961, the IDB has provided 
almost  USD  246 billion  for projects  aimed  to reduce  poverty,  raise  standards  of living,  spur economic  growth,  protect 
natural resources, foster integration and trade, and reach other agreed goals. IDB’s operations approvals in 20 14 
totaled USD 13.8 billion and average annual approvals have increased consistently from USD 9.8 billion in 2005 – 
2009 to USD12.6 billion in 2010 –2014. The IDB is a global partnership of 48 member countries, in which the 26 
borrowing countries of LAC hold  the majority of shares. The IDB holds a credit rating of AAA/aaa. The IDB will 
capitalize on their strong and well -established experience with partners in the energy and financial sector. As 
described  in section  C.4, the IFD/CMF  division  of the IDB has a record  of successful  interventions  and a long history 
of collaboration with an extensive network of  NDBs.  
152. Executing Entity. Please see Section  C.4. 
153. As per IDB policy, all programs require institutional capacity and fiduciary assessments of their  corresponding  
executor for approval by the IDB Board. These assessments are carried out for new executing agencies with no 
previous experience with IDB programs, and also periodically for executing agencies already with a track record of  
 
 
68 Recently de veloped strategies have been identified in18 countries plus CARICOM (the Caribbean community).  
69 Argentine Republic Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) . UNFCCC 2015.


---
*Page 45*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 64  
 
 
interventions,  and are specially  designed  to determine  the capacity  of these  institutions  to deliver.  BICE’s  more  recent 
institutional capacity analysis has been assessed positively, has been approved by the IDB and is still in  force.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
154. In December 2016, the a technical IDB mission visited Argentina, to consult with BICE and relevant Argentine 
authorities on the market potential for RE and EE investments, as well as to discuss their determination and 
potential specific roles in developing the Project as is being  proposed.  
 
Table E5.3.1. - Authorities consulted during the December 2016 mission  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155. The above -mentioned technical visit also consulted with commercial banking institutions, projects developers and 
technology providers of RE and EE equipment, as well  as industry associations and the National Commission of 
Securities to assess the market potential, stakeholders’ interest, financing options and barriers to sub -project 
development (see Annex  2). 
156. The ongoing  dialogue  with the authorities  remains  in line with the country’s  NDC  investment  plans,  in order  to identify 
concrete sub -projects for which funding from the Project will be best  suited.  
157. In the case of specific sub -projects, each developer is responsible for fulfilling all consultations with stakeholder s 
required by local laws and regulations. When applying for funding from the Project, the recipient of the loan shall 
follow the requirements established by BICE in order to be in compliance with IDB policies. When required, the 
recipient of the loan is re sponsible for conducting and documenting any public consultation that is carried out with 
civil society and other relevant  stakeholders.  
158. On December 6, 2017, the Argentine NDA provided a non -objection to the Project’s full proposal (see Annex  1). 
159. BICE prov ided its co -financing commitment letter on April 7, 2017 (see Annex  4). 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
160. This proposal  intends  to use GCF  resources  to offer financial  mechanisms  tailored  to meet  the specific  needs  of RE 
and EE projects. GCF loan and grant resources will be used in the most effective way: standard financing tools 
(using loan resources) may be combined with non -financial instruments (developed with grant resources) to reduce 
perceived and real r isk levels for developers, hence contributing to remove the financial barriers to investment. The 
effective combination of these resources will contribute to finance as many sub -projects as possible, with as much 
leverage as possible, depending on the spec ific credit risk of each  borrower.  
161. Through the generation of a track record and knowledge for investors, financial institutions and developers, the 
perceived risks will be lower and additional finance will be available to further develop the sector in the  country.  
162. Consistent with its principles and objectives, GCF funding will be used to mitigate risks that commercial lenders are 
not able to bear, providing financing at long -term maturities, currently not available in the market, and crowding -in 
the private  sector by catalyzing investment that would not have happened otherwise. Grant resources will be 
concentrated on technical assistance and Project implementation support, optimizing the use of available 
concessional funds (see also Section  D.1).  
163. Section E.6 .5 shows that compared to similar projects, this project has a relatively lower cost per ton of CO 2eq 
reduced. Indicators show an estimated cost per tCO 2eq of USD 37.95 for the total Project investment (including 
leveraged  finance)  and USD  16.8 per ton CO 2eq for GCF  funding  only.  Lower  costs  for GCF  resources  are expected 
when considering the impact of the revolving account (USD 25.6 and USD 11.3 per tCO 2eq, respectively).  
Institution/Entity  Name of representative  
Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development  Prem D. Zalzman  
Ministry of Energy and Mining – Sub-secretariat for Renewable 
Energy  Sebastian Kind, Maximiliano Morrone, Mauro 
Soares  
Ministry of Energy and Mining – Sub-secretariat for Energy 
Efficiency  Marco Bergel, Andrea Heins  
Ministry of Agroindustry – Sub-secretariat for Added Value  Mariano Lechardoy


---
*Page 46*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 64  
 
 
164. The economic and financial analysis assessed the impact of the financing line as a whole (during its estimated 
lifetime of 20 years). It was conducted on a per technology basis, comparing sub -project values with and without 
GCF support (see Annex 3 for more  details).  
165. The use of concessional  funding  is aimed  at compensating  for the incremental  risks of this type of projects,  enabling 
financing  to reach  cost levels  that make  sub-projects  viable.  By doing  this, the Project  seeks  to give impulse  to these 
investments without  distorting the market, in order to create momentum and set the markets in motion so that they 
can function on their own in the medium to long term.  
166. Thus, the GCF loan resources have an impact on the interest rate BICE provides to LFIs, while it should be noted 
that final interest rates include LFI market SPREAD that would not be impacted by the GCF funds. The LFI market 
spread is influenced by the credit quality of the borrowing clients and based on the value that local banks charge at 
the moment. Furtherm ore, an important factor increasing the impact of GCF funding is its longer tenor that BICE 
would be able to provide to LFIs under the  Project.70 
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
167. The Project  will encourage  leverage  from other  sources  of debt and capital  mainly  through:  (i) minimum  requirement 
of capital  in projects  financed  (end beneficiaries  of the loan);  (ii) possible  caps  per individual  credit  as established  in 
the OR, requiring larger projects to seek alternatives to complement their financing with other sources; and (iii) the 
possibility to work with LFIs that may be willing to complement financing with their own resources and get more 
involved in financing the sector, which encourages their pa rticipation in the  future.  
168. Based on previous experience with similar programs implemented by the IDB in the region, GCF resources are 
expected to leverage funds with a ratio of 1 to 2.3 (USD2.3 leveraged per USD1 of GCF funding provided). This 
indicative r atio includes co -financing from BICE leveraged finance (equity) from SMEs investing in beneficiary sub - 
projects  (see Table  E6.5.1).  It does  not include  mobilized  funding  as a result  of the demonstration  effect  (investments 
incentivized by the Project but which do not receive funding from it), as attribution of the development of these 
ventures to the Project activities would not be possible to  verify.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
169. The Project is conceived as a flexible instrument with the general goal of promoting RE and EE investments. It is 
designed to provide funding on a first -come -first-served basis, based on actual demand for credit or technical 
assistance by specific sub -projects. For this reason, in order to present evidence of the economic and fin ancial 
viability  of the Project,  the analysis  will be based  on an assumed  simulated  portfolio  of biomass,  biogas  and EE sub- 
projects to be financed71. Section F.1 presents the methodology, assumptions, results and conclusions of this 
analysis. The full do cument of the Financial Model can be found in Annex  3. 
170. Despite  of the estimated  significant  IRR of some  technologies,  it is important  to note that the additionality  of the GCF 
intervention becomes evident when considering the scarcity of adequate long -term financing from other sources in 
Argentina. The estimated rate of return figures are based on the condition that financing is available and thus that 
these  sub-projects  are actually  financed.  The scarcity  of long-term financial  resources  in Argentina  due to the current 
structure of the financial system actually inhibits the realization of these sub -projects. As mentioned above, GCF 
resources will address both the lack of long -term finance at adequate conditions and the structuring of bankable 
projects so to  enable SE projects to be  realized.  
 
 
70 BICE receives GCF resources at an annual interest rate of 0.75% in USD (excluding the commitment and service fees) 
for 20 years. BICE funding to LFIs in USD is currently at Libor+4% for 5 years (Status August 2017). GCF concessionality 
has two complementary  delivery  channels:  the interest  rate and the long-term tenor.  The following  financing  conditions  will 
be given in Argentinean pesos. In a reference credit line, BICE provides funding to LFI at Badlar (Buenos  Aires Deposits 
of Large Amount Rate) +2,50% points. The average LFI -to-client spread for this particular line in Argentinean pesos is 2% 
points, which is based on the credit risk of end -beneficiaries. This reference line uses less concessional resources t han 
those  from the GCF.  These  rates  are indicative  and dependent  on the market  conditions,  which  have  improved  for instance 
between 2015 -2017. Intermediary rates are subject to BICE’s board approval and will be part of the agreements set forth 
in the OR, s ubsequent to GCF Board approval. GCF concessional funding will furthermore offset the exchange rate risk. 
71 For practical purposes, the analysis uses aggregated data over time, based on the construction of a portfolio of sub - 
projects and the characterist ics of a representative beneficiary SME for each type of  sub-project.


---
*Page 47*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 64  
 
 
Table E.6.3.1.a - Project Financing Line Flow from GCF to SMEs through LFIs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: BICE.  
Note: Numbers are for demonstrative purposes only, and will chang e to reflect current market conditions at the time of the Project 
structuring. Badlar: Buenos Aires Deposits of Large Amount Rate.  
 
 
Table E.6.3.1.b - Project Financing Line Flow from GCF to SMEs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: BICE.  
Note: Numbers are for demonstrative purposes only, and will change to  reflect current market conditions at the time of the Project 
structuring. Badlar: Buenos Aires Deposits of Large Amount Rate.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
171. Existing literature identifies several areas in which multilateral development banks can support countries to mitigate 
the barriers  that still exist to the deployment  of SE projects,  through  technical,  financial,  and policy  support  measures. 
Securing private sector investment via the provision of more and better access to finance is among the most 
important elements of this  support.  
172. The proposed  Project  combines  IDB experiences  of similar  projects  successfully  implemented  or ongoing  in several 
countries across the region, in most cases working with concessional donor funding. Some of these experiences 
have already produced significant positive results in terms of volumes of financing approved and in terms of impact 
in the countries where programs have been implemented. The IDB has also gained experience in the management 
of external  concessi onal financing  and in the response  to donors  in line with their particular  requirements  and criteria 
for funding.  Lessons  have  been  learned  from each  and every  program  executed  in the area of clean  energy,  in terms 
of program  design  and execution,  as well as from relationships  with member  countries  and their institutions.  All these 
will be incorporated into the  Project.  
173. Particular lessons from other programs incorporated into the Project design  are: 
Deal Flow  Market 
SPREAD  Interest rate in USD  BICE  
Spread  Interest rate in 
local currency  Risk reduction 
mechanism  
GCF  n.a. 0.75%   - NA 
IDB n.a. n.a.  - Sovereign guarantee  
BICE  Libor + 
4/6%  Libor + 4,5%  Badlar* Priv + 
2,5/4,5%  Badlar Priv + 3%  Bank credit track 
record  
LFI Libor + 
5/7,5%  Libor + 5,75%  Badlar Priv + 
5,5/7,5%  Badlar Priv + 
5,75%  Collateral  
SME   
n.a. n.a.   Energy Savings 
insurance  Provider  (Project payment)   
 
Deal Flow  Market 
SPREAD  Interest rate in USD  BICE  
Spread  Interest rate in 
local currency  Risk reduction 
mechanism  
GCF  n.a. 0.75%   - NA 
IDB n.a. n.a.  - Sovereign guarantee  
BICE  Libor + 
5/7,5%   
Libor + 5,75%  Badlar Priv + 
4,5/7,5%   
Badlar Priv + 
5,75%   
Bank credit track 
record  
SME   
n.a. n.a.  Range  Energy Savings 
insurance  Provider  (Project payment)


---
*Page 48*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  47 OF 64  
 
 
i. Support the structuring of both the demand - and the supply -side of investment financing through financial and 
non-financial  instruments;  
ii. Address the barriers and perceived risks of all of the actors  involved;  
iii. Adapt to the local circumstances, with no silver bullet or textbook solution  available;  
iv. Blend  loans,  technical  assistance  and risk mitigation  instruments  to support  the financial  intermediation,  as none 
of these  instruments  on its own is able to ensure  that the supply  of financing  for RE and EE projects  will meet  its 
demand;  
v. Tailor investment products and incorporate RE and EE to private sector  needs;  
vi. Build on local knowledge and on the existing financial distribution network;  and 
vii. Invest in reputation and trust building, particularly when the deployment of new technologies is  sought.  
174. For the EE component, the ESI model combines best practices learned from EE initiatives and projects in LAC and 
beyond. As shown by the in -depth analysis of the Global Innovation Lab for Climate Finance La b (Annex 11), the 
ESI methodology was structured to provide an integrated package that addresses all barriers and shares the risks 
among the parties best able to manage those risks (see also footnote 8).  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions  
 (a) Total project financing (in millions)  USD430.672  
(b) Requested GCF amount (in millions)  USD103  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
(millions of tCO 2eq) 9,1 Million tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  USD47.27 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b / c)  USD11.3 / tCO 2eq 
 
175. Indicators were calculated over the base of the expected number and size of sub -projects financed as 
a result of activities by the Project (see Section E.2). Once deployed, sub -projects financed are 
expected to produce or save energy (in the form of MW) in the long term. The energy produced and 
saved  is then assumed  to lead to emissions  savings  calculated  in aggregated  terms  (both  annually  and 
during the lifetime of the projects), using the average displaced emissions factor for electricity in 
Argentina,  standard  load factors  and savings  ratios  for each  particular  RE and EE technology73. Based 
on estimated  reductions  of CO2 emissions  over the course  of the lifetime  of sub-projects  financed,  and 
using indicative amounts for co -financing resources for the Project, the cost of abatement is estimated 
considering only GCF financing, and then considering total Project investment (GCF, BICE  and 
leveraged finance from investors.  
 
 
 
 
 
72 This value includes total financing committed to the Project (GCF funding plus co -financing from  BICE, the total being 
equivalent to USD163.85 million including BICE in -kind resources and IDB grant resources). The USD 160 Million GCF 
and BICE co -financing will be utilized more than once through the revolving account for an estimated total of financin g of 
USD 298.75 plus SMEs’ own capital invested in the projects financed (expected to be in the range of 20% to 30% of total 
sub-project  cost).  For the purpose  of this calculation,  a 30% equity  share  has been  assumed  to cater  to the higher  collateral 
needs  for RE projects. Taking into account a smaller equity share 20% the indicator (d) would change marginally due to 
proportionality  to USD  47.33/tCO2eq  (from  USD  47.27/tCO2eq),  however,  (e) would  increase  to USD  12.92/tCO2eq  (from 
USD 11.31/tCO2eq). See Anne x 3. 
73 For the purpose of calculating total GHG emissions reduced, assumed lifetime of projects is 20 years for biomass and 
biogas projects and 10 years for EE projects.


---
*Page 49*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 64  
 
 
176. The estimated cost per tCO 2 reduced for the Project is well within values of benchmarks in the sector.  
As a reference, in the GCF supported EE project for BANDESAL in El Salvador74, the calculation of a 
simulated portfolio resulted in the following indicators:  
Total  project  financin g USD 51.7  Million[a]
 
Requested  GCF  amount  USD 21.7  Million[b] 
Expected lifetime emission  reductions  overtime  562,037 tCO 2eq 
Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a  / c) USD  91.99/tCO 2eq 
Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b  / c) USD  38.61/tCO 2eq 
[a] USD 51.7 Million, including USD 10 Million from private sources.  
[b] GCF resources of a total of USD 21.7 Million including a USD 1.7 Million grant.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
177. The Project design seeks to combine reimbursable funding from the GCF with BICE’s own resources 
to blend the terms of financing in order to achieve pricing and maturities that will make sub -projects 
viable without distorting the market. Furthermore, sub -projects financed by the Project will require a 
minimum amount of capital to be invested by loan recipients (SMEs investing in RE/EE technologies), 
which  despite  not being  included  as a co-financ ing commitment  will indeed  constitute  funding  leveraged 
directly by the  Project.  
Table E6.5.1. - Volume of finance by source (millions of USD)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[a] SMEs’ own capital invested in the projects financed (expected to be in the range of 20% to 30% of total project cost), albeit 
required for eligibility, is not committed ex ante. Hence, it does not constitute co -financing but is considered leveraged financing as it 
constitutes part of the investment for the sub -projects. Ensuring equity contributions  from borrowers is a regular practice in the 
banking sector in order to assure client’s financial solvency and commitment. SME will need to cover an equity portion for LF Is to feel 
comfortable to lend to  SMEs  
178. Values proposed are similar to those from previ ous programs implemented by the IDB in the region. 
The table shows co -financing amounts from BICE and IDB (“Project co -financing”) 75 , as well as 
additional third -party financing (leveraged finance in the form of equity for sub -projects financed),  only 
in the sub -projects being financed by the Project. These figures do not include mobilized funding as a  
 
 
74 See GCF project in El Salvador  (BANDESAL).  
75 Although  not formally  committed,  more  sub-projects  could  potentially  be co-financed  with additional  funds  from participant 
LFIs.  
  
 
GCF  
funding   
Project co - 
financing 
(BICE and 
IDB) Total 
Project 
funding  Total 
Project 
funding 
through 
revolving  
account   
Third -party 
finance 
leveraged 
(private)[a]  
 
Total 
investment  
Component 1: 
Implementation  
costs and technical 
assistance activities   
3  
0.85  
3.85  
3.85  
0.0  
3.85 
Component 2: 
Financing adapted 
to RE and EE  
projects   
100.0   
60.0  
160.0   
298.75   
128.04   
426.79  
Project total  103.0  60.85  163.85  302.6  128.04  430.64


---
*Page 50*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 64  
 
 
 result of the demonstration effect (investments incentivized by the Project but which do not receive 
funding from it), as attribution of the development of these ventures to the Project activities would not 
be possible to verify.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated a s a result of the project)  See Sections E.3.1 and H.1  
 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
179. The proposal is supported by a financial analysis, which quantifies ex ante the viability and potential impact of the 
Project,  based  on the analysis  of the market  potential  included  in the feasibility  analysis.  Estimated  values  for output 
and outcome  indicators  are calculated  using  an assumed  portfolio  of specific  RE and EE sub-projects  implemented 
with support from BICE using GCF funding. It is assumed that in a counterfactual scenario such RE and EE sub - 
projects are not deployed in the timeframe proposed by the Project. See Annex 3 for  details.  
180. For the financial  model,  the methodology  is based  on the analysis  of a model  sub-project  for each  of the sub-sectors 
identified  in the feasibility  analysis  (namely,  biogas  in agriculture,  pig and livestock  sub-sectors,  biomass  and EE in 
industry and services), which is then multiplied by a number of expected sub -projects to be financed under each 
category. An  internal rate of return (IRR) is calculated on the basis of a sample project’s cash flow. The IRR is 
calculated to reflect the sample project’s viability with and without financing from the Project. The higher this rate, 
the higher the project benefits ar e when compared to the  cost.  
181. In all cases, the assumption is that without the Project, the development of the sub -project is not possible, either 
because there is no enough capital available to cover for the entire investment without any financing or because 
financing  it from existing  sources  becomes  too expensive.  The resulting  “with -Project”  IRR should  be considered  a 
lower -bound measure for the Project's impact in economic terms, and externalities should be accounted for in 
addition to this  value.  
Table F1.1. - Summary of financial model of the Project [with revolving account finance]76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
182. The proposal is supported by an economic analysis that takes into account the whole Project cash flows and the 
monetized benefits of the carbon  reduction.  
183. Environmental  externalities  are accounted  for based  on a valuation  of GHG  emission  reductions.  A monetary  value  
of GHG emissions reduced by the projects financed is determined by the unit price of a metric ton of CO 2 in the  
 
76 Although these figures are proposed based on the results of the feasibility analysis, there is no information available on 
actual specific sub -projects until they are presented when applying to funding from the Project. Any portfolio used to build 
indicators before imple mentation of the Project is indicative and in all cases numeric values of targets should be treated 
with caution.  
 Without financing 
from Project  With financing 
from Project  
 
Technology  No. 
Projects 
targeted  Total Power 
capacity in 
MW Total 
financing 
(M USD)  Total 
investment  
(M USD)   
IRR  
Payback   
IRR  
Payback  
Biogas          
Pig farms  449 [954]  16.6 [35.3]  34 [71.4]  48 [102]  18% 6.7 29% 5.6 
Livestock (feedlot)  20 [43]  3.9 [8.3]  14 [24.5]  20 [35]  10% 11.1 16% 10 
Agroindustry  168 [357]  8.4 [17.9]  29 [51.5]  42 [73.5]  12% 11.7 20% 6.3 
Biomass  12 [21]  30 [52.5]  42 [73.5]  60 [105]  11% 12.7 18% 9.7 
 
Energy efficiency  598 
[1,136]    
41 [77.9]   
59 [111,3]   
9%  
11.1  
15%  
5.2 
Total   58.9 [114]  160 [298]  229 [426.8]


---
*Page 51*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 64  
 
 
international market. This value is based on information about carbon pricing around the world (emissions trading 
systems, ETS, and carbon taxes), which has been substantially increasing since 2012. The existing carbon prices 
vary significantly —from less t han USD1 per tCO 2e to USD130 per tCO 2e, with the majority of emissions (85%) 
priced at less than USD10 per tCO 2e. The analysis will use a unit price of USD9 per tCO 2e, conservatively and 
along the lines of existing or potential instruments in other emergin g economies (including Korea, China, Mexico 
and Chile)77. The use of this reference  price  is an interpretation  of the evaluation  exercise  of the various  economic, 
local and global, current and future costs of negative externalities associated to less clean  technologies displaced. 
International carbon pricing provides us with a publicly available resource for monetization of this aspect of the 
analysis.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
184. A feasibility analysis has been carried out to develop a strategy to financially support firms in Argentina in the 
implementation of RE and EE solutions that contribute to reduce emissions. The feasibility analysis proposes 
strategies aimed at stimulating the demand for financing as well as positioning BICE as the articulat ing institution 
for these efforts in  Argentina.  
185. To calculate the possible scope and impact of the Project, the methodology follows an evaluation of different 
business  opportunities  identified  in the Argentine  market,  prioritizing  these  based  on their poten tial and the mandate 
and objective of BICE. For the lines of business with highest potential, the analysis then proposes strategies for 
incentivizing the demand and creating specialized financial  mechanisms.  
Figure F2.1. - Methodology of feasibility analysis  
 
 
186. Following the results of the evaluation of technologies and sub -sectors, areas of opportunity identified with the 
highest value can be classified in three categories of  sub-projects:  
• Biogas,  specifically  in the pig and livestock sector  (mainly  “feedlot”78) and the industrial  sector  (mainly  food 
processing).  
• Biomass from agricultural and forestry waste, as well as industry (mainly paper and  wood).  
• EE in industry and service (electric/thermal), mainly energy intensive sub -sectors such as chemical,  food 
processing,  dairy,  plastic.  Technologies  in this category  include  cooling  systems,  pumps,  cogeneration,  solar 
heating, boilers and heat  recovery.  
187. The following  table  shows  a summary  of the analysis  of the three  abovementioned  sectors,  including  the estimated 
market size of each sub -sector eligible for the uptake of the financing line. The financing line will be open to  other  
technologies and will be demand -driven. Therefore, the table does not constitute a pre -determined allocation of  
 
 
77 In the European  Union  Emissions  Trading  System  (EU ETS),  which  remains  the single  largest  international  carbon  pricing 
instrument,  the average  price  in 2014  was €6/tCO 2 (USD  7/tCO 2). As of August,  2015,  this price  stood  at some  USD9/tCO 2. 
For governments, carbon pricing is an instrument to achieve emissions mitigation but also a source of revenue. See State  
and Trends of Carbon Pricing , World Bank and Ecofys,  2015.  
78 A feedlot  or feed yard is a type of animal  feeding  operation  which  is used  in intensive  animal  farming  for finishing  livestock, 
notably beef cattle, but also swine, horses, sheep, turkeys, chickens or ducks, prior to slaughter. It originates on the need  
for intensifying  production.


---
*Page 52*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 64  
 
 
funds to any particular technology Any additional technology inclusion will be governed by the ESMF and its 
exclusion criteria.  
Table F2.1. - Priority sub-sectors identified and their potential  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
188. Biogas sub-projects consist of the use of biodigesters. Gases captured from the organic waste deposited in the 
biodigester can be used as energy, significantly saving operational costs. A potential biogas sub -project would 
require a preliminary engineering study that is normally paid by the investor. This is often perceived as a risky 
upfront cost and generally becomes a disincentive for the development of these sub -projects. In addition, w hile 
these  projects  have  long payback periods  (ranging  from 5 to over 10 years  in some  cases),  the majority  of existing 
local credit  supply  for any type of firm is currently  below  5 years,  with SMEs  having  greater  difficulties  in accessing 
any credit at  all. 
189. Biomass sub-projects refer to plants that convert biomass into energy via thermochemical processes. Biomass 
that can be exploited in this conversion includes dry waste from forestry activity and other related industries (wood 
and furniture, paper, logging). Thermochemical processes refer mainly to incineration, pyrolysis and gasification. 
Biomass  projects  are largely  dependent  on the availability  of waste,  and guaranteeing  its supply  in the long term is 
the only way to reduce perceived risks for the se sub -projects. Relatively large SME producers and cooperatives 
are in better position to guarantee an adequate supply of the resource. In addition, distance between the resource 
and the plant location can be a limiting factor, as transport costs could ma ke projects unviable. Like in the case of 
biogas,  biomass  sub-projects  also require  high upfront  costs  for engineering  and feasibility  studies,  and the absence 
of adequate financing also jeopardize their  development.  
190. Having both biogas and biomass technologies be part of the Project is in line with government initiatives, as these 
are also technologies prioritized by the RenovAr  program.  
191. EE projects  in industry  and services  consist  of the replacement  of obsolete  and inefficient  equipment  for new ones 
that consume less energy to provide the same amount of products or services. The resulting savings from less  
 
79 As, biomass encompasses the largest sub -projects in size from the foreseen portfolio for the Project, and as the aim of 
the Project is to support smaller firms, the Project will limit eligibility of this particular technology to sub -projects with 
generation capacities below 5MW.  
80 Given the size of biomass investments, in comparison with the other eligible technologies, it is expected that direct 
financing from BICE (for sub loans larger than USD 5 million) will occur mainly in biomass sub -projects.  
 
Technology   
Sub-sector   
Description   
Estimated market size  Potential volume 
of Investment 
from Project  
Biogas  o Pig sector  
o Livestock sector 
(feedlot)  
o Food  processing  o Supplying excess 
energy to the  network  
o Self-supply  o 2,996 pig farms (with 
over 50 sows)  
o 2,000 livestock  farms  
o 4,200 food & beverage 
processing  firms  USD110 million 
(637 sub -projects)  
Biomass  o Agricultural and 
forestry waste, 
paper and  wood  
industry.  o Supplying excess 
energy to the  network  
o Self-supply  o Small -sized (2.5MW in 
average) generation 
plants79 USD60 million (12 
sub-projects)80 
EE o Industry 
(chemical, food 
processing, 
dairy)  o Solar thermal  collectors  
o Cogeneration  systems  
o Industrial cooling  
o Heat  recovery  o 75,000 firms (SME + 
large)  USD59 million (598 
sub-projects)  
o Services (hotels, 
hospitals)  o Solar thermal  collectors  
o Cogeneration  systems  
o HVAC


---
*Page 53*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 64  
 
 
energy  consumption  and maintenance  should  be sufficient  to payback  the initial  investment  in a relatively  short  time 
(normally, less than 5 years). Evidently, payback and return potential will depend on the cost of energy, and the 
availability of financing. While the government is already making efforts to normalize energy pr ices, Argentina’s 
energy costs are currently highly subsidized and way below those in the region. The current situation discourages 
investments  in EE, even  in energy -intensive  industries.  In addition,  investors  and financiers  lack confidence  on the 
performance  of the projects  and the real savings  that could  be achieved.  This results  in high costs  of financing  and 
in turn EE projects not being prioritized or even considered by  firms.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerati ons 
192. IDB Policies and management programs related to Environmental and Social Assessment, as well as gender 
policies are fully consistent with GCF requirements. IDB has gone through an in -depth assessment by the GCF 
Secretariat  and the Independent  Accreditation  Panel  and a full accreditation  with no conditions  has been  awarded.  
193. As per IDB safeguards, the Project is classified as a financial intermediary (Directive B.13 of the Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy, OP -703). Based on the E&S du e diligence conclusions and the intended use of 
proceeds, this operation is classified as low -risk level financial intermediation (FI -3). Sub -projects to be financed 
under the Project will exclude projects that (i) involve involuntary resettlement of peopl e, (ii) have a potentially 
adverse impact on communities and/or indigenous people, or (iii) involve conversion or degradation of critical 
natural habitats or cultural sites (see Exclusion List on Appendix 1. of Annex 5). It is important to note that sub - 
projects eligible for financing under this Project are not greenfield projects: they are EE and RE projects to be 
implemented in existing industrial or agricultural facilities. Category A projects will not be eligible to  the Project.  
194. The Project will be man aged through the implementation of an Environmental & Social management Framework 
(ESMF) (see Annex 5), to be fully integrated in the program OR. The ESMF integrates all applicable Argentine 
norms (see also Section C.6) and contains the program exclusion l ist and eligibility criteria, the rules, procedures 
and guidance for screening, evaluating and managing E&S for each type of eligible sub -project, the institutional 
capacity assessment and the stakeholder engagement plan including grievance  mechanisms.  
195. RE and EE projects deliver long term GHG emission reductions and are considered environmentally friendly, as 
they entail cleaner energy production and reduced consumption. However, some of the sub -projects eligible for 
financing  can have  adverse  environmental  or social  impacts  (see full description  of potential  E&S risks in Annex  5) 
that need to be assessed and managed on a project -by-project basis. In summary, along with (i) the application of 
an extended exclusion list and of a set of eligibility criteria, ( ii) the compliance with all applicable local regulations, 
the subprojects will have to comply  with: 
• A Program Decommissioning and Disposal protocol for EE  sub-projects  
• An Agricultural Waste protocol for biomass sub -projects, to ensure that they only use agricultural waste and 
that they are calibrated to only run on their own  waste.  
196. BICE will ensure that each sub -project financed is in compliance with the ESMF. The due diligence process 
concluded that BICE has the institutional capacity to manage a portfol io of sub -projects with the risks levels 
identified (see Annex  5).


---
*Page 54*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 64  
 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
197. As part of the Project  and following  IDB policy,  IDB determines  the on-lending,  financial  management  and oversight 
activities and contractual responsibilities in the framework of the loan contract with the Argentinean Republic and 
executed  by BICE.  All procurement  will be conducted  according  to IDB policy.  The following  procedures  shall apply 
for Component  1: a) Individual  Consultants  – Human  Resources  procedures  (AM-650),  b) Non-consulting  Services  
–Corporate Procurement Policy and procedures (GN -2303 -20); and for Component 2: a) Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and  Works financed by the Inter -American Development Bank GN -2349 -9 and b) Policies 
for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants financed by the Inter -American Development Bank GN -2350 -9. 
Please also see Annex 8.  
198. The approval of the Operational Regulation s (OR) of the Project by BICE, following the non -objection of the Bank, 
will be a prerequisite for the first disbursement of the GCF’s reimbursable resources. Such regulations: i) will have 
to be consistent with the policies and operational standards of BI CE, the IDB, and the laws and financial practices 
of the country;  (ii) will pick up the main  features  of the project,  including  the eligibility  criteria  for beneficiaries,  types 
of EE investments  and LFIs,  conditions  under  which  the LFIs are to provide  sub-loans  and ensure  that financing  is 
provided  in adequate  terms  and conditions  (medium  and long term at or below  market  rates)  to SMEs  sub-projects, 
as well as the environmental  and social  safeguards  that will apply  for each  of the technologies  financed  under  it; 
(iii) set up specific fiduciary conditions and reporting of the dedicated credit line to be established, including that 
any loan recuperations and re -payments are to be re -used by the line finance similar EE projects; (iv) will provide 
that failure  to comply  with its provisions  will prevent  access  to financing;  and (v) will established  that any change  to 
the OR will require the non -objection of the IDB.  
199. For the purposes of the execution of the project, BICE will have a list of sectors (exclusion list), previously agreed 
upon with the IDB and incorporated into the OR, which will not be able to gain access to finance, as well as a 
protocol that will have to be followed to ensure the adequate decommission and disposition of old equipment 
substituted  with the support  of the Project  to avoid  GHG  leakages.  The risk management  system  for environmental 
and social risks will be detailed in the Report for Environmental and Social Management of the project, an integral 
part of its  OR. 
200. The disbursements, reporting (including external audit reports), monitoring, and evaluation of the Project will be 
done in accordance to IDB Policies and Procedures, among others the IDB’s Financial Management Guidelines 
(OP-273-6), and reflected in the Term S heet and FAA. Given the characteristics of the operation, the IDB would 
make disbursements under the loan agreement according to its methods of disbursement that include: Advances 
of Funds,  Reimbursement  of Expenses  and Direct  Payments  to third parties  on behalf  and at the request  of BICE.  
201. Also during the project disbursement period or any extensions thereof, the project’s financial statements will be 
audited annually by an independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank to be hired and paid for by BICE, with  terms 
of reference previously approved by the Bank. Additionally, BICE will assume the commitment to submit non - 
audited financial reports on the project during the Project Financial Reporting Period. Audited financial statements 
will not be required duri ng the repayment of the  loan.  
202. To prepare its financial statements, BICE applies generally accepted accounting standards and regulations. The 
accounting  standards  used  shall be internationally  recognized  accounting  standards,  and the accounting  processes 
and systems  should  follow  best practices  of international  standards.  The use of appropriate  accounting  by executing 
agencies as well as their fiduciary systems are assessed before the approval of the loan. BICE will share audited 
accounts during the execution period and non -audited accounts after the execution  period.  
203. To the satisfaction of the IDB, the BICE must present reports relating to the implementation of the project each 
semester or other period as the IDB and the EE may agree, and they shall include as a minimum: (i) the status of 
the implementation  of the activities  of the program  the compliance  with the criteria  of eligibility  for credit  and program 
level problems and/or execution risks identified and the measures proposed to remedy or mitig ate those problems 
or risks; (ii) financial risk and potential non -performing loans and risk management measures undertaken in 
accordance, (iii) the extent that are being met environmental and social safeguards of the program; and (iv) the 
achievement of t he indicators of product and expected results, as they materialize. These reports will provide the 
inputs  for the Annual  Performance  Reports  (APRs)  the IDB will have  to deliver  for the GCF  according  to the AMA.  
204. BICE undertakes to maintain, in terms that will be set in the Operations Regulations, an information system from 
which held the collection of project information, so that the IDB can implement, with its resources, an assessment 
of impact ex post of the same, which will assess the extent that the ob jectives of the project were  achieved.


---
*Page 55*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 64  
 
 
205. BICE and the IDB will carry out a mid -term evaluation of the project about 30 months after first disbursement or 
once 50% of the loan proceeds have been committed, whichever occurs first. This evaluation will assess the 
progress in achieving the expected results in the project’s results matrix to identify any corrective action that may 
be required.  BICE  will also provide  the IDB with the necessary  information  to make  a completion  report  of the project 
90 days  after the end of the execution  period  or from the date of the last disbursement.  Regular  monitoring  meetings 
will also be scheduled. The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan of the project,  an integral part of any IDB project, will 
include a strategy to carry out an impact evaluation as of the last year of the project’s execution period. This 
evaluation  will be covered  with part of the GCF  non-reimbursable  resources  (see sub-activity  1.2.2,  1.2.3,  and 1.2.4) 
which complement this proposed GCF loan.


---
*Page 56*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 64  
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
206. Among the specific factors studied in the risk profile of the Project (fiduciary, macroeconomic, regulatory, 
operational), the possibility of a deterioration in economic and investment conditions having a negative impact 
over the results of the Project is perhaps the most distinct. In broad terms, the Project team has a positive view 
with regard to th e risks linked with public policy and regulation in Argentina in the field of energy and climate 
change because of the government’s international commitments and the importance of the sector from an 
environmental but also from an economic point of view.  
207. Table G1.1 summarizes the risk factors, the level of impact and the probability of occurrence. A description of 
these risk factors and mitigation measures is detailed in section  G.2. 
Table G1.1. - Project risk factors, level of impact and probability of occurrence  
 Risk Factor  Level of Impact  Probability of occurrence   
 1. Operational risk: Limited or insufficient human  capacity  Medium  Medium   
 2. Macroeconomic and fiscal sustainability  risks  High Low  
 3. Persistence of high risk perceptions of RE and EE projects by 
SMEs, project sponsors and LFIs High Medium   
 4. Failure  to create  financing  market  for RE and EE investments  High Low to Medium   
 5. Failure to achieve expected energy  savings  Medium  Low to Medium   
 6. Failure of adoption of proposed instruments by target SMEs and 
LFIs Medium  Medium to High   
 7. Environmental risks from improper decommissioning of obsolete 
EE equipment  Low Low  
 8. Reduced interest and commitment by Government / BICE  Medium  Low  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Operational risk: the risk of having limited or 
insufficient human capacity (specific technical 
expertise, legal or regulatory compliance capacities or 
a network of technology providers) to accompany the 
pace of development of sub -projects supported.   
Technical 
and 
operational   
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
208. Several  aspects  are considered  for mitigation  of this risk, including  activities  included  in Component  1 of the 
Project, and overseeing with local relevant public and private entities that knowledge is properly transferred 
from third party technical expertise to develop local  competences.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Macroeconomic and fiscal sustainability risks: risk of a 
potential weakening of economic conditions in the 
future (including exchange rates, repatriation of capital 
flows) having a negative impact in the conditions for 
private investment, the demand for new credit or the  
credit profiles of existing projects.   
 
Other   
 
High (>20% of 
project value)   
 
Low


---
*Page 57*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE  56 OF 64  
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
209. BICE will bear potential FX risks. Several aspects are considered for mitigation of this risk, including activities 
included in Component 1 of the Project, and overseeing with local relevant public and private entities that 
knowledge is properly transferred from third party technical expertise to develop local competences. To mitigate 
this risk, the project  team will  ensure  a continuous  monitoring  of the pipeline  of eligible  projects  and the status  of 
the portfo lio, in close coordination with the executing entity, BICE. Macroeconomic conditions, ongoing 
implementation of related regulation and any relevant government program in place, shall be closely monitored. 
Furthermore, an in -depth credit analysis of the LFI  and SME will be conducted, including a sectoral analysis of 
the SME’s  market  and forecast,  financial  status,  and use of the loan resources81. Where  applicable,  BICE  will ask 
for an SGR (See section C.6) BICE is following the FX policy defined in the framework of its Policy and Strategy 
guide which is aligned with national regulation. The limits on sale and buy positions are defined in the Liquidity 
and Financial Resources Committee (Comité de Liquidez y Recursos) following the Central Bank regulatory 
framework (Banco Central de la República Argentina BCRA). The maximum buy/sale positions according to the 
BCRA are equal to 30% of the committed capital (responsabilidad patrimonial comprometida - RPC). BICE is 
considering through the Liquidity and Financi al Resources Committee to cap the maximum sale exposition at 
17% and for buy position a maximum of 30%. This risk is monitored and managed on a daily basis by BICE’s 
finance department, which is in turn supervised monthly by the internal risk department. A s borrower, the 
Republic  of Argentina  will be directly  responsible  for all the financial  obligations  established  in the loan agreement 
to be entered  into with IDB and funded  with GCF  Proceeds.  The sovereign  guarantee  of the loan contract  consists 
of the responsibility of the government in its capacity as  borrower.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Persistence of high risk perceptions of RE and EE 
projects by target SMEs and LFIs is a critical  challenge 
to RE/EE investments and its occurrence has been  
analyzed both for developing and developed countries.  Technical 
and 
operational   
High (>20% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
210. The proposed Project methodology plans to address this  risk through different  mechanisms:  
i. Capacity  building  and awareness  enhancement . To increase  the capacity  of potential  SMEs  and LFIs to 
assess actual credit risks associated with the financing of RE and EE technologies under the Project’s 
mechanisms, thus further reducing perceived risks of loan  underperformance;  
ii. Technical  due diligence , by a third party  independent  validator  to assess  sub-project  feasibility,  structuring 
and engineering, and energy saving for EE  sub-projects;  
iii. Shared insurance mechanisms . In addition, economic conditions in the short to medium term, in particular 
those resulting from incremental prices of non -sustainable biomass, uncertain supply and increasing transport 
costs will induce increasing interest in EE efficiency  investments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 LFIs will be institutions of the pool of BICE -accredited LFIs. Accreditation is based on financial audited data and LFI 
reports and risk qualification utilizing metrics on efficiency, liquidity, capitalization, assets, profitability, governance and 
shareholder structure following the regulation by the Central Bank. Participating LFIs will be required to provide feedback 
on Project  instruments  to ensure  their viability.  Lending  conditions  including  interest  rate and tenor  by LFIs will be monitored 
and reported (see Sections D.1 and  D.2).


---
*Page 58*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 64  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
There is a risk that the project does not create a 
financing market for RE and EE investments and the 
interest of financial institutions remains dependent on 
the provision of credit lines supported by concessional  
financing.   
Technical 
and 
operational   
High (>20% of 
project value)   
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
211. The proposed Project methodology plans to address this risk through different mechanisms which include 
capacity building and demonstration  projects:  
• Initial support to kick -off the market will be provided through the Project. Seed finance for a  number of sub - 
projects,  once  the financing  strategy  has been  deployed  by BICE,  will support  demonstration  of the viability  of the 
concept.  
• LFIs gain experience  with RE and EE investments  using  loan resources  and risk-sharing  mechanisms,  which 
let them experience the actual risks of these investments. The key barrier to RE and EE investment is not the 
interest rate but the tenor. Together these activities mitigate the residual risk to  low. 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
There is a potential risk in that the EE investment 
projects to be developed under this Project will not 
achieve the expected energy savings and/or that these 
energy savings will not occur in the expected time 
frame.   
Technical 
and 
operational   
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
212. This risk is being addressed through different means. Risk will be transferred to sub -project developers and, if 
the expected  energy  savings  are not achieved  due to equipment  failure,  the guarantee/surety  bonds  furnished  by 
the ESTPs should provide risk protection for end users, SMEs and/or  lenders.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
There are risks related to the up -take/lower than 
expected momentum of the proposed instruments by 
Argentina’s SME target firms and financial institutions.   
Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
213. In the framework of the feasibility analysis of the barriers to investment, consultations were undertaken with key 
market  actors  to confirm  interest  in RE and EE and the conditions  for investment.  Furthermore,  in the framework 
of the proposed Project, each mechan ism will be discussed and socialized with the relevant actors so as to 
receive  and integrate  feedback  during  the structuring  and implementation  of the financial  strategy.  These  different 
interactive phases serve to increase the interest of market actors. I n addition, the intervention is designed to 
minimize  transaction  costs  to SMEs,  ESTPs  and LFIs of entering  and participating  in the Project.  This is achieved 
by standardizing and simplifying documentation and  procedures.


---
*Page 59*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 64  
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
If not properly decommissioned and disposed, the 
replaced equipment could lead to GHG leakages (re - 
utilization) and/or soil contamination.   
Social and 
environmental   
Low (<5% of 
project value)   
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
214. BICE,  with support  from IDB, will design  and implement  a Decommissioning  and Disposal  Protocol,  based  on the 
existing local regulations and compliant with IDB safeguards. The Project stipulates that old replaced equipment 
should be properly decommissioned and disposed of to avoid GHG emissions leakages and any potential 
contamination. Replaced equipment will have to be handled in a technically  appropriate manner to ensure that 
its final disposal is undertaken in accordance with all relevant national regulations and with the assistance of 
national licensed or certified waste management service  provider.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
215. Other potential risk that may arise during the life of the project is that the interest and commitment of the 
Argentinean government or BICE could be reduced as a result of changing policy priorities and/or economic 
conditions. The level of impact of this risk is medium and its probability of occurrence is low. This risk is to be 
mitigated through the continuous and constructive engagement with government authorities, as well as by the 
commitments resulting from international agreements.  
H.1. Logic Fr amework.  
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level82 
Paradigm shift objectives  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathways  216. The Project is expected to shift the current paradigm by altering the risk perceptions of the 
local financing sector and target SMEs for SE investments, developing an enabling 
environment for investors through standardization, providing a track record of profitable and 
sustainable business in the energy services market, and thereby supportin g an evolving SE 
market. By disbursing funds applying the mechanisms described in Section B.1. the Project 
aims to build a track record of profitable business in the selected technologies with a 
demonstrative effect expected to lead to a paradigm shift in the SE financing market in 
Argentina. Such market proving of the ESI concept and structured mechanisms for RE sub - 
projects through the proposed Project is crucial to achieving a paradigm shift given the 
lessons  learnt  from existing  RP and EE financing  initiatives.  Achieving  such  a paradigm  shift 
would  reduce  national  energy  related  emissions  in Argentina  by 9.1 million  tCO2eq  over the 
project’s lifetime. Furthermore, the Project’s impact includes improved working conditions 
and opportunities  for both men and women  in the biomass,  biogas  and EE industries,  as well 
as improved  access  to finance  for women -led/owned  SMEs  investing  in biomass,  biogas  and 
EE83. 
 
82 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  
83 For the sake of flexibility, and following standard IDB practice in similar previous successful programs, the amounts of 
Project funding to be used in each of the eligible technologies will not be predetermined. As a result, there is a possibilit y 
that resources may end up concentrating in one particular technology, either RE or EE. The concept of paradigm shift is


---
*Page 60*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 64  
 
 
 
Expected Result   
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Base - 
line Target   
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
 
 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low - 
emission energy 
access and power 
generation   
 
 
M1.1 Tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(tCO 2eq) reduced or 
avoided power 
generation  IDB Project report based 
on registry created by 
sub-activity 1.2.3.  
Aggregate value of 
sector -specific tCO 2eq 
reduction indicators. 
Intended to be estimated 
from projections over 
lifetime period of sub - 
projects   565,134  
(Year 2021)  9,110,338  
(Year 
2038)  National grid 
emission factor: 
Full 
disbursement of 
financing line.  
Mitigation of 
Risk factors 3,  
4, and 6 and 
risk mitigation 
strategies in 
section G.2.  
 
 
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances   
 
M3.1 Tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(tCO 2eq) reduced or 
avoided – buildings, 
cities, industries, and 
appliances  IDB Project report 
Same as above   28,843  
 
(Year 2021)  269,203  
(Year 
2038)  National grid 
emission factor: 
Full 
disbursement of 
financing line.  
Mitigation of risk 
factors 3 -6 and 
risk mitigation 
strategies in 
section G.2.  
 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project level  
 
Expected Result   
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)   
Baseline  Target   
Assumptions  
Mid-term Final  
Project outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low -emission 
power suppliers  M6.1 Proportion of 
low-emission power 
supply in a 
jurisdiction or market  MINEM and 
CAMMESA  
annual 
reports  2.2%84 NA 8%85 
(Year 
2025)  Financial closing and 
construction for 
projects awarded in 
Ronda 1 of RenovAr 
program occur within 
timelines established.  
 
 
being addressed for SE markets as a whole, and does not depend on the number of sub -projects financed but on the 
capacity to demonstrate the viability of these investments and the ways in which they can be financed. This is deemed 
reasonable due to the fact that barriers to financing RE and EE projects are very similar from the perspective of lenders 
and investors,  although  activities  associated  to the Project  are expected  to promote  participation  of smaller  firms.  The shift 
in perc eptions, either via RE or EE sub -projects, is expected to have an impact among actors across the SE  sector.  
84 Share  of RE sources  in national  demand  in the wholesale  power  market,  as of October,  2016.  Per Law 27.191’s  definition, 
RE includes power generated from all non -conventional RE sources, including hydro up to 50  MW. 
85 Based on national targets by 2018. It is expected that the share by the end of the Project implementation will be at least 
in levels equivalent to the 2018 national target. http://www.cac.com.ar/data/documentos/19_Ley%2027%20191.pdf


---
*Page 61*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 64  
 
 
      While the project 
contributes to this 
outcome , the 
achievement of this 
outcome cannot be 
controlled by the 
project as the 
replication of the 
mechanisms and the 
participation of LFIs 
and SMEs is 
necessary for its 
achievement. The risk 
mitigation measures 
mentioned in section G 
will mitigate this  risk 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low -emission 
power suppliers  M6.3 MWs of low - 
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated  IDB Project 
report  709 MW,  
all RE 
(17MW in  
biogas and 
biomass 
not 
reported)86 768 MW  
(Year 
2023)  823 MW  
(Year 
2038)  Assumed portfolio of 
sub-projects includes:  
Biogas projects, 
specifically in the pig 
and livestock sector 
(mainly “feedlot”) and  
the industrial sector  
      (mainly food  
      processing); and  
      Biomass from  
      agricultural and  
      forestry waste, as well  
      as industry (mainly  
      paper and wood).  
RE generation financed 
and installed with GCF 
support  Annual GWh of 
energy produced 
from RE sources by 
sub-projects 
financed  IDB Project 
report  0 917.2  
During the 
execution 
period  8,842  Assumed production 
factor for biogas and 
biomass: 0.8 (0.85 for 
livestock sector)  
While the project  
      contributes to this  
      outcome, the  
      achievement of this  
      outcome cannot be  
      controlled by the 
      project as the adoption  
      of the mechanisms by  
      LFIs and SMEs (Risk  
      factor 6 in Section G.1)  
      is necessary for its  
      achievement. The risk  
      mitigation measures  
      mentioned in section  
      G.2 will mitigate this  
      risk 
 
86 Informe mensual 2017, MINEM, February 2017.


---
*Page 62*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 64  
 
 
Energy saved by sub - 
projects financed and 
installed with GCF 
support  Annual GWh of 
energy saved from 
EE technologies 
implemented in sub - 
projects financed  IDB Project 
report  0 40.95  
 
 
During the 
execution 
period  229.4  Assumed savings 
factor per technology 
considered: engines: 
0.05, preheating: 0.6,  
boilers:   0.06, cooling  
systems: 0.27, A/C:  
0.2, cogeneration: 0.35  
      While the project  
      contributes to this  
      outcome, the  
      achievement of this  
      outcome cannot be  
      controlled by the  
      project as the  
      replication of the  
      mechanisms and the  
      participation of LFIs  
      and SMEs is  
      necessary for its  
      achievement. The risk  
      mitigation measures  
      mentioned in section  
      G.2 will mitigate this  
      risk 
Project component  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
  IDB Project  0 3 (Year  15 (Year  Including gender  
  report   2021)  2023)  baseline study  
 Number of targeted 
technical assistance 
studies/reports 
completed    Including 
1 gender 
baseline 
study  (see   
    paragraph    
    222)   
  IDB Project  0 15 (Year  25 (Year  Including training 
sessions and national  
At least 20% of women 
trained (see paragraph 
222)   report   2021) 100  2023) 175  
    participant  participant  
    s s 
Component 1.  Number of training      
Implementation costs  sessions completed      
and technical 
assistance activities     At least 
20% of   
    women   
    trained   
  IDB Project  0 3 (Year  6 (Year  
2023)  
Total of 
800 
attendees   
  report   2021)  
 Number of    Total of  
 events/publications    500 
 completed    attendees  
    % of 
    women at


---
*Page 63*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 64  
 
 
    least 20%  % of  
(see women at  
paragraph  least 20%  
222) (see 
1 
knowledge  paragraph 
222) 
platform   
module to   
encourage   
female   
participati   
on in the   
sector   
(see  
paragraph   
222)  
 Estimated 
number of RE 
sub-projects 
financed  IDB Project 
report  0 649 (Year  
2023)  
 
 
During the 
execution 
period  
At least 
20% of 
women - 
led or 
owned 
projects  1,375  
(Year 
2038)  Assumed portfolio of 
sub-projects includes:  
Biogas projects, 
specifically in the pig 
and livestock sector 
(mainly “feedlot”) and 
the industrial sector 
(mainly food 
processing); and  
Biomass from 
agricultural and 
forestry waste, as  well 
as industry (mainly 
paper and wood).  
 
Component 2. 
Financing adapted to 
RE and EE projects       See also risk factor 
3&4 in Section G.1 and 
risk mitigation 
measures in Section 
G.2. 
      At least 20% of 
women -led or owned 
projects  
 Estimated number of 
EE sub -projects 
financed  IDB Project 
report  0 598 (Year  
2023)  
 
 
During the 
execution 
period  
At least 
20% of 
women - 
led or  1,136  
(Year 
2038)  Assumed portfolio of 
sub-projects includes:  
EE in industry and 
service 
(electric/thermal), 
mainly energy 
intensive sub -sectors 
such as chemical, food 
processing, dairy, 
plastic. Technologies 
in this  category  
include, and are not


---
*Page 64*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 64  
 
 
    owned 
projects   limited to, cooling 
systems, pumps, 
cogeneration, solar 
heating, boilers and 
heat recovery.  
 See also risk factor 
3&4 in Section G.1 and 
risk mitigation 
measures in Section 
G.2. 
 At least 20% of 
women -led or owned 
projects  
 
 
Table H1.2.1. - Project inputs by components, activities and sub -activities  
 
Components  Activities  Sub-activities  Inputs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Component 1: 
Implementation 
costs and technical 
assistance activities   
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Develop financial and non - 
financial instruments, including 
standard performance contract, 
insurance policy covering energy 
savings and validation 
methodologies to account energy 
savings and generation  1.1.1 Development of market assessment and gender 
baseline studies.  Technical 
consultants  
 
1.1.2 Development of a standard performance contract.  Legal and  
technical 
consultants  
1.1.3 Develop a procedure/methodology to facilitate the SMEs 
to participate in the renovAR program   
Legal consultant  
1.1.4 Develop standards and technical validation 
methodologies for projects and  project developers.  Technical 
consultants / Firm  
1.1.5 Development of financing structuring and risk mitigation 
instruments (ESI for EE) and project incentive strategy.  Technical 
consultants  
1.1.6 Development and implementation of a Promotion and 
Execution Plan for the Project.  Technical 
consultants  
1.1.7 Development of a Project Pipeline.  Technical  
consultants  
1.1.8 Strengthen regulatory framework (lessons learned, 
good practices and discussing with public authorities on 
barriers and potential solutions to the current regulation)  Technical / Legal 
consultants  
 
 
 
 
1.2 Strengthen capacity of BICE, 
LFIs, ESTPs, project developers 
and validators for SE project 
development. Seed incentives and 
Knowledge sharing  1.2.1. Training of project developers/technology solution 
providers/LFIs/Validators/SMEs (at least 20% women) about 
Program mechanisms  Technical 
consultants  
1.2.2 Establishment at BICE of a business unit dedicated for 
SE financing.  Technical 
consultants  
1.2.3 Establishment of electronic registry system for 
monitoring and evaluation of projects and program’s results.  Technical 
consultants / Firm  
1.2.4 Seed incentives for projects (initial project design costs, 
project validation cost)  Technical 
consultants  
1.2.5 Management  and monitoring of the Project.  Technical  
consultants


---
*Page 65*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 64  
 
 
  1.2.6 Development of six (6) products/publications, 
knowledge sharing events, country market reports published, 
and webinars  Knowledge 
consultants  
Component 2: 
Financing adapted 
to RE and EE 
projects  2.1 Increase medium and long - 
term credit provided to SMEs for 
biomass, biogas, and EE sub - 
projects.    
Credit line  
 
217. In relation to the outputs and outcomes proposed for the Project, the following indicators have been 
designed  in order  to monitor  gender -related  activities  (see Annex  10). As these  are co-benefits,  these  are 
presented separately and do not constitute a commitment for the achievement of Project objective. 
Where p ossible, beneficiary SMEs and ESTPs will provide information as an input for the following sex - 
disaggregated indicators:  
(i) % of companies considered for GCF financing that receive information about the gender 
activities (internships, capacity building, work ing experience), targeting 100% of beneficiary 
SMEs by  2020  
(ii) % of beneficiary  firms  that contractually  agree  and plan for implementation  of at least  one gender 
activity, targeting 30% of beneficiary SMEs by  2020  
(iii) % of companies that initiate implementation of agreed activities in (ii), targeting 40% of 
beneficiary SMEs by  2020  
(iv) One knowledge platform module to share experiences with financing women -led projects, SMEs, 
and technology providers to encourage female participation in the  sector.  
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
218. The Project will apply the standard procedures established by the IDB for monitoring and evaluation of investment 
operations. Based on the proposed results and a monitoring and evaluation plan to be agreed between the IDB and 
BICE, and following the AMA, the evolution of indicators should be reported periodically during Project execution. In 
coordination with the IDB, BICE will compile and maintain all information, indicators and parameters necessary for 
the prepara tion of Project reports, including annual plans, midterm review and final evaluation, and any ex -post 
supervision the IDB or the GCF may wish to  conduct.  
219. It is the responsibility of BICE to ensure that the sub -borrower is eligible for funding from the Proj ect in accordance 
with the Project’s  eligibility  criteria,  as defined  in the OR. Monitoring  of disbursements  for eligible  expenditures  will be 
held by the IDB ex - post. In coordination with BICE, the IDB may schedule supervision visits to sub borrowers to 
monitor  and verify  the proper  use of resources  and compliance  with contractual  conditions  of the Project  with regards 
to the use of  funds.  
220. Operations  approved  by BICE  and presented  to the IDB to be part of the Project  must  be properly  identified  in BICE’s 
accounting systems and be in compliance with what is stated in the specific loan agreements. These records should 
allow for identifying financial conditions of each transaction (e.g. currency, maturity, interest rates), the value of the 
contract, loan proc eeds and eventual use of proceeds for monitoring purposes, program funds balances and default 
rates, if  necessary.  
221. For the management of Project resources, the Bank and BICE will agree on a specific bank account to be set up or 
designated by BICE for the t ransfer of IDB -GCF funds following requests for  disbursements.  
222. The monitoring  process  intends  to follow  up the execution  of the Project  in order  to identify  the intermediate  milestones 
achieved  in each  phase  and evaluate  its outcomes  and fulfillment  of proposed  targets.  The indicators  to be monitored 
will be those included in sections H.1.1 and H.1.2, above. IDB’s own policies for monitoring of programs include 
mandatory instruments such as the Results Matrix (to be agreed between IDB and the executing a gency and is 
required for approval of the program by the IDB Board) and a Progress Monitoring Report (PMR) that accompanies 
the execution of each IDB investment loan  intervention.  
223. BICE  will collect  the necessary  data for monitoring  and present  annual  repor ts to the IDB. In some  cases,  the IDB will 
make calculations required for some indicators, based on the information provided by BICE in the annual reports. 
BICE’s own information systems are considered sufficient and appropriate for monitoring the proposed  indicators.


---
*Page 66*
---

H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING   
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 64  
 
 
Secondary sources of information (especially international and government agencies publications) are also 
acceptable for contributions and/or complementing of information, as per description of indicators. BICE will deliver 
these annual reports within sixty (60) calendar days after the end of each year of Project’s implementation. The 
reports  will include  information  regarding  the evolution  of the indicators,  as well as financial information  regarding  the 
use of the resources.  The IDB will be entitled  to request  additional  information,  if necessary.  In addition  to the annual 
reports  and the scheduled  activities  for monitoring  of the operations  described  above,  BICE  and the IDB will conduct 
a midterm evaluation within twenty -four (24) months from the effective date of the loan contract or when 50% of 
Project  resources  have  been  disbursed  – whichever  occurs  first. Finally,  BICE  will present  a final report  to the IDB up 
to six (6) months after the day of the last disbursement. This report shall contain all relevant information to assess if 
objectives of the Project and targets for each indicator have been met. Based on this report and as per normal 
practice, the IDB will also pr epare a Project Completion Report (PCR), which evaluates the fulfillment of targets, 
reviews the overall results of the operation and describes lessons learned, among other relevant  aspects.  
224. The evaluation  proposed  will follow  an ex-post economic  analysis,  based  on the data collected  for a set of indicators 
detailed in sections H.1.1 and  H.1.2.  
225. Due to the long-term nature  of the sub-projects  to be financed,  real data available  by the end of the execution  period 
will not be sufficient to run the ex -post economic analysis without relying partially on certain projections. The 
evaluation  exercise  will be made  at the time of program  completion,  time at which  data collected  will be used  to adjust 
projections on the expected results. After that and if necessary, arrangements will need to be made for a discussion 
on an optimal  timeframe  for further  actual  data collection  during  the expected  lifetime  of the sub-projects  financed.  
226. Since  the ex-post evaluation  aims  to replicate  the ex-ante economic  analysis,  replacing  the assumptions  or estimated 
values with values effectively verified, information to be gathered shall be equivalent to that used in the economic 
analysis presented with the proposal to the IDB Board. As a reference, some of the information to be obtained on 
sub-projects once these are known to be participant in the Project, includes: number of sub -projects under each 
category, contracted price of energy (income), installed capacity, operating capacity, production/efficiency facto rs, 
time of start of operations, investment costs, O&M costs, emission factor,  etc. 
227. It will be the responsibility of the IDB to supervise the execution of the Project evaluation from the data collected in 
accordance with the plan proposed.


---
*Page 67*
---

 
 
 
 
ANNEXES  
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 64  
 
NDA No -objection Letter (Annex 1 dated 6 December 2017) 
Feasibility Study (Annex 2)  
Economic and financial model with sensitivity analysis (xls format) (Annex 3) 
BICE co -financing commitment (If applicable) (Annex 4)  
Environmental and Social Management Framework (Annex 5) 
Map indicating the location of the project/ (Annex 6)  
Project implementation timeline (Annex 7) 
18-month Procurement Plan (Annex 8) 
Detailed Budg et (Annex 9)  
Gender Analysis and Action Plan (Annex 10)  
Micale, Stadelmann, Boni (2015). Energy Savings Insurance: Pilot Progress, Lessons Learned, and 
Replication Plan, Global Innovation Lab for Climate Finance Lab, April 2015 (Annex 11)  
Energy Efficiency  Project Evaluation and Implementation Flow (Annex 12)  
Argentine regulatory framework and initiatives for Energy Efficiency (Annex 13)  ☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
 
☒ 
☒ I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
I


---
*Page 68*
---

 
GCF/B.19/ xx/Add.06  
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 69*
---

 
 
 
 
GCF/B.19 /xx/ Add.0 6 
Page 1  
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Promoting risk mitigation instruments and finance for renewable 
energy and energy efficiency investments  
Accredited entity  Inter -American Development Bank (IDB)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Intermediation 2 (I2)  
 
 
Environmental and  Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not applicable  
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-24 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Link to disclosure  English: https:// www.iadb.org/en/climatechange  
Spanish: https:// www.iadb.org/es/cambioclimatico  
An ESMS consistent  with the requirements for a category I -2 project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)  
Other links   
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of  
report/disclosure  Not applicable