=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Rudo Matsheza
/CreationDate: D:20180125170955+09'00'
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/ModDate: D:20180206095010+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board
27 February - 1 March 2018 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea
Provisional agenda item 15GCF/B.19/22/Add.03  
6 February 2018  
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum III 
Funding proposal package for FP06 1 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “Integrated physical adaptation and
community resilience through an enhanced direct access pilot in the public,
private, and civil society sectors of three Eastern Caribbean small island
developing states ”;
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s); and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;


---
*Page 2*
---

Project/Programme 
Title: Integrated physical adaptation and community resilience through  an 
enhanced direct access pilot in the public, private, and civil society 
sectors of three Eastern Caribb ean small island developing stat es 
Country/Region: Eastern Caribbean 
Accredited Entity: Departmen t of Environment, Antigua and Barbu da 
Date of Submission: 31 July 2016


---
*Page 3*
---

	
						
	
	
Contents 
  
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAIN ST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AN D MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template   
- Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accre dited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, a ccredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information . Accredited entities can either  directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary info rmation in the proposal with c ross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
- The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding  annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name c onvention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[ Date]-[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 4*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 148 
 
	
	A
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / p rogramme title Integrated physical adaptat ion and community resilience 
through an enhanced direct a ccess pilot in the public, 
private, and civil societ y sectors of three Eastern 
Caribbean small island developin g states
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada – members 
of the Or ganization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS )
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  
Antigua and Barbuda NDA 
Ministry of Finance 
Kevin Silston 
Deputy Financial Secretary Parliament Drive, S t. John’s, Antigua 
Tel.: +1 268  
Email: kevin.silston@gmail.com  
Department of Environment 
Ministry of Health and the Environment  
Her Excellency Ambassador Diann Black ‐Layne  
Director of the Department of Environment and Ambassador 
for Climate Change #1 Victoria  Park Botanical Gardens, 
Factory Rd., St. John’s, Antigua W.I.  
Tel.: +1 268 462 4625 Fa x: +1 268 462 6265  
Email: antiguabarbudaenvironmentdivision@gmail.com 
Email: dcblack11@gmail.com  
 Dominica NDA  
Ministry of Finance M r. Samuel Carrette  
Chief Development Planner 5th Floor, Financial Centre Kennedy Avenue, Roseau, Commonwealth of Dominica  
Tel.: +1 767 266 3221; +1 767 266 3561  
Fax: +1 767 448 0054  
E‐mail: carrettes@dominica.gov.dm 
E‐mail: finsecfinance@gominica.gov.dm  
 
Grenada NDA 
Ministry of Economic Development, Planning, Trade, 
Cooperatives and International Business  
Mr. Timothy Antoine  Permanent Secretary Financial Complex, Carenage 
St. George’s, Grenada  
Tel.: +1 473 440 2928; +1 473 440 2731; +1 473 440 2732  Fax: +1 473 440 4115 
E‐mail: psfinancegrenada@gmail.com 
A.1.5. Accredited entity Department of Environment, M inistry of Health and the 
Environment, Anti gua and Barbuda 
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☒  Direct ☐  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary Executing Entities:  
 Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda 
 Ministry with responsibilit y for Environment, Grenada  
 Ministry with responsibility  for Environment, Dominica


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 148 
 
	
	A
In addition to the executing entities, a number of potential 
service providers have been identified at this stage (see 
Table 4). 
 
Beneficiaries:  
Vulnerable populations in Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica 
and Grenada
A.1.7. Project size catego ry (Total investment, million 
USD) ☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☐  Mitigation ☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission Initial submission: 31 July 2016 
Second submission: 17 July 2017 
Third submission: 15 September 2017 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, position Ms. Joan Carrott 
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Health and the Environment 
High Street, St. John’s, Antigua 
 Ms. Lia Nicholson 
Project Consultant 
Project Management Unit (PMU) Department of the Environment 
Factory Road 
St. John’s, 
Antigua
Organization Department of Environment 
Ministr y of Health and the Environment 
Email address Email: DOE@ab.gov.ag   
E‐mail:  
 
Diann.Black-Layne@ab.gov.ag  
Lia.Nicholson @ab.gov.ag
Telephone number Tel.: +1 268 462 4625  
Fax: +1 268 462 6265
Mailing address #1 Victoria Park Botanical Ga rdens, Factory Rd., St. John’s, 
Antigua W.I.
  
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapi d bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-ef ficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, et c.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and ma nagement, agroforestry, agricul tural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate ch ange – diversification of supply sources and supply chain manag ement, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 148 
 
	
	A
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate resilient crops, e fficient irrigation systems, et c.) 
☒ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 ☒ 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/p rogramme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
GCF’s Request for Proposals for Piloting Enhanced Direct Access  
In 2016, the Green Climate Fund announced a pilot initiative fo r Enhancing Direct Access with the objective of the pilot 
to allow the GCF to effectively operationalization its enhance direct access modality at the sub-national, national and 
regional levels with differen t types of public and private enti ties.  
This includes devolved decision-making and stronger local multi -stakeholder engagement. The pilot phase will offer the 
GCF an opportunity to gain experience and additional insights t hrough such an approach, with a view to establishing EDA 
as a standard operational modality of the Fund. 
This project is in response to the request for proposals (RfP) issued by the GCF in July 2016, and is designed to meet 
the stated objectives of the RF P, namely: to enhance country ow nership of projects and programmes by devolving 
decision making at country level, thereby allowing greater invo lvement and input from impacted stakeholders. Unlike the 
traditional direct access modalit y, there will be no submission  of individual projects or programmes to the Fund because 
decision-making for the funding of specific pilot activities wi ll be devolved to the country level.1 
A table of how this EDA proposal meets the criteria set out in the GCF Enhancing Direct Access (EDA) Request for 
Proposals is provided in Annex 2. Alignment of the Enhancing Direct Access proposal for the Eastern Caribbean against 
GCF Request for Proposals criteria . 
Integrated physical adaptation and community resilience through an enhanced direct access pilot in the public, 
private, and civil society sectors of three Eastern Caribbean small island developing states  
The proposed project is designed to enhance country ownership o f adaptation in three small island states by devolving 
decision making to the country and community level, thereby all owing greater involvement and input from communities 
vulnerable to climate change. The problem that this project see ks to address is that the Eastern Caribbean pilot countries 
of Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada are suffering from  loss of property, life and well-being due to climate 
variability and climate-induced extremes. Climate change is alr eady leading to increased frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events. Over t he past 50 years, approximately U S$3 billion in losses are a ttributed to the consequences 
of natural hazards in the Easter n Caribbean alone. If this tren d continues, the Eastern Ca ribbean sub-region will face 
potential losses of US$350-870 million per year2.   
In September 2017, according to preliminary estimates, Antigua and Barbuda has experienced damages totaling over 
USD 102 million; changes in flow ( losses) over USD 20 million; and its estimated recovery  needs are USD 152.5 million 
(12% of Gross Domestic Product).  The housing sector accounted f or half of all damages and recovery needs. For 
Dominica, estimates of the total damage of Hurricane Maria coul d reach in excess of 200 perc ent of GDP or approximately 
US$1.3 billion. Dominica’s GDP in 2016 is USD 525 million.  Dom inica is among the lowest GDP per capita ranking in 
the Caribbean region with GDP per capita of US$6,460.  
                                                 
1 GCF EDA Request for Proposals: http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/318991/2016_EDA_RF P.pdf/406a5b0b-c4f9-
4784-813a-ef90a966f3c6  Accessed 4 September 2017 
2 http://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/  Accessed 4 September 2017


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 148 
 
	
	A
Climate trends for the Eastern Caribbean sub-region are: betwee n 1 and 
4°C warmer by the end of the century; average annual rainfall i s projected 
to decrease by the end of the cent ury, however rainfall variabi lity is 
projected to increase, with mo re intense downpours and extended  drought 
conditions; and hurricane intensity is likely to increase, with  estimates of 5 
– 15% increased intensity3. 
The resulting fiscal losses from recurrent disasters, coupled w ith the 
ongoing effects of climate change,  have greatly contributed to 
unsustainable budgetary deficits and imposed significant negati ve 
constraints to economic growth. The Eastern Caribbean pilot cou ntries are 
vulnerable to climate change because the adaptation infrastruct ural works, 
which require large up-front overhead costs, cannot be downscal ed in 
proportion to population size of these small islands. This is a  major 
socioeconomic reality that confr onts small islands, notwithstan ding the 
benefits of adaptation. Moreover, the relative impact of an ext reme event 
such as a hurricane affects most  of island’s territory and has a 
disproportionate impact on gross domestic product, compared to a larger 
country where an individual ev ent generally affects a small pro portion of 
its total territory and its GDP4.  
The result is relatively higher  adaptation and disaster risk re duction costs 
per capita in countries with small populations and areas—especi ally those 
that are also geographically iso lated, have a poor resource bas e, and have 
high transport costs.   
Project Objectives and Strategy 
The objective of this project is to strengthen institutional ca pacities and 
increase the resilience of at least 5% of the population in the  E a s t e r n  
Caribbean pilot countries to climate variability and change, of  which 50% 
are women, through adaptation in i nfrastructure, strengthened b uildings, 
and enhanced ecosystem services. 
The outputs of the project are: 
Output 1 : Enhanced capacity for climate adaptation planning, 
implementation, and monitoring and evaluation via direct access . 
This will operationalize and strengthen direct access modalitie s 
in each of the small island pilot countries to strengthen finan cial 
institutions, promote openness, transparency and country 
ownership of climate adaptation actions across sectors and 
scales (national, community and individual) 
Output 2 : Governments implement concrete adaptation 
measures using ecosystem-based approaches where 
appropriate. This will demonstrate enhanced direct access in the 
public sector through an on-granting mechanism that aligns GCF-financed concrete local area adaptation projects to climate -
proof ongoing investments and co-financing from the 
Government  
                                                 
3 CARIBSAVE, 2015. National Vulnerability Impact and Adaptation Analysis for Antigua and Barbuda. Prepared with funding from 
UN Environment-ROLAC. 
4 IPCC, 2007. AR5 WGII Chapter 29 (Small Island Developing State s) 
Key information
% of pop. with increased  resilience:  5 %
% female: 50 %
# new en ti ti es  accredited: 3
# strengthened  fi n ancin g  mechanisms: 6
GCF contribution  (million  USD): 20
Financial  instrument: Grant
Counterpart,  leveraged  financing  and in‐
kind su p po rt:                                  (million  USD)
Government  co‐financing 6
Civil society  organiza tions 1.5
Private  sector  (households,  MSMEs) 11
Total 18.5
IPCC Climate  Projections  for the Eastern  
Caribbean  (by end of century):
Increase  in hurricane  intensity  between  
5% and 15%
Temperature  rise of between  1 and 4°C
Average  annual  rainfall  could  decrease  by 
by up to 40% 
Increased  rainfall  variability,  more  
extremes  (flood  and drought)
1 meter  sea level rise
Key timelines
April 2016:  First EDA consultations
July 2016:  Concept  submission  to GCF
February  2017:  Baseline  studies  completed
July 2017:  Full proposal  submission  to 
GCFSteady  increase  in Atlantic  
storm  count  (1850  –2 0 1 4 )


---
*Page 8*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 148 
 
	
	A
Output 3 : Community resilience to climate impacts is enhanced through tangible adaptation benefits . This will 
demonstrate enhanced direct acces s for CSOs and NGOs through an  on-granting mechanism for adaptation in 
community buildings that promote s resilience to droughts, flood s and hurricanes  
Output 4 : Privately owned physical assets of vulnerable populat ions are more resilient to climate variability and 
change through concessional microfinancing.  This will demonstrate enhanced di rect access in the private se ctor 
through a concessional on-lending revolving loans programme for  adaptation in buildings (homes and small 
businesses) 
The most prevalent barriers i dentified in the baseline studies were: 
#1: Adaptation that ‘leaves no one behind’. Low-income househol ds and vulnerable groups suffer 
disproportionately from climate impacts; access to finance is d ifficult; volatile asset value due to climate extremes 
and unaffordable insurance. 
#2: Financing for adaptation in public, private and civil socie ty sectors. Lack of capacity and institutional structures 
to directly access international climate change financing; lack  of predictability and timeliness in the delivery of 
climate finance; disbursement rat es as low as 10% of approved c limate finance in pilot SIDS. 
#3: High per capita losses and co sts of climate recovery. Adapt ation that involves infrastructural works requires 
large up-front costs, which in  the case of SIDS can’t be downsc aled in proportion to the population size. 
This project is designed to address barriers to climate action in the country context of the pilot SIDS. The proposal 
presents an opportunity for the di rect access accredited entity  to work with in Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and 
Grenada to move beyond the financing of individual climate chan ge projects towards a more comprehensive, stakeholder 
driven and programmatic approach to projected climate impacts, which is based on transparent criteria and strengthening 
of financial institutions to suppo rt implementation of national  priorities that are aligned with the GCF’s investment criteria  
and results management fr amework, the Paris Agreement and the U NFCCC.  
The private sector targeted in th is proposal are homeowners and  small business owners whos e property and assets are 
exposed to climate risks. This group has difficulty accessing c redit at affordable rates to prepare for climate variability 
and change, are generally indebt ed due to past losses and damag es, and suffer from high costs of electricity and water. 
As a result of these multiple t hreats, this target group is at risk of falling below the poverty line due to a natural disaste r 
or slow onset climate impacts. 
EDA as a Foundation for Transformational Change  
 
The OECS region is striving to transform its planning and housi ng systems in order to build resilience to climate change. 
The goal of promoting transformative change and paradigm shift in the case of this EDA proposal is defined as: 
“institutionalizing transparent decision-making and financing m echanisms that will increase the amount of funding 
reaching the bottom of the pyramid to allow for rapid uptake of  complementary and transformative adaptation actions that 
will advance the global goal of t he Paris Agreement, in a manne r that respects and supports stakeholders’ capacity for 
change”. The transparent decision-making and financing mechanis ms supported by the EDA will support a paradigm shift 
by channeling climate finance, acting as a link between interna tional climate finance flows and domestic policies and 
priorities, leveraging private sector involvement in climate ac tivities, and increasing domestic coordination of financial 
flows for climate and environmen t, including from complementary  domestic sources. 
 The primary measurable benefits  for the US$20 million EDA proje ct that will contribute to tr ansformative change are: 
1. Accreditation of 3 direct acce ss entities in the Eastern Car ibbean, including for on-lending accreditation 
2. 6 transparent sustainable financing mechanisms for supportin g adaptation in the OECS sub-region meet 
GCF criteria  
3. At least 5% of the total population in the three pilot count ries benefits directly from EDA activities, of 
which 50% is female (direct beneficiaries include those under O utput 3 (on-granting) and Output 4 (on-
lending)) 
4. 90% of beneficiaries believe project-related decision making  is inclusive and responsive, by sex, age, 
disabilit
y and population group


---
*Page 9*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 148 
 
	
	A
5. Local knowledge products and public awareness products for a  wide audience reach over 50,000 people
6. At least 100 people are trained to identify, prioritize, imp lement, monitor and evaluate adaptation 
strategies and measures 
7. 300 vulnerable households and 100 businesses use Fund-suppor ted microfinancing to respond to 
climate variability and project ed climate change, of which appr oximately 40% are female-headed 
 
 
Figure	1.	A	snapshot	of	how	EDA	proposal	responds	to	and	is	aligned	with	the	GCF’s	Investment 	Criteria	
The EDA project will achieve the primary measurable benefits wi th the requested USD 20 million in grants for the three 
pilot countries. The budget is transparently allocated with eac h country receiving the same amount of funding (USD 6 
million per country), and within this amount, the sectoral budg ets are broken down as follows: Governments 3 M, NGOs 
1 M, and private sector 2 M. The project includes provisions fo r transparent budget line reallo cation in consultation with 
the GCF under extreme circumstances, should one of the SIDS be unable to programme their allocation of resources 
under the project.  
The project is anticipated to benefit from US$18.5 million in c o-financing, in-kind support and leveraged funds. With USD 
2 million to support capacity building of transparent decision- making processes, monitoring and evaluation, gender 
mainstreaming and other policy-level interventions, the remaini ng USD 18 million will be directly available to beneficiaries 
– a total of USD 6 million per pilot country.  
The EDA project will use grants initially t o reach the most vul nerable persons who are struggl ing in the current financing 
climate. Subsequent EDA submissi on intends to use instruments s uch as reimbursable grants, equity, concessional loans 
and guarantees. The use of grants in this first EDA is consiste nt with the risks in working with a new Fund such as the 
GCF, with a new modality that is being piloted via this RFP. If  successful, the lessons learn ed will build confidence in the 
partnership between the Fund and the Direct Access entities wit hin the region, promoting access to other financing 
instruments of the GCF.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 148 
 
	
	A
 
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable ) March 2017 (completed) 
Expected financial close (if applicable ) dd/mm /yyyy
Estimated implementation start and end date Project Inception: March – September 2018 
Start: October 2018; End:  November 2022 
Project/pro gramme lifespan 4years


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 148 
	
	B
B.1. Description of Financial Ele ments of the Project / Program me 
Please provide: 
 an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from 
financial closing through final maturity of the propos ed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; 
and a sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme 
 
 a description of how the choice of fi nancial instrument(s) will overcome ba rriers and achieve project objectives, 
and leverage public and/or private finance 
 
a breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub-component in local and foreign 
currency and a currency hedging mechanism:  
For example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal exploration project, sub-components 
would include civil engineering works, drilling services, drilling equipment and inspection test.  
 Rationale for grant financial instrument  
 
This project’s choice of financial instrument, a full grant req uest, is necessary for the project to overcome barriers 
confronting small island states  and achieve the project’s objec tives to build resilience in v ulnerable populations. The 
project is designed to maximize the impact of the grant financi ng through a Revolving Fund for enhancing direct access 
in the private sector. The priv ate sector targeted in this prop osal are homeowners and small business owners whose 
property and assets are exposed to climate risks, and who requi re upfront financing to implement cost-effective measures 
to protect their property  from climate extremes.  
 
The Revolving Fund, an unsecured, concessionary debt fund targe ting vulnerable populations, is a quasi-debt/quasi-
grant facility. The debt structure of the facility is primarily  driven by the creation of new concessional financing by the 
recycling of the principal repayments of initial concessional f inancing through amortization – this process is known as the 
“revolver”. The “grant” funding oc curs through discretionary fi nancing forgiveness and payment flexibility to certain 
categories of borrowers for whom repayment, even at concessiona ry rates may be difficult, instead of pursuing legal 
recourse against such defaulted borrowers.  
 The Revolving Fund will not be increasing its capital base thro ugh interest income returns. At the time of a natural shock 
such as post-disaster recovery, the Revolving Fund can aggressi vely “kick-in” with flexible payment structures and 
funding to home and business owners. The Revolving Fund will co mplement debt from the private sector, such as local 
banks. In the hierarchy of human needs, a climate resilient bui lding to live and conduct business is a basic need; once 
this is met through the Revolv ing Fund, beneficiaries will be i n a better position to increas e productivity and borrow from 
local banks. For more information, see Section E.6. Efficiency and effectiveness.  
 Market demand for concessional loan financing – home and business owners  
 The market demand for the Revolving Fund loan in the three EDA countries is estimated at  USD 213 million, which 
exceeds the USD 6 million that w ill be available in the EDA pro ject. The analysis is provided in Section C.5. Market 
Overview . 
 Rationale for co-financing 
 Across sectors, the project is estimated to achieve US$18.5 mil lion of counterpart financing and in-kind support, pending 
the further definition of interv entions during implementation. This project is expected to l everage over US$11 million of 
private sector financing through repayments in the Revolving Fu nd structure in Output 4 over t he course of 10 years. Civil 
society organizations will cont ribute an estimated US$1.5 milli on of their own financing and in-kind support to the 
interventions under Output 3. Governments are expected to provi de counterpart and in-kind support of US$6 million for 
Output 1 and Output 2. For more information, see Section E.6. Efficiency and effectiveness.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 148 
	
	B
The ability of the Governments an d stakeholders to meet co-fina ncing commitments depends on the exposure of the 
islands to extreme climate impacts . Natural disaster shocks in the Eastern Caribbean have resulted in lower growth 
scenarios and higher debt paths5. Each of the pilot countries have experienced devastating hurr icanes, which have 
resulted in economic shocks, increased debt, and resulted in co nstrained fiscal space and debt restructuring programmes. 
In September 2017 alone, the East ern Caribbean is lands are esti mated to have suffered losse s of up to 200% GDP due 
to Category 5 hurricanes.  
 
The Ministers of Environment in t he participating countries at their annual meeting of the OECS Council of Ministers of 
Environmental Sustainability on 28 April 2017 in Grenada, “ endorsed  the recommendation that Member States urgently 
make available, to the extent possible, the necessary human res ource, financial and material investments to effectively 
secure access to climate finance”, including commitments from t he three Governments to support this pilot Enhancing 
Direct Access modality6. 
 
                                                 
5 IMF, 2016. Grenada Debt Sustainability Analysis https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/pdf/2016/dsacr16133.pd f Accessed 7 
September 2017 
6 Decision 2/COMES4 . 4th Meeting of the Council of M inisters of Environmental Sust ainability, Grenada, April 27 – 28, 2017


---
*Page 13*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 148 
	
	B
Project Budget 
 
Output Sub-component (if applicable) Activities Amount 
(for 
entire 
project) Currency  Amount 
(for 
entire 
project) Local 
currency 
(ECD – 
Eastern 
Caribbean 
dollar)GCF 
funding 
amount Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient 
Output 1. Enhanced 
capacity for climate 
adaptation planning, 
implementation, and 
monitoring and 
evaluation via direct 
access Sub-component 1.1 Capacity 
building to strengthen financial 
institutions, devolve decision-
making, stakeholder 
engagement for transparency, 
and sustainable procurement Activity 1.1. Appoint 
implementation, 
oversight and 
transparency 
mechanisms with 
adequate capacity 
Activity 1.2. Design a 
Sustainable 
Procurement system for 
construction supplies in 
pilot countries 
Activity 1.3. Support 
accreditation of direct 
access entities in the 
Eastern Caribbean 0.5 million 
USD ($)  
 1.355 0.5 million USD 
($) 
Sub-component 1.2 Monitoring, 
evaluation and promoting 
learning Activity 1.4. Facilitate 
effective monitoring and 
evaluation, and lessons 
learned consistent with 
an enhanced direct 
access approach 0.5 million 
USD ($)  
 1.355 0.5 million USD 
($) 
Output 2. Governments 
implement concrete adaptation measures 
using ecosystem-based 
approaches where 
appropriate Sub-component 2.1 Public 
sector adaptation in Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and 
Grenada   Activity 2.1. 
Competitively solicit priority interventions for 
adaptation in the public 
sector  
Activity 2.2. Undertake 
due diligence and 
studies on public sector 
adaptation interventions 
as needed  9 
million 
USD ($)  
 24.39 9 million USD 
($)


---
*Page 14*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 148 
	
	B
Activity 2.3. Implement 
pilot approaches for 
adaptation in public 
infrastructure  
Output 3. Community resilience to climate impacts is enhanced 
through tangible 
adaptation benefits Sub-component 3.1 Small grant 
facility for community adaptation in Antigua and 
Barbuda, Dominica and 
Grenada Activity 3.1. Select 
community adaptation projects through a 
competitive small 
grants facility 
Activity 3.2. 
Communities 
implement adaptation 
projects with tangible 
benefits 3 
million 
USD ($) 
 8.13 3 million USD 
($) 
Output 4. Privately 
owned physical assets 
of vulnerable 
populations are more 
resilient to climate 
variability and change 
through concessional 
microfinancing Sub-component 4.1 Revolving 
Loans for adaptation in private 
buildings in Antigua and 
Barbuda, Dominica and 
Grenada Activity 4.1. Launch the 
private sector Revolving 
Fund for adaptation in 
buildings 
Activity 4.2. Finance 
adaptation in buildings 
and manage 
repayments 6 million 
USD ($) 
 16.26 6 million USD 
($) 
Output 5. Project 
management  Sub-component 5.1 Project 
management  consistent with 
an EDA programmatic 
approach  
1.0 million 
USD ($) 
 2.71 1.0 million USD 
($) 
Total project financing  20 million 
USD ($)  54.2   
* Please expand the table if needed. 
 
 
A breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type (project staff a nd consultants, travel, goods, wor ks, services, e tc.) and disbu rsement schedule in 
project/programme confirmation (t erm sheet) is included in sect ion I, Annexes.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 148 
	
	B
 
   
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  ………20…… million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
………………… 
………… 
 
……20…… Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) (4)  years 
 
  
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please sp ecify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please not e that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance again st the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  ………20…… million USD 
($)  
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of 
Institution Tenor Pricing Seniority 
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  …………… 
…………… 
…………… 
…………… Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  ………………
………………
………………
………………(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: ……………………… 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitm ent in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable ) N/A 
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (not applicable)


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 148 
	
	C
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as  these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of t he project / programme.  
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existi ng national and sector policies and strategies. 
 
Climate change is a serious and substantial threat to the econo mies of Caribbean nations, the livelihoods of communities 
and the environments and infrastr ucture across the region. The Eastern Caribbean SIDS targeted in this project are highly 
vulnerable to climate change: t hey are small and remote (<120,0 00 people per country), have a limited natural resource 
base (<800 km2 total land mass), limited human capacity and technical capabil ity, and fragile ecosystems. The Eastern 
Caribbean is already experiencing the effects of climate variab ility and change through damage from severe weather 
systems and other extreme events,  as well as more subtle change s in temperature and rainfall patterns. Climate change 
effects are evident in the decline of some coastal tourism reso urces, but also in the socioeco nomic sectors which support 
tourism, such as agriculture, water resources, health and biodi versity7. These effects will be magnified under projected 
climate scenarios for the sub-region. 
 
Climate trends in the Eastern Caribbean include increased tempe rature, rainfall extremes (both drought and high intensity 
downpours) and more severe hurrica nes. The Hadley Centre PRECIS  (Providing Regional Climates for Impact Studies) 
regional model has 25-km resolution for the Caribbean region. P RECIS results for the Eastern Caribbean using SRES 
A2 (higher emissions) and B2 (lower emissions) scenarios are8: 
1. Between 1 and 4°C warmer by the end of the century – the rat e of increase in air temperature in the Caribbean 
during the 20th century exceeded the global average9 
2. Average annual rainfall is projected to decrease by the end of the century  
3. Rainfall variability is proje cted to increase, with more int ense downpours and ext ended drought conditions 
4. Hurricane intensity is likely  to increase; increases in hurr icane frequency a re uncertain  
 Higher Temperatures: Health impacts, Risks and Adaptations measures  Recent epidemics in Latin America and the Caribbean underscore the risks of higher temperatures to human health, as 
transmission rates of vector-borne viruses are likely to increa se under higher temperatures. Epidemiological research 
has linked dengue fever transmission to temperature, where warm er temperatures can shorten incubation periods from 
12 days at 30°C to only 7 days at 32 – 35°C
10. Chikungunya – a viral disease transmitted to humans by infected  
mosquitoes – spread rapidly across the Caribbean in 2013 and 20 14. The Zika virus has already spread to Antigua and 
Barbuda and other Caribbean countries11. In addition, the IPCC’s Chapter 29 on small islands found tha t in the Caribbean, 
the essential malaria transmi ssion conditions now exist based o n trends in the last 10 years12. 
 
                                                 
7 Simpson, M. C., Clarke, J. F., S cott, D. J., New, M., Karmalka r, A., Day, O. J., Taylor, M., Gossling, S., Wilson, M., Chadee , D., 
Stager, H., Waithe, R., Stewart, A ., Georges, J., Hutchinson, N ., Fields, N., Sim, R., Rutty, M., Matthews, L., and Charles, S . (2012). 
CARIBSAVE Climate Change Risk Atlas (CCCRA) - Antigua and Barbu da. DFID, AusAID and The CARIBSAVE Partnership, 
Barbados, West Indies. 
8 ECLAC, 2010. Regional Climate Modelling in the Caribbean: The PRECIS-Caribbean Initiative. Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean, April. 
9 IPCC, 2007. AR5 WGII Chapter 29 (SIDS) 
10 ECLAC, 2010. Regional Climate Modelling in the Caribbean: The PRECIS-Caribbean Initiative. Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean, April. 
11 Center for Disease Control and Prevention: Zika Travel Informa tion. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/zika-information Accesse d 
April 9, 2016. 
12 IPCC, 2007. AR5 WGII Chapter 29 (SIDS), p. 1625.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 148 
	
	C
 
Figure	2.	PRECIS	regional	climate	model	projected 	changes	in	the	annual	mean	surface	temperature 	for	2071‐2099	(compared 	to	1961‐1989)	
for	high	(top)	and	low	emissions 	(bottom) 	scenarios 	for	the	Caribbean 	(ECLAC	2010)	
 
Extreme Rainfall: The Dual Impacts of Drought and Flooding  Climate risk is not only associated with changes in mean values , but also (and perhaps more importantly) with changes 
in extremes. Due to the signific ant economic costs of flooding,  increasingly studies across the Caribbean are focusing on 
projected rainfall extremes
13. 
 Drought leads to water shortages and poor sanitation practices at home, which have health i mpacts. Recent changes in 
the epidemiology of leptospirosi s – a potentially fatal bacteri al disease that affects humans and animals – have been 
detected, likely linked to factors in ambient temperature and c hanges in precipitation, and water availability
14. Recent 
drought has caused the Government of Antigua and Barbuda to dec ide to increase desalination capacity to meet 100% 
of national needs. 
                                                 
13 ECLAC 2010: PRECIS regional climate model 
14 Russell 2009 in IPCC AR5 WGII Chapter 29 (SIDS), p. 1624.


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 148 
	
	C
 
Figure	3.	Extreme	drought	is	projected 	to	intensive	for	the	Eastern	Caribbean. 	Source:	Antigua	and	Barbuda’s 	Third	National	
Communications 	to	the	UNFCC	
The most recent drought in the Ca ribbean also impacted livestoc k populations and resultant value of meat production. 
As explained by in a weekly col umn on Veterinary issues, “at th e Government Pound at Paynter s says he is down to his 
last 100 bales of hay…Last year he made 15,000 bales of hay. Th is year he only managed 4,000.”15 The drought was 
not limited to Antigua and Barbuda; the Caribbean Disaster Emer gency Management Agency (CDEMA) had to place 
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Dominica, northern Guyana, St Ki tts and Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines, 
Trinidad and Tobago and northern Suriname on drought warning be cause the below-normal rainfall recorded during the 
previous dry and wet seasons, which resulted in a number of cou ntries experiencing water shortages in 2015.  CDEMA 
announced that 2015 was the driest  year on record for the Easte rn Caribbean and that the drought situation in 2015-16 
is similar to major drought of 2009-2010.16 
 
Table	1.	Impact	of	Drought	(2013‐4)	on	meat	production 	in	Antigua	and	Barbuda	(in	Lbs.)		
Year Pork Beef Lamb Goat TOTAL 
2010 121,165 325,500 42,665 14,245 503,575 
2011 164,689 336,000 25,515 7,140 533,344 
2012 146,737 343,350 23,275 3,045 516,407 
2013 90,977 267,750 12,478 5,040 376,245 
2014 81,554 203,350 13,720 3,885 302,509 
 
As a result of the predominance of coastal cities and the vulne rability to climate change and na tural disasters, households 
and in particular low-income residents are exposed to risks of climate variability. This situation has contributed to a 
housing deficit of quality and quantity across the Caribbean.17 In Grenada, for example, 28,000 houses or 89% of the 
country’s housing stock of 31,122 houses were damaged by Hurric ane Ivan. Near 10,000 houses, or 30%, were so 
damaged that they required complete replacement. Approximately 22,000 or 70% required repairs.  The cost of damage 
to the housing sector was estim ated at $EC 1.38 million. 
 Hurricanes: high costs for small islands 
 
Hurricanes are causing dispropor tionate economic losses in the economies of the Ea stern Caribbean.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 148 
	
	C
Rainfall ahead of the hurricane caused several landslides in Do minica as water levels acros s the island began to rise by 
the afternoon of September 18.18 Maria made landfall at 21:15 AST  that day (1:15 UTC, September  19) as a Category 5 
hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 160 mph (260 km/h). T hese winds, the most extreme to ever impact the 
island,19 battered the roof of practica lly every home—including the offi cial residence of Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit, 
who required rescue when his home began to flood.20 Downing all cellular, radio and internet services, Maria effec tively 
cut Dominica off from the outside world; the situation there re mained unclear for a couple of days after the hurricane's 
passage.21,22 Skerrit called the devastation "mind boggling" before going of fline, and indicated immediate priority was to 
rescue survivors rather than assess damage. Initial ham radio r eports from the capital of Roseau on September 19 
indicated "total devastation,"  with half the city flooded, cars  stranded, and stretches of res idential area "flattened".23 
 
 
Figure	4.	Roads	in	the	capital	of	Roseau	littered	with	structural 	debris,	damaged 	vegetation 	and	downed	power	lines.	
The infrastructure of Roseau was  left in ruins; practically eve ry power pole and line was downed, and the main road was 
reduced to fragments of flooded asphalt. The winds stripped the  public library of its roof panels and demolished all but 
one wall of the Baptist church.24 To the south of Roseau, river side flooding and numerous landsl ides impacted the town 
of Pointe Michel, destroying about  80% of its structures and ca using most of the deaths in the country.25,26 Outside the 
capital area, the worst of the destruction was concentrated aro und the east coast and rural areas, where collapsed roads 
and bridges isolated many villages. The port and fishing town o f Marigot, Saint Andrew Parish, was 80% damaged.27 
Settlements in Saint David Parish, such as Castle Bruce, Good H ope and Grand Fond, had been practically eradicated; 
many homes hun g off cliffs or decoupled from their foundations. In Rosalie, ru shing waters gushed over the villa ge's 
                                                 
15   Francis, Fiona (2015, July 27) Vet Watch “SOS: Goats and She ep”, The Daily Observer; pp 20-21, Vol. 22 No. 172. 
16 http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/news/CEDMA-places-several-Caribb ean-countries-on-drought-warnings   
17 McHardy, 2016. The state of housing in six Caribbean countries . Inter-American Development Bank 
18 Center of Hurricane Maria to move across Dominica tonight. Dom inica News Online. September 18, 2017. Retrieved September 
18, 2017. http://dominicanewsonline.com/news/homepage/news/center-of-hurr icane-maria-to-move-across-dominica-tonight/   
19 Yuliya Talmazan (September 22, 2017). "Hurricane Maria Damages  Dominica’s Main Hospital, Leaves ‘War Zone’ Conditions". 
Retrieved September 26, 2017. http://abcnews.go.com/International/merciless-hurricane-maria-p ummels-dominica-takes-aim-
puerto/story?id=49944250   
20 Paul, Pritha (19 September 2017) . "Hurricane Maria, Now Catego ry 5, Blows Away Roof Of Dominica PM's House". International 
Business Times. Retrieved 18 September 2017. http://www.ibtimes.com/hurricane- maria-now-category-5-blows-awa y-roof-
dominica-pms-house-2591299   
21 Austin Ramzy (19 September 201 7). "Hurricane Maria Does ‘Mind Boggling’ Damage to Dominica, Leader Says". New York 
Times. Retrieved 19 September 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/201 7/09/19/world/americas/hu rricane-maria-caribbean.html 
22 "Concerns over Dominica comm unication blackout". St. Lucia Tim es. 19 September 2017. Retrieved 19 September 2017. 
https://stluciatimes.com/2017/09/ 19/concerns-dominica-communica tion-blackout   
23 "Radio Amateur on St. Lucia rel ays reports of hurricane devast ation on Dominica". St. Lucia News Online. 19 September 2017. 
Retrieved 19 September 2017. https://www.stlucianewsonline.com/radio-amateur-on-st-lucia-rel ays-reports-of-hurricane-
devastation-on-dominica/   
24 Barbara Marcolini (September 22, 2017). "A Walk Through Domini ca, Hours After Hurricane Maria". Retrieved September 27, 
2017. https://www.nytimes.com/vi deo/world/americas/100000005450694/do minica-hurricane-maria.html   
25 Tropical Cyclone Maria: Damage Assessment in Pointe Michel, Sa int Luke Parish, Dominica. UNITAR’s Operational Satellite 
Applications Programme (Map). United Nations Institute for Teac hing and Learning. September 25, 2017. Retrieved September 27, 
2017. https://unitar.org/unosat/node/44/2681   
26 "Death toll rises in Dominica". Antigua Observer. September 26 , 2017. Retrieved September 27, 2017. 
https://antiguaobserver.com/ death-toll-rises-in-dominica/   
27 Tropical Cyclone Maria: Damage Assessment in Marigot, Saint An drew Parish, Dominica. UNITAR’s Operational Satellite 
Applications Programme (Map). United Nations Institute for Teac hing and Learning. September 26, 2017. Retrieved September 27, 
2017. https://unitar.org/unosat/node/44/2684


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 148 
	
	C
bridge and damaged facilities in its bay area. Throughout Saint  Patrick Parish, the extreme winds ripped through roofs 
and scorched the vegetation. Bu ildings in Grand Bay, the parish 's main settlement, experienced total roof failure or were 
otherwise structurally compromis ed. Many houses in La Plaine ca ved in or slid into rivers, and its single bridge was 
broken.28 
 
 
Figure	5.	Devastation 	caused	by	the	impacts	of	Hurricane 	Marian	on	the	island	of	Dominica, 	September 	2017.	Initial	national	damage	is	
estimated 	as	200%	of	GDP.	
Overall, the hurricane damaged the roofs of as much as 98% of t he island's buildings, including those serving as shelters; 
half of the houses had their frames destroyed. Its ferocious wi nds defoliated nearly all vegetat ion, splintering or uprooting 
thousands of trees and decimating  the island's lush rainforests .29 The agricultural sector, a vital source of income for the 
country, was completely wiped out: 100% of banana and tuber pla ntations was lost, as well as vast amounts of livestock 
and farm equipment. In Maria's wake, Dominica's population suff ered from an island-wide water shortage due to uprooted 
pipes. The Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEM A) estimates that the hurricane has caused 
"billions of dollars" worth of damage.30 As of October 1, there are 30 fatalities confirmed across the island,31 with more 
than 50 reported missing.32 
                                                 
28 Hurricane Maria: Situation R eport #1 (PDF) (Report). Caribbean  Disaster Emergency Management Agency. September 20, 2017. 
Retrieved September 27, 2017. https://cdn.prezly.com/3d/dea9209ed311e78b2bef8ae45cc8c5/CDEMA- Situation-Report-_1---
Hurricane-Maria-FINAL.pdf   
29 Claire Phipps (September 21, 2 017). "Hurricane Maria: Dominica  'in daze' after storm leaves island cut off from world". The 
Guardian. Associated Press & Reut ers. Retrieved September 27, 2 017. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/sep/21/dominica-
daze-hurricane-maria- island-caribbean-rescue   
30 "CDEMA - Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency". 
https://www.facebook.com /cdemacu1/videos/1968258416782805/   
31 Miller, Amy. "Woman tells how she  survived Hurricane Maria, ev acuated home". The Washington Times. The Associated Press. 
Retrieved 1 October 2017. https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2017/oct/1/woman-tells-how -she-survived-hurricane-maria-
evacu/   
32 "Hurricane Maria: the slow road to rebuilding stricken Dominic a – in pictures". ReliefWeb. The Guardian. September 30, 2017. 
Retrieved October 1, 2017. https://reliefweb.int/report/dom inica/hurricane-maria-slow-road -rebuilding-stricken-dominica-pictures


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 148 
	
	C
 
 
Aftermath of Hurricane Maria in Dominica  
Through the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insu rance Facility (CCRI F), Dominica received a pproximately US$19.2 million 
in emergency funds (less than 0.01% of estimated damages). On 2 9 September, UN and partners launched a Flash 
Appeal for $31.1 million to support relief and early recovery e fforts in Dominica until the end of 2017. The UN has allocated 
US$3 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) to  address the urgent needs of Dominica’s people. 
The World Bank is working towards providing a financial package  of about $100 million for Dominica, including accessing 
the IDA crisis response window. To date, Dominica has borrowed USD 70 million from the World Bank, of which 
approximately 70% (USD 50 million)  has been for climate resilie nce and disaster recovery
33.  
 
Climate projections for hurricanes  
 Historical observations of hurri cane activity in the Atlantic b asin from 1850 – 2014 indicate increasing trends of hurricane 
activity (see figure above). Clim ate models project that maximu m wind speed of the strongest hurricanes is likely to 
increase between 5% (low scenario) and 15% (high scenario), whi ch would increase loss of life and other economic 
losses
34. Hydro-meteorological hazards pose perhaps the greatest risk t o Antigua and Barbuda, and historic disaster 
records demonstrate that hurricanes and tropical storms are the  highest-cost hazards in terms of loss of life and economic 
losses. 
 
                                                 
33 World Bank Aggregate Reports. Accessed October 2017 http://go.worldbank.org/9SBBWN1IG0   
34 CARIBSAVE, 2015. National Vulnerability Impact Analysis for An tigua and Barbuda Case study 1: Dominica’s developm ent has been set back decades due to Hurricane Maria 
 
For Dominica, earlier estimates indicate that the total damage could reach in excess o f 200 percent of GDP or 
approximately US$1.3 billion. Domin ica’s GDP in 2016 is USD 525  million.  Dominica is amo ng the lowest ranking 
in the Caribbean region with a GDP per capita of US $6,460. (So urce: World Bank) 
 
The most catastrophic impacts may have been in countries and co mmunities with very low insurance coverage, 
which is why Maria’s insured losses across the Caribbean will b e significantly lower than overall economic damages 
of between US$30 and $60 billion.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 148 
	
	C
 
Figure	6.	Bars	depict	number	of	named	systems	(yellow),	hurricanes 	(red),	and	category	3	or	greater	(purple)	in	the	Atlantic	basin	from	1850	
–	2014	(source:	NOAA	National	Hurricane 	Center	http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/climo/) 	
Sea Level Rise and Projected Coastal Impacts 
 Many of the key critical facilities within the OECS are located  along the coast. This also includes significant human 
settlement. According to the Quantification and Magnitude of Lo sses and Damages Resulting from the Impacts of Climate 
Change: Modelling the Transformati onal Impacts and Costs of Sea  Level Rise in the Caribbean (Full Report) produced 
by Caribsave and the United Nat ions Development Programme (UNDP ) in 2010, the impacts of 1m SLR on the CARICOM 
nations would displace an estimated 110,000 people in the CARIC OM nations. Nations with substantive populations 
affected by a 1m SLR include S t. Kitts and Nevis (2%) and Antig ua and Barbuda (3%)
35. 
 
Tourism and agriculture revealed key vulnerabilities for some n ations. Considering its very clo se proximity to the coast, it 
is not surprising that tourism was by far the most vulnerable m ajor economic sector. This is a key finding, as tourism is a 
major part of the economies of Caribbean nations and has been o verlooked in most previous assessments of the impacts 
of SLR on national economies. The World Travel and Tourism Coun cil (WTTC) estimates that tourism represents 15% of 
GDP and 13% of employment (approximately 2 million jobs) in the  Caribbean, and the importance of tourism for individual 
island economies can be much higher (GDP in 2002): Antigua and Barbuda 72%, St. Lucia 51%, The Bahamas 46%, 
Barbados 37%, St. Vincent and t he Grenadines 29%, Jamaica 27%, St. Kitts and Nevis 25%, B elize and Grenada 23%, 
Dominica 22%. Of the 673 major resorts in the CARICOM countries  inventoried for the analysis, 149 are at risk to 1m 
SLR. Beaches are critical asse ts for tourism in the Caribbean a nd a much greater proportion would be lost to inundation 
and accelerated erosion well befor e resort infrastructure was d amaged. 
                                                 
35 Simpson, et al., 2010. Quantification and Magnitude of Losses and Damages Resulting from the Impacts of Climate Change: 
Modelling the Transformational I mpacts and Costs of Sea Level R ise in the Caribbean, United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP), Barbados, West Indies.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 148 
	
	C
Major resort properties were at significant risk to 1m SLR in v arious countries, notably, Be lize (73%), St. Kitts and Nevis 
(64%), Haiti (46%), Bahamas (36% ) and Trinidad & Tobago (33%). Such impacts would transfor m coastal tourism in the 
region, with implications for property values, insurance costs,  destination competitiveness, marketing and wider issues of 
local employment and economic 
well-being for thousands of 
employees. In some cases, impacts 
to particularly high-profile tourism 
properties would have a 
disproportionately large economic 
impact. 
 
Also of importance to tourism, but 
a l s o  t h e  w i d e r  e c o n o m y  i n  e a c h  
nation, is the vulnerability of key 
transportation infrastructure. SLR of 
1m inundated a total of 21 out of 64 
airports within CARICOM. The 
vulnerability of airports was highest 
in Grenada, where the runway area 
will become completely inundated. 
More than 550km of roads were 
projected to be inundated by 1m 
SLR in CARICOM nations. The road 
networks were at greatest risk in The 
Bahamas (14%), Dominica (14%) 
and Guyana (12%). Seaports would al so be affected, with the sur rounding port lands of 35 out of 44 ports in CARICOM 
inundated by 1m SLR unless prot ected by coastal structures.36 
  Strategic approach of the Enhanced Direct Access project and the role of the OECS 
 
The negative impacts of climate change have resulted in scarce financing normally allocated to achieve economic growth, 
poverty reduction and sustainable development agendas are alloc ated to fight drought, extreme rainfall, more frequent 
hurricanes and explosion of vecto rs and pests in the Pilot stat es.  Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada are 
responding to the multi-faceted challenges posed by climate cha nge. The islands have all ratified the Paris Agreement, 
submitted their respective Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), and have been undertaking national policy and 
planning.
37 Furthermore, the islands are part of the economic union of the  Organization of Eastern Caribbean States 
(OECS), and have signed the St. Geor ge’s Declaration which incl udes an action plan for climate change. 
 
Working together as part of this project proposal, the OECS and  the selection of the three pilot countries is an optimal 
grouping to enhance climate finance at a scaled-up sub-regional  level given the following: 
 Shared geographical characteristics that have led to common cl imate vulnerabilities ac ross the island states, 
where experience and ex pertise in one island can be more readil y applied in other island states 
 Small populations with limited governance and technical capaci ty, where sub-regional scaling of functions such 
as fiduciary and oversight can be more cost effectively managed  that at the individual nation level with populations 
of ~100,000 
 The OECS has a strong legal gov ernance arrangement under the R evised Treaty of Basseterre, which re-
enforces the Organisation of Eas tern Caribbean States Economic Union.	This Union convenes regional meetings 
of the Ministers of the Environm ent and at the Head of State lev els on issues confrontin g the re gion.  
                                                 
36 Simpson, et al., 2010. Quantification and Magnitude of Losses and Damages Resulting from the Impacts of Climate Change: 
Modelling the Transformational I mpacts and Costs of Sea Level R ise in the Caribbean, United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP), Barbados, West Indies. 
37 Dominica developed its Low Carbon Climate Resilient Developmen t Strategy in 2012 which was the first Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Action (NAMA) regist ered amongst CARICOM states. 
Table	2.	Summary 	of	global	sea	level	rise	projections 	for	the	21st	Century


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 148 
	
	C
 The OECS sub-regional has a long history of regional approache s.  This will be first time that this approach will 
include the enhancing of the capacities of the countries within  the sub-region to achieve direct access to 
international donors. 
 
The OECS Commission has a good track record of implementing pro jects in the OECS and will play a key role in the 
project through the role of indep endent monitoring and evaluati on of the impact of the projec ts within each of the pilot 
countries.   
 Baselines During the proposal development phase, each of the countries pr epared their own baseline assessments.  The results 
are included in the Appendices, and the baseline results are pr esented below. In general, several key adaptation policies 
and planning are in place in each island state. For example, ea ch SIDS has communicated their priorities to the UNFCCC 
through their respective National Communications and the Nation ally Determined Contributions. Grenada has produced 
its National Adaptation Plan (NAP), and Antigua and Barbuda and  Dominica are currently submitting NAP Readiness 
proposals to the GCF. However, capacity to access financing to implement adaptation is a barrier in each of the pilot 
countries, and in particular direct access financing for vulner able populations. This is a political and reputational risk sin ce 
the pilot SIDS have invested in years of consultation and polic ies with a view to “unlocking” adaptation financing, which 
has not yet been forthcoming. The EDA proposal will build on th e baselines outlined below to efficiently devolve decision-
making and promote country ownership of adaptation. 
 Baseline for Antigua and Barbuda 
 The Government of Antigua and Barbuda (GOAB) undertook national  planning and consultations to develop the Medium-
Term Development Strategy in 2015 . This strategy was designed to contribute to the Sustainable D evelopment Goals 
(SDGs) and includes climate change principles. One of the four dimensions in the Medium-Term Development Strategy 
for 2020 includes as a core programme of action, “Disaster Risk  Management and Climate Change Resilience,” which 
strives to minimize the economic toll that disasters take on th e economy, by reducing adverse direct and indirect impacts, 
facilitating more efficient recovery and generally reducing the  diversion of resour ces that would have otherwise advanced 
economic development. The EDA will reduce economic  losses due t o climate extremes in the building sector. 
 
In 2002, a Policy Framework for Integrated Adaptation Planning and Managem ent in Antigua and Barbuda  was 
developed, however not adopted as a policy although the framewo rk guided subsequent approaches. Several 
vulnerability and adaptation assessments were conducted between  2014 and 2016:  National Adaptation Plan and 
Strategy for the Water Sector was developed in 2014; a National Vulnerability Anal ysis for Antigua and Barbuda  
was finalized by CARIBSAVE in 2015; and in 2016, Antigua and Ba rbuda communicated its Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC) goals to the UNFCCC, which included specific adaptation targets . Antigua and Barbuda has 
submitted its application to the GCF for Readiness support to d evelop a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) . These policies 
and studies will inform the selection of transparent criteria t o evaluate EDA activities, and EDA activities will provide case  
studies and lessons learned to inform policies under developmen t, such as the NAP. 
 Comprehensive legislation was passed by Parliament in 2015 with  the Environmental Protection and Management 
Act (EPMA, 2015), which use the OECS Model Legislation crafted per  the St. George’s Declaration for Environmental 
Sustainability. The EPMA, 2015 legally established the Sustainable Island Resource Financing Fund (SIRF Fund), 
which is a funding mechanism to implement the Act that sits wit h the Department of Environment. The goal of the SIRF 
Fund is to catalyze both domestic and international resources f or environmental management, including climate change. 
The SIRF Fund is integral to the EDA project as it is a Special  Fund under the Finance and Administration Act, and the 
SIRF Fund is the mechanism through which the Department of Envi ronment can manage on-granting and on-lending 
within the OECS economic union. 
 Baseline for Dominica 
 The Climate Change, Environment and Natural Resource Management Bil l 2016  was developed to establish the 
enabling framework to facilitate the transition to low-carbon c limate resilient development as provided in Dominica’s Low 
Carbon Climate Resilient Strate
gy (2012 ). Mention is made of “fosterin g improved collaboration in the area of climate


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 148 
	
	C
change adaptation and disaster risk management”.  It is stipula ted that the National Climate Change Committee will “co-
ordinate the periodic review and revision of Dominica’s Low Car bon Climate Resilient Strategy (2012) and Climate 
Change Adaptation Policy (2002) and monitor the implementation of the directives of the policy as well as coordinate the 
evaluation and deployment of appropriate technologies in suppor t of climate change adaptation and mitigation options”. 
The Bill also seeks to “establis h the policy, legal and institu tional framework to facilitate the integration of climate chang e 
adaptation and mitigation into t he environmental impact assessm ent process”. The EDA proje ct will build the capacity of 
the National Climate Change Committee, the Department of Climat e Change, Environment and Development and  
support the operationalization of the Climate Change Trust Fund  that will be legislated under the 2016 Bill. 
 In 2015, the National Land Use Policy  was approved by Cabinet. The National Land Use Policy “sets th e foundation for 
all land use decisions and describes how best to manage develop ment to improve quality of life for Dominicans, through 
economic and social developmen t, protecting human health and sa fety, and conserving the natural environment”.  
 In 2012, the Cabinet-approved Low-Carbon Climate Resilient Development Strategy  and compendium Strategic 
Programme for Climate Resilience (SPCR) were developed through an extensive consultative process that was 
supported under the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR)  funded under the Climate Investment Funds (CIF). The 
Strategy provides an overview of the country circumstances, the  development context and identifies climate change 
vulnerabilities in key sectors, for specifically vulnerable gro ups, for the private sector, im portant eco-systems and natural 
resources. The Disas ter Vulnerability Reduc tion Project is as a  direct result of the SPCR.  
 Currently the Third National Communication is in progress. Thro ugh this, the 2002 National Climate Change Adaptation 
Policy will be revised into a Climate Change Policy and Action Plan. T his will guide the development of Dominica's 
National Adaptation Plan (NAP)  and will include mitigation and cross-cutting issues. The abov e policies and studies will 
inform the selection of transparent criteria to evaluate EDA ac tivities, and EDA activities will provide case studies and 
lessons learned to inform policies under development. 
 Baseline for Grenada 
 The Government of Grenada signed on to the Paris Climate Change Agreement  in September of 2015 and ratified the 
agreement in April of 2016. The National Climate Change Policy , together with the National Adaption Plan (NAP) and 
the National Determined Contribution (NDC), serves to link vari ous efforts such as the National Sustainable 
Development Plan 2030 , the National Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy , and the National Environment 
Management Strategy and Action Plan,  amongst others, to: 1) provide a framework for climate mainstr eaming, 2) 
establish implementation and re source mobilizati on mechanisms, and 3) prioritize activities from already existing sectoral 
and local plans with climate ch ange adaptation aspects. It furt her strives to improve availabilit y of sector-specific climate 
vulnerability data. 
 The draft National Climate Change A daptation Plan (NAP) is expected to be submitted  to Cabinet for a pproval during 
the first half of 2018.  It will be one of Grenada’s main mecha nisms for accessing external climate finance and play a 
crucial role as a vehicle for strategic investments in the coun try’s climate-res ilient development. Furthermore, the NAP 
will provide the framework for fu rther mainstreaming of climate  change considerations into planning and budgetary 
processes to “climate-proof” public and private investments, wh ich will ensure efficient spending of scarce financial 
resources. The NAP will be the ov erall governance structure to coordinate and guide external financing and donor 
contributions on climate change. The National Climate Change Co mmittee (NCCC) which is a Cabinet appointed 
committee to provide policy direction on climate change issues will be the forum to validate and access international 
contributions that link to climate adaptation. The EDA project will build the capacity of the National Climate Change 
Committee, and support the operat ionalization of Grenada’s Sust ainable Development Trust Fund. 
 In the National Determined Contribution (NDC) , Grenada commits to reducing its Greenhouse gas emissions by 3 0% 
below 2010 levels by 2025, with an indicative reduction of 40% of 2010 by 2030.  The NDC also addresses adaptation 
actions to build resilience to  climate change.  Grenada has real ized the need to take an integrated approach to adaptation 
by linking local activities with national policies and sector s pecific experiences. Mainstream ing climate change adaptation 
activities into national development planning is a major focus and several actions have been identified to support 
resilience building at all levels. The above policies and studi es will inform the selection of tr ansparent criteria to evaluat e 
EDA activities, and EDA activiti es will provide case studies an d lessons learned to inform policies under development


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 148 
	
	C
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scen ario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, ke y barriers, cha llenges and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/pro gramme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario. 
 The objective of this project is to strengthen institutional ca pacities to directly access clim ate finance in order to increas e 
the resilience of 5% of the population in the Eastern Caribbean  pilot countries to climat e variability and change, through 
adaptation in infrastructure, strengthened buildings, and enhan ced ecosystem services. The project outcome will enhance 
country ownership of climate adaptation through devolving decis ion-making in the Government, private and NGO sectors 
to allow for greater involvement  of those affected by climate c hange and greater impact and scale of adaptation actions 
in the pilot countries. 
 
This project is designed to address barriers to climate action in the country context of the pilot SIDS. Key barriers identifi ed 
in the baseline studies were a lack of institutional capacity f or directly accessing international climate change financing in  
the relevant agencies, and a lack of predictable financing dire ctly available to beneficiaries to support and complement 
urgent actions to adapt to climate change. Key barriers are ana lyzed below. 
 Key barrier 1: Implementing adap tation that ‘leaves no one behi nd’ 
 Disasters tend to worsen the already present inequalities in th eir paths
38. The CARIBSAVE partnership conducted 
comprehensive climate vulnerability assessments in 2012 and sur vey respondents revealed a low level of financial 
security in the event of job loss or a natural disaster; househ olds that are unable to sustain  themselves after one month, 
and are unable to source any external help, are at significantl y greater risk. Other events of concern include drought, 
flooding and storm surge, which mai nly affect properties, infra structure and the natural environment. Few households 
(and almost all female headed households) have insurance. The s urvey was conducted in Antigua and Barbuda with 
lessons for the sub-region39. 
 Low-income households tend to suffer disproportionately because  they sacrifice adaptation and disaster resilience 
activities for the sake of using money for other urgent priorit ies and risk last minute preparations when they are certain 
that, for example, a hurricane system will impact the country. Fisher folk are affected when there is infrastructural damage 
or loss of boats, but once the storm has passed they can usuall y return to work with little impact. Particularly vulnerable 
livelihood groups include low to middle level hotel and restaur ant employees, taxi operators, farmers and roadside and 
beach vendors. Those employed by government or in other private  sector establishments do not usually suffer from 
income loss. Tourism is often impacted by port and airport clos ures for a few days and even after schedules are restored, 
there can be a noticeable decline of long stay passengers, a de cline in the duration of their stay and/or a decline in tourist  
expenditure immediately following  the passage of a hurricane, w ith significant consequences for the tourism sector and 
the wider economy40. 
 Two communities in the EDA participating states face unique bar riers to adaptation and resilience: the indigenous 
Kalinago (Carib) people of Dominica, and the island of Barbuda.  In both cases, individuals do not own the land but rather 
the land is a communal asset that is governed by an appointed C ouncil. This significantly lim its the ability of individuals 
to access credit at local banks  since they do not possess requi red collateral i.e. certificate of titles.  
 
The Carib Territory is comprised of 3,782 acres of land stretch ing over 9 miles on the East, A tlantic coast of Dominica in 
the Parish of St. David. The Territor y is divided into 8 hamlets. As per the 2011 Preliminar y Census, the population of the 
                                                 
38 Misra, 2017. The Poor in Irma's Path. Citylab. https://www.cit ylab.com/equity/2017/09/the-poor-in-irmas-
path/539412/?utm_source=nl__link 4_091217&silverid=MzEwMTkwMTQwN jE0S0 Accessed 12 September 2017 
39 Simpson, M. et al, 2012. CARIBSAVE Climate Change Risk Atlas ( CCCRA) - Antigua and Barbuda. DFID, AusAID and The 
CARIBSAVE Partnership, Barbados, West Indies. 
40 Simpson, M. et al, 2012. CARIBSAVE Climate Change Risk Atlas ( CCCRA) - Antigua and Barbuda. DFID, AusAID and The 
CARIBSAVE Partnership, Barbados, West Indies.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 148 
	
	C
Carib Territory recorded 2,145 - 1,212 (56.5%) males and 933 (4 3.5%) females41. Unemployment in the Carib Territory 
is estimated to be high, particu larly among the youth. Decline in the agricultural sector co upled with delayed realization 
of strong and sustained growth in the tourism sector nationally  continue to negatively impact employment in the Carib 
Territory. The Carib Territory , which is located on the exposed  windward side of Dominica, was devastated by Hurricane 
Maria in September 2017.   
 The island of Barbuda has a population of about 2,000 people ac ross about 15,000 acres of land, with the highest 
elevation on the island at 38 m above sea level. A 1977 study h ad already identified that the way of life for Barbudans, 
which at the time was reliant on cattle cultivation under commu nal land tenure, was already at risk due to diminishing 
rainfall
42. As the island’s economy transitioned to tourism, with hotels built at low elevation on beaches, climate change 
continues to pose a threat to the community, as demonstrated by  the devastated caused by Hurricane Irma. Tourism is 
often impacted by port and airport closures for a few days and even after schedules are restored, there can be a noticeable 
decline of long stay passengers, a  decline in the duration of t heir stay and/or a decline in tourist expenditure immediately 
following the passage of a hurri cane, with significant conseque nces for the tourism sector and the wider economy. The 
EDA project will help to realize the goal of adaptation that ‘l eaves no one behind’ by providing unsecured concessional 
loans to the Kalinago people and to Barbudans. 
 
Key barrier 2: Ensuring adequate and predictable supply of fina nce for adaptation and resilience in MSMEs 
(including homeowners) and the public sector 
 The lack of predictability and timeliness in the delivery of cl imate finance to complement national development and 
infrastructure projects is a key  barrier to achieving transform ational adaptation outcomes. 
 
Multilateral climate funds increasingly 
require co-financing and joint investment 
structures, where re cipient countries 
contribute to the project, e.g. to finance 
the development cost equivalent of the 
project, and the multilateral funds finance the incremental co sts of adaptation. 
However, the national budget cycle of 
recipient countries generally operates on 
a yearly cycle. In the case of the OECS 
countries participating in this EDA pilot, national budget applications are 
submitted to the Ministry of Finance 
annually by September, and the budget debate takes place in Parliament in 
January of the following year; once 
approved, funds must be spent over that calendar year. In contrast, climate 
finance received through multilateral 
processes, from inception to first disbursement, is a multi-year and highly 
unpredictable process, ranging between 
2 and 8 years from time of application to first disbursement
43. When multilateral 
climate financin g mandates that national 
                                                 
41 World Bank, 2014. Social assessment for indigenous peoples’ plan, Carib territory . Dominica. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/443411468245971907/So cial-assessment-for-indigenous- peoples-plan-Carib-territory 
Accessed 11 September 2017 
42 Berlant-Schiller, R., 1977. The Social and Economic Role of Ca ttle in Barbuda. Geographical Review , Vol. 67, No. 3 (Jul.), pp. 
299-309 
43 Amerasinghe, N. et al, 2017. The Future of the Funds: Explorin g the Architecture of Multilateral Climate Finance. World 
Resources Institute (WRI). http://www.wri.org/publication/futur e-of-the-funds Accessed 13 September 2017 
Figure	7.	The	disconnect 	between	annual	national	budgetary 	cycles	and	multi‐year	
multilateral 	climate	financing 	cycles	is	a	key	barrier	to	achieving 	transformational 	
adaptation 	outcomes. 		
Source: Compiled by author, data from WRI, 2017. The Future of the Funds Max
Year 1Y e a r  2Y e a r 3Y e a r  4Y e a r  5Accreditation/Investment  Plan 
EndorsementMinMax MinProject  
ApprovalMax MinFirst 
Disbursement
Year 1Y e a r  2Y e a r 3Y e a r  4Y e a r  5National  
budget  cycleNational  
budget  cycleNational  
budget  cycleNational  
budget  cycleNational  
budget  cycleComparison  of Multilateral  v. National budgeting  cyclesMultilateral  
project  cycleNational  
project  cycle
# years


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 148 
	
	C
project cycles must follow inte rnational timelines, this can re sult in longer project cycles for national projects; 
consequential delays can preven t critical interventions and tri gger environmental and social consequences. 
 The disconnect between annual national budgetary cycles and mul ti-year multilateral climate financing cycles is a key 
barrier to achieving transformat ional adaptation outcomes (Figu re above). The private sector generally operates on an 
even shorter timescale, from a fe w weeks to several months.  
 A study conducted by the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) on climate finance flows to the small islands of the 
Eastern Caribbean, specifically the ten member states of the Or ganisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), identified 
found that the amounts of climate finance commitment to OECS me mbers that have actually been disbursed is very low, 
particularly for Dominica, St Lucia, Antigua and Barbuda, and S t. Vincent and the Grenadines. For example, Dominica 
has only received via disbursement 10% of the climate funds com mitted over the period 2010 – 2015, and Antigua and 
Barbuda has only received 1% of committed amounts of climate fu nds44.  
 
Enhanced direct access is an opportunity to pilot approaches th at will overcome a key barrier to achieving 
transformational adaptat ion outcomes, namely, the lack of predi ctability and timeliness in the delivery of climate finance. 
This EDA project will pilot a stra tegy for overcoming this barr ier by devolving decision making at the country and 
local/sectoral level, thereby a llowing greater involvement and input from impacted stakeholders,  and importantly providing 
predictability as to when financing will be disbursed to direct  beneficiaries in order to leverage complementary sources of 
funding in both the public and pr ivate sector. Unlike the tradi tional direct access modality, t here will be no submission of 
individual projects or programmes to the Fund because decision- making for the funding of specific pilot activities will be 
devolved to the country level.45 This devolved approach has the potential to significantly enha nce predictability and impact 
potential of climate actio ns at the local level.   
 
The private sector in the contex t of this EDA project in the Ea stern Caribbean SIDS is defined as home and small 
businesses who own their buildi ng. The Market demand analysis f or concessional loans in section B.1. estimated the 
demand for Revolving Fund loans in the three EDA countries at U SD 213 million for this segment of the private sector. 
Furthermore, the building sector in the Eastern Caribbean frequ ently suffers disproportionate losses as a result of 
hurricanes (Table 1).  
 Providing long-term public finance for on-lending can adjust fo r financial markets that fail to provide sufficient volumes of 
affordable, long-term debt for critical adaptation actions
46. The establishment of national Funds is an international best 
practice47. To date, more than 30 countries are in the process of establi shing or putting into operation national funding 
entities dedicated to climate finance – or national climate fun ds. Such institutions play an increasingly important role in 
channeling climate finance and acting as a link between interna tional climate finance flows  and domestic policies and 
priorities. They can fulfill a number of other roles in which t hey leverage private sector invo lvement in climate activities o r 
increase domestic coordination of financial flows for climate a nd environment. These new funds are owned by recipient 
countries who determine how prio rities are set and how funds ar e disbursed and accounted for48.   
 
Antigua and Barbuda in 2015 legally  established the Sustainable  Island Resource Framework Fund (SIRF Fund), which 
was operationalized in 2017 with the first invitation for appli cations to the Revolving Fund for home/business owners. 
However, there is currently no r egional financial mechanism to fulfill the current dearth of finan cing for the private sector 
and vulnerable communities, and linking international climate f inance flows and OECS policies and priorities. The EDA 
project provides a framework for scaling-up the SIRF Fund from a domestic fund to a sub-regional fund for the OECS. 
This process would require subsequent decisions by the OECS Cou ncil of Ministers and OECS Parliament. The results 
of the EDA will be documented and presented to these bodies to inform decision-making in Year 2 or 3 of project 
implementation, once the results of the mid-term independent ev aluation are available. 
                                                 
44 SEI, 2017. Climate finance to the Small Island States of the E astern Caribbean. 
45 GCF EDA Request for Proposals: http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/318991/2016_EDA_RF P.pdf/406a5b0b-c4f9-
4784-813a-ef90a966f3c6  Accessed 4 September 2017 
46 UN Environment, 2016. Demystifying adaptation finance for the private sector. UNEP Finance Initiative.  
47 GIZ, 2012. It’s not just the money: institutional strengthening of nati onal climate funds. Lessons learned from GIZ’s work on the 
ground.  GIZ Discussion Paper. 
48 GIZ, 2012. It’s not just the money: institutional strengthening of nati onal climate funds. Lessons learned from GIZ’s work on the 
ground.  GIZ Discussion Paper.


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 148 
	
	C
 
In addition to scaling up the SIRF Fund on a sub-regional basis , the EDA project will build institutional capacity in climate 
finance management at the national scale in Dominica and Grenad a. Dominica’s NDC identified the following priorities: 
“a sustainable financing mechanism to ensure timely and direct access to international climate change financing to 
implement priority climate change risks management measures by the private sector and vulnerable communities, legal 
establishment of the Department of Climate Change, Environment and Development, and the legal establishment of 
Climate Change Trust Fund.” The Grenada Sustainable Development  Trust Fund was set up with technical assistance 
from GIZ to increase adaptive capacity of communities through t he implementation of concrete community-based 
adaptation activities and incentives in the islands of Grenada,  Carriacou and Petit Martinique. The EDA will work in the 
context of these existing baselines to:  
 Scale up the Revolving Fund to a sub-regional mechanism (Year 2 or 3, when the results of the mid-term 
evaluation will be presented to t he OECS Council of Ministers a nd OECS Parliament) 
 Support legislation, establishm ent and operationalization of t he Trust Fund in Dominica (this will be financed by 
Dominica’s National Adaptation Planning project, which was subm itted to the GCF in October 2017 with the 
Department of Environment in Antigua and Barbuda serving as Del ivery Partner) 
 Support the Grenada Sustainable Development Trust Fund’s innov ative financing for adaptation (this is being 
done under a GIZ-supported project; the EDA project will build the Trust Fund’s experience using its policies and 
procedures). 
 
Key barrier 3: Lack of capacity at the national and local level  to sustain long-term adaptation impact 
 Project implementation in the Eastern Caribbean tends to establ ish project-specific units and  project-specific oversight 
committees. This arrangement is taxing on human resources in sm all island developing states, where Government 
agency units can consist of just 3-4 staff. In addition, creati ng parallel implementation and oversight processes duplicates 
existing arrangements, while in so me cases projects can recruit  public servants and can thus r esult in staff turnover and 
reduced implementation capacity. At the end of a project, under  this arrangement, personnel are disbanded and the 
institutional capacity is lost. Project-specific staffing struc tures also expose the project to significant delays in 
implementation. One project implemented in the Eastern Caribbea n over the period of 2010 – 2016 documented the 
challenges and kn ock-on effects that pro ject unit turnover has in small islands: 
 
The RRACC Project was designed as a 5-year projec t beginning in October 2010. The grant agreement was 
signed in January 2011, and project staff was recruited in late 2011/early 2012. For all practical purposes, the project therefore effectively commenced in early 2012. In addition, there was significant staff turnover. The first 
Project Coordinator who was recruited in November 2011 resigned in 2014. Prior to her resignation, the Coastal 
Zone Management Specialist who was recruited in January 2012 resigned from the Project in May 2013; this 
post has remained vacant since then. The second Project C oordinator was hired 9 months after the departure of 
the first Coordinator. During that time, the Project’s Co mmunications Specialist served as the Officer in Charge 
for the Project. A Programme Officer was hired in May 2014 and left when her contract expired in May 2016; the 
second Project Coordinator was hired in February 2015; and the Water Resources Specialist who was recruited 
in January 2012 left in September 2015 when his contract expired. The Communications Specialist also left in September 2015 when her contract expired
49. 
 Another variable of project implementation in SIDS is the relat ively large public sector as a percentage of the total 
workforce. For example, in Antigua and Barbuda, the public-sect or accounts for approximately 30% of the total workforce, 
and many national experts in sectors such as water, agriculture , transportation and planning are civil servants. Projects 
typically are structured to tap into this expertise through con sultations and workshops; h owever, because project 
management units and oversight committees often operate with th eir own timelines and agendas, this approach of 
consultations and workshops results in overburdening of technic ians (consultation fatigue) and can result in loss of 
productivity in core work programmes. Effectively using nationa l expertise in SIDS is critical for impact because often 
these individuals and agencies have respon sibility to maintain interventions beyond the life of the project. These are also 
the most important stakeholders when it comes to mainstreaming adaptation into policy and planning, and to scaling up 
adaptation.  
                                                 
49 Chase, V. et al., 2016. End of P roject Monitoring and Evaluati on: Reducing the Risks to Human and Natural Assets Resulting 
from Climate Change (RRACC) Project. Published by the OECS Comm ission with support from USAID.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 148 
	
	C
 
The project seeks to overcome t he challenge of lack of institut ional capacity by structuring project implementation to use 
existing institutions and decision -making processes in each of the pilot countries. The core structure of the Project 
Management Unit (PMU) consists of an overall Project Manager, w ith support from a PMU Assistant and PMU Task 
Manager. The EDA project team will consist of a Project Coordin ator, Deputy Project Coordinator, Technical Coordinator, 
and Project Consultants across t he three participating countrie s. The positions within the PM U are filled by the following 
staffing arrangements:  
 Full time Project Coordinators, which may be consultants hired  to work on one or more projects 
 Part-time Coordinator with spec ialized expertise hired to work  on specific component(s)  
 Part-time Project or Technical Coordinator seconded from withi n the Government civil service and paid a stipend 
to work on the project 
 Part-time Project or Technical Coordinator seconded from withi n the Government civil se rvice without additional 
pay, where the project implement ation is part of their direct j ob responsibilities 
 Technical Coordinator; fu ll time and/or part-time 
 Part-time and full-time Projec t Consultants hired for a variet y of reasons, for example fo r specific deliverables 
 Interns and students seek ing hands-on experience 
 The project will build institutional and project management cap acity of the key institutions in the recipient countries to 
implement the project efficiently and with maximum impact. 7.5%  of the project budget is dedicated to achieving this: 
under Output 1 there is USD 500k for 1.1 Capacity building for devolved decision-making, stakeholder engagement for 
transparency, and sustainable procurement , and USD 1 M for 1.2 Project management . Activities under this component 
include: Appoint implementation, oversight and transparency mec hanisms with adequate capaci ty; Support accreditation 
of direct access entities in pilot countries, including conduct ing capacity self-assessments to build ownership over 
capacity-building activities, and; Facilitate effective project  management, monitoring and evaluation, and lessons learned 
consistent with an enhanced direct access approach. The EDA pro ject will demonstrate a peer-t o-peer learning approach.
 The Ministries with responsibility for Environment will serve a s the Executing Entities in the respective pilot countries. 
Each country will have its own Project Management Unit within t he sister Environment agencies supporting the activities 
of the Executing Entities in the respective countries. The Proj ect Management Committee
50 (PMC) oversees the 
transparent allocation of human resources within the PMU to pro jects. This is an international best practice to achieving 
programmatic approaches that has been demonstrated in Antigua a nd Barbuda and will be introduced to Dominica and 
Grenada via the proposed EDA project. The OECS Commission Monit oring and Evaluation Unit will for the first time 
provide external M&E services to a project to evaluate project results. In the context of  the EDA this will promote 
accountability and maximize lear ning opportunities for the sub- region.  
 The PMU is designed to achieve e fficiency and coordination in t he management of funding from  a variety of donors, the 
governments and even NGOs. The PMU also ensures that there is e ffective coordination and e fficiency when there are 
project activities that are similar and inter-dependent on each  other for execution. The EDA countries are small island 
developing states where access to well-trained technical capaci ty is a key risk. The PMU is a mitigation measure to 
minimize this risk. 
 The project management arrangement s are also consistent with an d necessary for an enhanced direct access approach, 
which empowers local stakeholders and will position the benefic iary islands to access and program scaled-up resources 
from a variety of sources in ord er to meet the sub-region’s amb itious climate change goals. 
 Development Partner Initiativ es relevant to the EDA Project 
 A study conducted by the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) on climate finance flows to the small islands of the 
Eastern Caribbean, specificall
y the ten member states of the Or ganisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS ), identified 
                                                 
50 NB: The Project Management Commi ttee (PMC) in Antigua and Barb uda will serve as the overall 
Steering Committee for the proj ect as it will monitor and mento r the National Steering Committees. The 
PMC will invite the Chair of the national committees to attend its meetings (virtually) when EDA sub-
regional agenda items are being considered.


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 148 
	
	C
that 6 OECS members have received committed ODA (including thro ugh multilateral sources)  that principally targets 
climate change objectives (“climate finance”) in the period 201 0-15 inclusive, including the three countries participating 
in the EDA. The total amount of climate finance for the 2010-15  period to the 6 OECS members was US 101 million, of 
which one third (USD 30 million)  was in the form of loans. This  contrasts with the Pacific where all climate finance so far 
has been grant-based51.   
 The majority of the climate finance to the OECS sub-region has been to the disaster sector, primarily for disaster risk 
reduction, followed by renewabl e energy and energy policy. MDBs  have been the most common “first recipients” of the 
funding, followed to a much lesser extent by UN agencies. Virtu ally all climate finance has been delivered in the form of 
short term projects52. See Section E.6.4. Application of best practices  for a table illustrating how this EDA project 
incorporates lessons learned from the implementation of previou s projects. 
 
The sectoral focus of climate finance by development partners i n the OECS to date has been na rrow, mainly on disaster-
related activities. Climate finance provides an opportunity to build resilience across a muc h wider array of sectors, 
including not only by addressing direct climate risks but also by strengthening key development sectors that can help 
local communities cope better with the impacts of a changing cl imate. For SIDS, it is especially important to align climate 
finance with national development priorities, since funding is limited and the financial needs many53.  
 The enhanced direct access project will complement initiatives by other development partners by: 1) focusing on 
adaptation, which has been underfunded in the OECS region with most attention to DRR and renewable energy and 
policy; 2) OECS states have been borrowing financing for adapta tion, which is unusual when compared to other highly 
vulnerable SIDS; 3) this will be the first direct access projec t for the region that demonstrates a SIDS mentoring approach, 
under the umbrella of the OECS economic union; and, importantly , 4) the EDA project will build institutional capacity 
through innovative project management arrangements tailored to a SIDS context, which will incr ease absorption capacity. 
The project will monitor as an indicator the timing of disburse ments over the project life and evaluate this against the sub-
regional averages, to M&E differ ent GCF programming mechanisms.  
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
The EDA project will achieve it s theory of change and the objec tives of the Request for Pr oposals issued by the GCF 
through the proposed scope of a ctivities and planned measures u nder the four (4) project O utputs. The EDA project’s 
Gender and Social Inclusion Ac tion Plan (GAP) is included in th e attached Environmental Social Management Plan.  
 The proposed scope of activitie s is primarily limited by budget  constraints. The project will demonstrate en hanced direct 
access in the Government, NGOs and communities, and the private  sector in three (3) countries within the OECS – 
Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada. The total financing available to each country i s USD 6.5 million, of which 
US$ 500,000 is for capa city building, transparent decision-maki ng processes and project management.  
 The remaining US$6 m illion per SIDS is anticipated to be progra mmed as follows: 
 US$3 million is available for adaptation in the public sector,  up to US$1.5 million GCF contribution per project 
 US$2 million to the MSME private sector beneficiaries via the Revolving Fund Programme for Adaptation 
concessional loans up to US$75,000 per loan  
 US$1 million is available to NGO s/CSOs Small grants programme for community adaptation, up to US$50,000 
per project of GCF contribution 
 
The objectives, type, sectors and size of the indicative activi ties are presented below. Co-financing ratios and means of 
verification for each sector are provided in Table 7. Counterpart, leveraged financi ng and in-kind support to be realized 
during EDA implementation . 
                                                 
51 Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), 2017. Climate finance t o the Small Island States of t he Eastern Caribbean: An overview  of 
financial support provided from 2010 to 2015. Fourth Council of  Ministers, Environmental Sus tainability, April 2017, Grenada. 
52 SEI, 2017. Climate finance to the Small Island States of the E astern Caribbean. 
53 SEI, 2017. Climate finance to the Small Island States of the E astern Caribbean.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 148 
	
	CProblem  Statement Project  Activities Outputs
Problem  statement:  
Climate  change  leads  to increased  frequency  and intensity  of 
extreme  weather  events;  limited  ownership  and technical  
capacity  to plan and implement  adaptation;  and limited  
funding  available  to public,  private  and community  sectors  
for financing  of adaptation  interventions.  This is resulting  in 
Eastern  Caribbean  populations  suffering  from loss of 
property,  life and well being  due to climate‐induced  extremes  Barrier  1Adaptation  that ‘leaves  no one behind’.  Low‐income  households  suffer  
disproportionately  from climate  impacts;  difficult  access  to finance.
Barrier  2Financing  for adaptation  in public,  private  and civil society  sectors.  Lack 
of predictability  and timeliness  in the delivery  of climate  finance;  
disbursement  rates  as low as 10% of approved  climate  finance  in pilot 
SIDS
Barrier  3High per capita  losses  and costs of climate  recovery.  Adaptation  that 
involves  infrastructural  works  requires  large  up‐front costs,  which  in the 
case of SIDS can’t be downscaled  in proportion  to the population  size.Activity:
Devolved  decision‐
making,  stakeholder  
engagement,  and 
transparencyActivity:
Sustainable  Procurement  
plan reduces  the cost of 
input  materials  
(concrete,  wood)  Paris 
AgreementEASTERN CARIBBEAN ENHANCING DIRECT ACCESS – THEORY OF CHANGE
Impact:
Increased  resilience  of at least 5% of the population  in the Eastern  Caribbean  pilot countries  to climate  variability  and change,  through  
adaptation  in infrastructure,  strengthened  buildings,  and enhanced  ecosystem  servicesGCF Governing  Instrument:  
The Green  Climate  Fund  will finance  agreed  full and agreed  
incremental  costs  for activities  to enable  and support  enhanced  
action  on adaptation,  etc.Green  
Climate  FundGCF Governing  Instrument:  In allocating  resources  for adaptation,  
the Board  will take into account  the urgent  and immediate  needs  of 
developing  countries  that are particularly  vulnerable  to the adverse  
effects  of climate  change,  including  …S I D SParis Agreement:  
Global  goal on adaptation  of enhancing  adaptive  capacity,  strengthening  resilience  and reducing  vulnerability  to climate  change  with a view 
to contributing  to sustainable  developmentAssumptionsAssumption:
Countries  are willing  to amend  their 
policies  and procedures  to access  GCF 
financing  for EDA via the direct  access  
process,  and commit  adequate  resourcesAssumption:
Countries  remain  committed  to the 
provisions  on climate  change  set forth 
in their Nationally  Determined  
Contributions  (NDCs)Assumption:
OECS  Secretariat  remains  committed  to 
supporting  an enabling  environment  for direct  
access,  and has the requisite  capacity  to provide  
oversight  for project  implementation  
Activity:Governments
 prioritize  
and implement  adaptation  
interventions  Activity:
NGOs  implement  
adaptation  via a call for 
proposalsActivity:Private
 sector  implements  
adaptation  in private  
assets  via revolving  loans  
financingOutput  1:
Enhanced  capacity  for 
climate  adaptation  
planning,  
implementation,  and 
monitoring  and 
evaluation  via direct  
accessOutput  2:
Governments  implement  
concrete  adaptation  
measures  using  
ecosystem ‐based  
approaches  where  
appropriate  Output  3:
Community  resilience  to 
climate  impacts  is 
enhanced  through  tangible  
adaptation  benefits  Output  4:
Privately  owned  physical  
assets  of vulnerable  
populations  are more  
resilient  to climate  
variability  and change  
through  concessional  
microfinancing  Outcome  1:
Strengthened  institutional  and regulatory  systems  
access  climate  finance  from the GCF and other  funds.Outcome  2:
Strengthened  adaptive  capacity  and reduced  exposure  
to climate  risks.Outcomes Impact


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 148 
	
	C
Output 1. Enhanced capacity for climate adaptation planning, im plementation, and monitoring and evaluation 
via direct access.  Pre-feasibility studies in the pilot countries identified exis ting oversight, decision-making bodies and 
executing entities that would ben efit from targeted capacity-bu ilding and some structural changes, namely appointment 
of non-governmental observers and formalization of decision-mak ing processes, for the EDA project. This Output will 
build capacity in each country and at the sub-regional level fo r transparent governance for  the EDA. The outcome of the 
EDA will enable two Executing Enti ties plus the OECS Commission  to become accredited to the GCF. This Output will 
also design a Sustainable Procur ement system for EDA implementa tion, to reduce the impact of adaptation inputs 
(construction material, sand, wood) and to support bulk procure ment to lower the cost of i ndividual procurements.  
 Output 1 will build capacity across Outputs 2 – 4 to enable sta keholders in the various sectors to develop a quality pipeline 
of sub-investments by identifying local champions in the respec tive sectors in each country and supporting them to 
develop the pipeline with stakehol ders. This is an identified b est practice of the GEF Small Grants Programme in the 
Eastern Caribbean: “Dominica’s national SGP clearly benefits fr om the presence of a full-time national coordinator who 
can actively reach out to, engage , and support potential grante es”.
54  
 The objective of this Output is to: 
 Support accreditation of 3 direct access entities in the Easte rn Caribbean, including for on-lending accreditation
 6 transparent sustainable financing mechanisms for supporting adaptation in the OECS sub-region meet GCF 
criteria  
 Train at least 100 people, of which 50% are female, to identif y, prioritize, implement, monitor and evaluate 
adaptation strategies and measures 
 Public awareness activities targeting 5 knowledge products rea ching over 50,000 people, of which 50% are 
female 
 
Technical quality of the adaptat ion interventions will be ensur ed through flexible project implementation and management 
arrangements, which are designed to utilize experts in the loca l public and private sectors (s ee Section C.2.). A Technical 
Expert Committee (TEC) will be formed constituting relevant exp erts in that field. For example, in Antigua and Barbuda, 
the TEC group overseeing the Re volving Fund pilot for adaptatio n in buildings (funded by the GEF and Adaptation Fund) 
includes: 
- Building Inspectors (Phys ical Planning Authority) 
- Fire Officers (Fire Department) 
- Civil Engineer (Depa rtment of Environment) 
- Electrician (private sector) 
- Carpenter (Antigua and Barbuda  Institute for Continuing Educa tion) 
- ESS and Gender Expert (Communi ty Development Division) 
 The technical quality of the int erventions will be supported th rough a strong M&E framework and independent monitoring 
and evaluation. The OECS Commission will operationalize the pro ject’s M&E framework, to support ongoing M&E 
throughout implementation (see Section H). In addition to maxim izing local expertise, the Accredited Entity has a 
framework agreement with UNOPS
55 to provide inter alia  technical assistance on an as-needed basis.  
 The project will produce at least 5 informative visual knowledg e products that will be used in communicating and sharing 
knowledge to promote ecosystem-based and community resilience a daptation approaches and i nnovative approaches to 
adaptation the Eastern Caribbean , and with small island develop ing states globally.  
 
These knowledge products will be tailored to target different a udiences, namely: the public; technicians; and high-level 
policy-makers. Tangible, lasting, and concrete outputs include the following indica tive products: 
 Informational brief on the co st-effectiveness of adaptation in terventions  
 Adaptation Options in Buildings  informational packet using lessons learned under this project,  with printed folders 
distributed to ke
y partners, and guidelines for users
                                                 
54 GEF, 2012. Cluster Country Portfo lio Evaluation: GEF Beneficia ry Countries of the OECS (1992-2011). Prepared by the GEF 
Evaluation Office http://www.gefieo.org/sites/default/files/ieo /council-documents/c-42-me-inf- 02.pdf Accessed 13 September 201 7 
55 United Nations Office for Projec t Services (UNOPS) https://www .unops.org/english/Pages/Home.aspx


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 148 
	
	C
 At least two documentary-style videos on concrete adaptation i nterventions uploaded to the DoE’s YouTube 
channel56 
 A jingle to sensitize the public  about the economic benefits o f adaptation to climate change   
 
The above listed products will be refined and executed through the development and implementation of the 
comprehensive communications plan for broad-based community edu cation, awareness and mobilization of support, and 
the other awareness activities budgeted for.  
 
CASE STUDY ON VISIBILITY and MOBILISATION57 
 
The UNDP FlipCam Project was i ntroduced in 2009 to document the ir projects on the ground, the FlipCam 
revolutionized video production a t UNDP, enabling a low-cost al ternative to acquire footage on UNDP projects 
around the world. The FlipCam ca me with a 15-min instructional video that provided all the information needed to 
use the camera to produce short v ideos that tells a better stor y that previously. 
[more info: https://vimeo.com/5542623]  
How this could be applie d to the GCF EDA project 
 
The explosion of smart phones and tables with high quality came ras is an excellent opportunity to gain more 
visibility for the cause of con crete adaptation and best practi ces. Opportunities include: 
1. A short film competition on t he most innovative household ad aptation solution  
2. Documenting the progress of t he waterway resilience interven tions or exposure of other work being 
done by the community or agencies 
3. Citizen journalism to cover r eal issues occurring in the cou ntry in real time for example, to highlight 
flooding or drought impacts, especially challenges faces by vul nerable community members, and to 
highlight the good work being done by individuals and community  groups. 
 
All of this brings compelling c ontent that are of interest to t he local communities within Antigua and Barbuda, 
Dominica and Grenada and could be tweeted, liked or viewed thro u
gh the social media initiative. 
Box	1.	Creative	visibility	and	mobilization 	content	that	will	be	further	developed 	through	the	project’s	communications 	plans	
for	each	pilot	country	 
A Knowledge, Attitudes and Pra ctices (KAP) study found that amo ng respondents in the OECS sub-region, television 
was the preferred medium for rec eiving information on climate c hange (73.3%) followed closely by radio (63.7%). The 
majority also stipulated news and infomercials as their preferr ed TV & Radio vehicles for the ‘packaging’ of such 
information.58 Radio and television will be a key means of communication to t he public, however diss emination will target 
multiple avenues to reach a broad audience – for example, per t he KAP Study, younger respond ents have a greater 
preference to get climate change information via websites, emai l, social media and text messaging. The mediums for 
communicating project outputs will be subsumed within an overar ching communications strat egy that will include a range 
of the following include: 
 The OECS and the Department’s website is managed by a dedicate d officer, who is also fluent in English, 
Spanish and French. The website is in English, and lessons lear ned can be adapted and communicated to other 
regions 
 The Department has an active presence in social media, specifi cally through its Facebook page and twitter 
account. The AF project will ther efore feature heavily as the p roject unfolds, capturing and displaying the stories 
of the residents and persons work ing closely with the project 
 The Department maintains a YouTube channel for videos produced : http://bit.ly/2c3xWvt   
 The project will utilize project briefs and power-point presen tations targeted at the Ministerial level and Cabinet, 
to communicate lessons lea rned for decision-makers
                                                 
56 Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda, YouTube Channe l: 
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCJLb4VqZbp9u_gDqwKU5S_w 
57 Adapted from Orange Media, 2014 . iLand Resilience Public Aware ness Strategy & Action Plan: Interim Report II. OECS Project 
on Climate Change Adaptation & Sustainable Land Management in t he Eastern Caribbean. 
58 Orange Media, 2014. Technical Report I: GCCA Visibility Strate gy & Action Plan. OECS Project on Climate Change Adaptation & 
Sustainable Land Management in the Eastern Caribbean.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 148 
	
	C
 The entities will work closely w ith the GEF small grants progr am and its national network to extend the project 
activities and outputs of the project.  The NGOs and community groups are empowered through projects with 
workshops and sub-contracts for project implementation, buildin g on the successful model of the GEF SGP. 
 An annual stakeholder consultation meeting will be held with t he community members to review progress of the 
project, including through presentations by beneficiaries, and solicit learning and lessons shared through focus 
group discussions. Annual meetings will be documented in detail ed reports and will form  the basis for adaptive 
management. 
 Community members will be encouraged and supported in developi ng documentaries on the work that they are 
involved with, in the respecti ve of Outputs 1 and 2 (Box 1). 
 Outcomes of the variou s Outputs will be pac kaged in briefing n otes/press releases t hat will be shared on the 
Department of Environment website, websites of local partner st akeholders (e.g. Public Utilities company, 
National Office of Disaster Serv ices, Environmental Awareness G roup, etc.) 
 As the national focal points for climate change and other MEAs , the respective entities and service providers 
travel to Climate Change meetings and are available to showcase  this project at side events. This will be done 
in partnership with the NGOs to g ive international exposure to the project’s results from different voices. 
 The entities also engage traditional media sources and will en sure that the messages an d outputs of the project 
are expressed through regular media blitzes 
 
Output 2. Governments implement concrete adaptation measures us ing ecosystem-based approaches where 
appropriate.  This Output will solicit priority adaptation interventions in the public sector in each of the pilot countries 
targeting ecosystem services and drainage systems to cope with a 1-in-50-year flood event. National committees will 
evaluate the proposals using tran sparent criteria (evaluation c riteria are presented in Table 3).  
 
Indicative activities will build on baseline work of the sub-re gional EU-OECS Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA), 
which involved all three EDA pilot countries. The GCCF project contracted consultants to tra vel to each country within 
with local Government stakeholders to identify adaptation proje cts in each of the countries, however there were 
insufficient funds under the GCCA to implement the actions iden tified. Building on potential pipeline projects identified 
under the GCCA, the EDA will advance adaptation interventions s uch as those under the GCCA as well as under the 
PPCR and the USAID RRACC projects.  
 The objective of this Output is to: 
 Improve the resilience of physical assets (valued at least USD  25 M) to climate variability and change, considering 
human benefits  
 Restore, protect or strengthen  the coverage/scale of ecosystem s in response to climate variability and change 
 
The Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GAP) identified a low participation of women in the construction services 
sector
59, and identities opportunities to increase gender impact of the  project via services related to delivery of climate 
change information, adaptation and resilience services, e.g. EI As, construction, project management, procurement, M&E, 
etc. Recommended activities in the GAP include partnering with entrepreneurship agency and/or universities to facilitate 
continuous training in entrepreneu rship women, persons with dis abilities (PWDs) other vulner able groups as it relates to 
climate change adaptation and res ilience services for this Outp ut.  
 Indicative Output 2 public sector activates will be at the sub- watershed/village scale, and up to US$1.5 million of GCF 
contribution per project. Target sectors are: water resources, drainage infrastructure, and ecosystem-based adaptation 
(see the ESMP Appendix for additional details): 
• Small-scale infrastructure including rehabilitation, maintenan ce and upgrading 
• Village-level drainage  
• Smallholder farm irrigation (drip irrigation, shallow wells, e tc.) 
• Small-scale watershed managem ent, habitat restoration, and reh abilitation 
• Ecosystem-based adaptation, including soil and water conservati on; forest management and monitoring to 
prevent landslides 	
                                                 
59 Baksh, Rawwida and Associates, 2016. Country Gender Assessment  (CGA) Synthesis. Prepared for the Caribbean Development 
Bank.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 148 
	
	C
Indicative interventions are subject to applications received f rom the public sector in response to the Call for Proposals. 
The islands of Dominica and Barbuda have been struck by Categor y 5 hurricanes in 2017, which may have impacted 
national priorities; indicative  interventions will be validated  during the project’ s inception phase. 
 
 
 
Output 3. Community resilience to climate impacts is enhanced t hrough tangible adaptation benefits. This Output 
targets the buildin g sector and will benefit from the GEF Small Grants Pro gramme, which has been operational in the Case Study 2: Example of poten tial sub-project under Component 2 (per EDA RFP)  
 Improved drainage and restoration of functionality and rem ediation of climate induced water-health issues in 
Cashew Hill community, Antigua and Barbuda. 
 
Objectives : To demonstrate cost-effective ecosystem-based adaptation solu tions in a climate vulnerable community, 
for integrated adaptation to: use nature-based solutions to red uce flooding risk to cope with a 1 in 50-year event, 
improve water quality, which will reduce mosquito breeding with  guppies/live fish (as opposed to chemicals), establish 
a green urban area around the detention pond (livability/access ibility and health). 
  Financial structure : US$1.5 million from G CF; US$2 million cash c o-financing (Gove rnment of Antigua & Barbuda) 
 Alignment with GCF investment criteria and results areas : Tangible economic benefits will be enjoyed by the 
beneficiary population through pr oject interventions that will increase the waterway capacity  from a 1 in 5-year rainfall 
event, to a targeted 1 in 50-year rainfall flooding event. This  will reduce flooding in the community decreasing 
expenditure on repairs from flood damage, reducing loss of prod uctive days due to flood conditions and achieve 
climate resilient development for the community. 
 Implementation arrangement : Figure 3 – Public sector projec t implementation arrangements 
 
Figure	8.	Location	of	Cashew	Hill	project	site	in	the	local	area	(left)	and	location	within	the	island	of	Antigua	(right)


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 148 
	
	C
Eastern Caribbean for over ten y ears, and has built capacity at  the community level to devel op and implement projects. 
The EDA project will issue a ca ll for proposals for community a daptation projects  (<$50,000), which will be evaluated 
using transparent criteria. Suc cessful applicants will receive a small (<$5,000) preparation grant to develop the proposal, 
and communities will implement adaptation projects with tangibl e benefits. Indicative inter ventions for community 
buildings are presented in Figure below.  
 
Many community shelters and other community buildings were damaged in 
Tropical Storm Erika and Hurricane Maria in 
Dominica, during Hurricane Irma in Antigua 
and Barbuda, and in Grenada during 
Hurricane Ivan. In addition, CSOs through Output 3 can apply for funds to support 
adaptation in buildings for exceptionally 
vulnerable people, for example persons living below the poverty line, persons with 
disabilities, who cannot  borrow a Revolving 
Fund loan even at concessional rates (see Box 1). Criteria to determine households 
that are eligible for grant funding will be 
agreed by the CSO Steering Committee with transparency and strong community 
ownership. CSOs such as the local 
Association of Persons w ith Disabilities or a 
church could apply for grant funding to 
support adaptation in buildings owner by the 
most vulnerable community groups.  
 Eligibility for on-granting under Output 3 
includes: a registered community group 
under national laws, and; ability to mobilize 
cash and in-kind co-financing (aiming for at 
least 25% of total project budget). CSO 
programming will take c are not to only favor 
stronger organizations: while the most 
capable CSOs may end up “taking the 
lead”, the institutional arrangements would have to show increasing role and 
responsibility being taken up by other 
partners, especially any CBOs or indigenous peoples o rganizations involved in the project.  
 The community adaptation projec ts are capped at USD 50,000 per project. The entity that will issue community adaptation 
project call for proposals are: 
 Antigua and Barbuda: Marine Ecos ystems Protected Areas Trust ( MEPA Trust) 
 Dominica: National GEF Small Grants Programme 
 Grenada: Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF) 
 
About the service providers – Output 3 
 Antigua & Barbuda MEPA Trust The Antigua and Barbuda Marine Ecosystem Protected Area Trust I nc. (MEPA Trust) was estab lished in 2015. The MEPA 
Trust is envisioned to be a core national mechanism for sustain ed financing to support local community environmental 
initiatives: https://mepat rustantiguabarbuda.org/ 
 
Figure	9.	The	Caribbean’s 	housing	deficit	is	driven	by	the	high	costs	of	building	a	home	
relative	to	income.	Adequate 	housing	builds	resilience 	to	climate	change,	reduces	
erosion,	and	improves 	the	energy	efficiency 	of	buildings, 	which	in	turn	lowers	
greenhouse 	gas	emissions.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 148 
	
	C
Dominica GEF Small Grants Programme  
Since it was established in 1994, Dominica’s GEF Small Grants P rogramme has approved 101 projects with a total grant 
financing of approximately USD 2. 6 M. The GEF Small Grants Prog ramme projects have raised US$ 765,019 in cash co-
financing and a total of US$ 2 M in in-kind co-financing. Commu nity-based adaptation has accounted for less than 10% 
of the overall funding profile. Dominica’s GEF Small Grants Pro gramme will be used for the Grants for NGOs Output of 
this Enhanced Direct Access project, with a view to institution alizing the Programme and increasing its profile within the 
public sector.  
 
Grenada Sustainable Development Trust Fund The Grenada Sustainable Development Trust Fund
 was set up with technical assistance from GIZ to increase adapt ive 
capacity of communities through th e implementation of concrete community-based adaptation activities and incentives in 
the islands of Grenada, Carriacou and Petit Martinique. The mai n output of baseline work was the design, establishment 
and operationalization of a Comm unity Climate Change Adaptation  Fund (CCCAF) administered by the Trust Fund that 
responds to the needs of vulnerable communities and that links climate risks and adaption m easures with livelihoods. 
The long-term goal, which will be advanced through the implemen tation of this Enhanced Direct Access project, is to 
institutionalize this fund so tha t there is a permanent source of funding for community-based adaptation action. 
 Grenada Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF) The Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF) is a poverty reduction initia tive funded by the Government of Grenada and the 
Caribbean Development Bank. The BNTF aims to reduce poverty and  vulnerability by enhancing access to basic social 
and economic infrastructures and  human resource development ser vices.    
 
Output 4. Privately owned physical assets of vulnerable populat ions are more resilient to climate variability and 
change through concessional microfinancing.  The private sector Revolving Fund loan programme for adaptatio n in 
buildings is currently being piloted in Antigua and Barbuda. Th is Output of the EDA project will scale up the initiative via 
launching an invitation for applications in all three pilot cou ntries. Several institutions have been identified to manage the  
Revolving Fund in the pilot countries. These institutions will be validated at EDA inception, using GCF capacity 
assessment checklists covering fiduciary standards, environment al and social safeguards, and gender criteria (see self-
assessment templates in Appendice s). Once evaluated, the projec t will finance adaptation in buildings and manage 
reflows into the Revolving Fund,  that are revolved and re-disbu rsed to beneficiaries (see Figure above for a visual diagram 
of the problem, and Figure below fo r details on the proposed so lution). 
 
The objective of this Output is for 300 vulnerable households a nd 100 businesses use Fund-supported microfinancing to 
respond to climate variability and projected climate change thr ough adaptation in private building assets, of which 
approximately 40% are female-hea ded. For an applicant to be eli gible for a loan, an individual must be
60: 
(a) the owner of the home or business; 
(b) employed or have a source of income; 
(c) willing to be subjected to d irect debits on t heir salary/ac count for loan payments,  where applicable; and 
(d) willing to adhere to all t he terms and conditions of the lo an agreement. 
 
                                                 
60 Environmental Protection and Management (SIRFF Revolving Fund Programme for Adaptation) Regulations 2017


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 148 
	
	C
 
Figure	10.	Indicative 	activities 	for	adaptation 	in	privately	owned	buildings 	to	be	funded	through	the	Revolving 	Fund	concessional 	loans	
program	under	Output	4	of	the	EDA	 
The indicative adaptation interventions in buildings are design ed to cope with climate projec tions that have been identified 
to date in the IPCC and other c limate modelling literature.  
 
Water and Sanitation  interventions in buildings are guided by local knowledge in An tigua and Barbuda, which is the most 
arid of the Eastern Caribbean islands, however Dominica and Gre nada are increasingly expe riencing extended drought 
conditions. The Global Water Partnership-Caribbean case studies  and best practices61 are reflected in the Figure. The 
Eastern Caribbean could experience 20% less rainfall on average  per year by 208062. Frequent drought conditions, leave 
the population vulnerable to diseases linked to inadequate wate r supply and sanitation, such as cholera, typhoid and 
bacterial dysentery63. 
 Temperature  interventions will adapt buildin gs to protect human health and  wellbeing to the project 2.4˚C and 3.2˚C local 
temperature increases project ed by the 2080s. Heat wave events have been found to be associated with short-term 
increases in mortality globally as well as morbidity related to  heat exhaustion and dehydration. Hot dry spells can affect 
air quality and increase diseases like acute respiratory infect ions and influenza like illnes ses which are quite common 
among residents of Antigua and Barbuda and the Eastern Caribbea n
64.  
 
Regional Climate Models project that hurricane intensity could increase by between 5 and 15% b y the end of the century. 
This is consistent with recent t rends, as the strongest hurrica ne on record in the Atlantic formed in September 2017. 
Scientific research is increasi ngly able to quantify the part t hat climate change has played in  the occurrence of extreme 
weather event65, such as severe heat or floodin g, however this has generall y focused on events in the UK and Canada, 
                                                 
61 GWP-C, 2011. Rainwater Harvesting Model http://www.gwp.org/en/ GWP-Caribbean/WE-LEARN/knowledge-resources/regional-
resources/Rainwater-Harvesting- Model/ Accessed 12 September 201 7 
62 ECLAC, 2010. Regional Climate Modelling in the Caribbean: The PRECIS-Caribbean Initiative. Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean, April. 
63 Simpson et al, 2012. CCCRA 
64 Simpson, M. et al, 2012. CARIBSAVE Climate Change Risk Atlas ( CCCRA) - Antigua and Barbuda. DFID, AusAID and The 
CARIBSAVE Partnership, Barbados, West Indies. 
65 Redfen, 2014. Warming boosts UK  flooding risk. British Broadca sting Channel (BBC). http://www.bbc.com/news/science-
environment-27228408 Accessed 12 September 2017


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 148 
	
	C
and there is less literature available for the linkages between  climate change and extreme climate events in the tropics. 
Hurricane  interventions in buildings unde r the EDA project will be desig ned to withstand a Category 5 hurricane.  
 Energy resilience  in buildings is a critical adaptation measure as utility grids  can be disrupted for extended periods – for 
example, post-hurricane Irma, an estimated 11 million people in  Florida were without power and this could extend for a 
period of several weeks
66. Experiences in the Caribbean are similar, with power taking u p to 3 months for restoration 
following extreme hurricanes. E nergy resilience is critical to sustain equitable livelihoods and ‘leave no one behind’ in 
adaptation. People with medicine requiring refrigeration, such as HIV patients, require energy resilience, and many 
livelihoods depend on energy security, for example milk farmers  to refrigerate their produc ts. Energy resilience is an 
adaptation measure with the installation of batteries to suppor t a facility for up to 48 hours, and solar/wind RE to recharge 
batteries. Energy efficiency for air conditioning units will me et the Regional Energy Efficiency Building Code under 
development by CARICOM member sta tes. This code is being develo ped from the International Energy Conservation 
Code of 2018 (IECC) provided by the International Code Council (ICC). HVAC energy efficiency requirements for both 
Commercial and Residential applications will reference the 2018  IECC. The standard used for design loads is the 
ANSI/ASHRAE ACCA standard 183. A dditionally, CROSQ is also work ing on ISO standards for air conditioning.  
 The implementation of this code (REEBC) along with the standard s mentioned above will have a large positive impact on 
the energy sector by reducing the national energy demand which in turn will reduce the GH G emissions. Based on the 
energy usage in commercial buildings, HVAC systems account for approximately 70% of the total energy use that sector.
 
Flooding  interventions will also be addr essed Output 2 for the public 
sector via infrastructure such as check dams is the responsibil ity of 
the respective Public Works authority. However, building owners  will 
be able to access financing to enable their properties to meet local 
area plan guidelines, such as easements that may require or 
recommend a certain percent of pervious surface cover in flood 
prone areas, bore holes to capture runoff from pervious surface s, 
among others.   
 There is a degree of uncertainty in climate models, and therefo re 
adaptation options in the EDA will be consistent with a “no reg rets” 
approach. Adaptation in buildings will be consistent with “no r egrets” 
interventions. The most appropriate forms of adaptation are tho se 
that build on current actions to cope with present-day climate variability and extreme events, and that also contribute in a p ositive 
manner to sustainable economic development, sound environmental  
management, social progress , and wise resource use
67.  
 
However, there is also a risk that adaptation interventions are  not able to reduce losses and damages as anticipated if 
climate change scenarios exceed projections and countries do no t exceed their mitigation ambition under the Paris 
Agreement. For example, Category 5+ Hurricane Irma in September  2017 with sustained wind speeds at 195 mph when 
it struck Barbuda is the strongest  hurricane on record in the A tlantic, and it has caused devastation in the islands that it 
hit. As the stage-damage curve show s below, adaptation interven tions can have significant benefits when climate change 
is within a certain scale; bey ond that scale, it is not clear t hat the adaptation interventions will be able to avert climate 
losses. 
 
                                                 
66 Sullivan, P. et al. After Irma, Florida prepares for days - an d maybe weeks - without power. The Washington Post 13 September  
2017 https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2017/09 /12/florida-struggles-with-top- job-in-irmas-wake-restoring-
power-to-millions/?utm_term=.4ae0e43cb084 Accessed 13 September  2017 
67 ADB, 2005. Pacific Studies Series: Climate Proofi ng – A Risk-based Approach to Adaptation. Chapter IV: Why Adapt, and What is 
Involved? Asian Development Bank. No. 030905 Case Study 3: Philadelphia Storm water 
Grants 
 
The City of Philadelphia has created the Storm water Management Incentives Program 
(SMIP) and the Greened Acre Retrofit 
Program (GARP) to reduce the price for consumers and contractors to design and 
install storm water best management 
practices. These practices reduce storm water flow to the City’s sewer and surrounding 
waterways and enhance water quality in the 
region’s watersheds. SMIP provides grants directly to property owner s to construct storm 
water retrofit projects to build large-scale storm 
water retrofit proje cts across multiple 
ti


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 148 
	
	C
A stage-damage curve is a picture of the vulnerability of a 
structure to damage from (in thi s case) floods, which is rooted  
in a building’s design characteristics and construction 
material68. In the Figure to the right, the green curve shows 
the initial situation of a particular building (e.g., a residen tial, 
one-story concrete/block house with a slab ground floor and 
metal roof, near the shore) as are common in the Eastern Caribbean. For that building in its present location and 
configuration, a flood of about 0.9 meters causes damage 
equivalent to about 10% of the replacement value of the 
building; a flood of 1.1 meters causes damage equivalent to 
about 40% of replacement value; the building is more than 90% destroyed if the flood height reaches 1.7 meters. The 
conceptual impact of implementing adaptation in that building 
can reduce the replacement value by 5% for a 0.9 meter flood; reduce damage by 20% at a flood height of 1.1 meters, 
and the adaptation intervention of  increasing the ground floor 
level would not reduce much of the damage value of a 1.7 meter flood. 
 Monitoring and evaluation of the interventions will be 
conducted to provide concrete examples of a stage-damage 
curve such as the one pres ented conceptually above. 
 The project will not lend money to the “most” vulnerable person s (this would trigger Environmental and Social Safeguard 
risks) therefore Output 4 is not  targeted to the “most” vulnera ble. This Output tar gets persons within an income bracket 
where they are un-bankable or for other reasons do not have rea dy access to traditional banks; people who are at risk of 
falling into poverty but where they do have a source of income to repay into the Revolving Fund. The Output for NGOs 
and CSOs is the Output that will target the most vulnerable – p eople who cannot repay even at concessional rates, such 
as persons with disabilities, and therefore the project is stru ctured to both efficiently use r esources as well as “leave no 
one behind”. See Section E.4.1. Vulnerability of  country and beneficiary groups . 
 The MSME Revolving Fund micro-loa ns are capped at USD 75,000 pe r loan.  
 About the service providers – Output 4 
 Potential service prov iders for the Revolving Fund loans in eac h of the countries includes: 
 Antigua and Barbuda: Sustainable  Island Resource Framework Fun d (SIRF Fund) 
 Dominica: Climate Change Trust Fund (similar to the SIRF Fund but not yet legislated); A gricultural Industrial 
and Development Bank (AID Bank) 
 Grenada: Grenada Development Bank (GDB) 
 
Antigua & Barbuda SIRF Fund The Sustainable Island Resource Framework (SIRF) Fund is the fi nancial mechanism of the Department of Environment. 
The SIRF Fund will provide the framework financial mechanism to  implement the Environmental Protection and 
Management Act of 2015, which b rought into national legislation  the multilateral environment al agreements to which the 
country is Party. The SIRF Fund is the DOE’s on-granting and on -lending mechanism to implement the 2015 Act, which 
includes climate targets in the NDC.  
 Dominica Agricultural Industrial and Development Bank (AID Bank) 
                                                 
68 ADB, 2005. Pacific Studies Series: Climate Proofi ng – A Risk-based Approach to Adaptation. Chapter VIII: Elaboration of the 
Approach, Methods, and Tools. A sian Development Bank. No. 03090 5 
Figure	11.	Hypothetical 	Stage‐Damage	Curve	to	demonstrate 	
vulnerability 	of	a	structure 	to	damage	from	(in	this	case)	flood.	
Source:	ADB,	2005.	Climate‐proofing	–	A	risk‐based	approach 	to	
infrastructure 	(CCAIRR	findings)


---
*Page 42*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 148 
	
	C
Dominica’s AID Bank is one of the potential implementing partne rs identified at Pre-Feasibility stage to be used for the 
Revolving Fund Programme for Adaptation ( http://www.aidbank.com/) . The AID Bank was established by an Act of 
Parliament on July 28, 1971. It became a subsidiary of the Nati onal Commercial and Development Bank, when the latter 
was established in December 1976 by the Act of Parliament No. 2 7 of 1976. It was then re-established as an autonomous 
institution on January 1982. 
 The primary objectives of the AID Bank, per its legal mandate, are to promote and influence economic development in 
the Commonwealth of Dominica and to mobilize funds for the purp ose of such development. The bank has two 
shareholders, namely: the Government of the Commonwealth of Dom inica, the majority shareholder, and the Dominica 
Social Security, the minority sh areholder with 89.6% and 10.4% of the shares respectively. Cur rent initiatives by the AID 
Bank include the Women Entrepreneurs Fund, Renewable Energy loa ns, and an Energy Efficiency Business Loan 
Facility.  
 
Figure	12.	Current	initiative 	of	Dominica’s 	AID	Bank	to	support	women	entrepreneurs. 	The	AID	Bank	is	not	yet	providing 	financing 	for	businesses 	
to	adapt	to	climate	change;	adaptation 	in	private	buildings 	would	be	piloted	under	the	EDA	project.		Source:	http://www.aidbank.com/ 		
 
Grenada Development Bank (GDB) 
The Grenada Development Bank was i dentified by the pre-feasibil ity study as a financial instit ution that could implement 
revolving loans mechanism for private sector climate change ada ptation. The institution has a track record of 
administering donor funds and channeling them to the private se ctor. The Bank has also been nominated for accreditation 
to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) by Grenada’s NDA, and the EDA p roject is designed to support accreditation of the 
NIE while the project will benefi t from its experience and trac k record.  
 The SIRF Fund is has track record with respect to complying wit h the Anti-Money Laundering/Counter Terrorist Financing 
(AML/CTF) provisions, as demonstrated by the Department of Envi ronment’s accreditation to the Green Climate Fund 
(the SIRF Fund is the Departm ent’s financial mechanism).  
 AML/CTF provisions are regulat ed by the Eastern Caribbean Centr al Bank (ECCB), which has issued guidance notes to 
assist financial institutions in the OECS in developing program mes to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. 
The guidance compliance with anti-money laundering policies, pr ocedures and controls as they relate to customer 
identification, verification of t ransactions, record retention,  reporting of suspicious activit y, recruitment and training of 
employees and audit reviews. Eastern Caribbean Union member ter ritories have passed comprehensive legislation and 
guidance notes for AML/CTF. In Grenada, for example, AML-CTF is  the mandate of the Finance Intelligence Unit which 
is govern by a Board chaired by the Attorney General of Grenada . Institutions and Money Services Supervision 
Department of the Grenada Authorit y for the Regulation of Finan cial Institutions (GARFIN) regulates money laundering. 
The template/validation process to assess the respective capaci ties for AML/CTF reflects GCF’s principles and will 
observe AML/CFT laws. See Section C.4. Background Information  for information on each o f the above-listed entities.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 148 
	
	C
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Exe cuting Entity)  
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile  of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
and how it will support the project/programme in terms of  equity investment, management, operations, production and 
marketing. 
 The Department of Environment in its role as Accredited Entity (AE) will enter into Subsid iary Agreements with the 
Executing Entities (EE) in Gren ada and Dominica respectively. T he Accredited Entity will enter into legal arrangements 
with the Executing Entities using  the template Agreement in the  Appendix. The template Agreement includes key 
provisions of legal arrangements under the GCF, including manag ing a Grievance Redress Mechanism and provisions 
for AML/CTF. In addition, the Go vernment of Antigua and Barbuda  has already signed the Privileges and Immunities 
with the GCF, and will facilitate  as appropriate the signing of  PNIs between the GCF and t he Governments of Dominica 
and Grenada.  
 The AE has reviewed capacity a ssessments for each of the EEs. P reliminary capacity assessments have been 
conducted with each country’s res pective GCF Readiness support,  and gaps have been identified. These gaps are 
being addressed through various channels (for example, GIZ and UNDP in Grenada). At the time of approval of this 
EDA project, during project inc eption, the AE will conduct upda ted capacity assessments to structure Executing Entity 
responsibilities over the first y ear, consistent with a risk-ba sed approach. At the end of Year 1 of implementation, a 
capacity audit will be conducted and the full delegation of EE responsibilities will be contin gent on the results of this 
capacity audit.  
 Executing Entities  To effectively demonstrate enhanced direct access in the public , private and NGO sectors, t he Accredited Entity will 
conduct due diligence on executing entities using the FMCA and self-assessment capacity checklists (see Appendix) 
during the inception phase in Year 1, as well as Pricewaterhous eCoopers (PwC) through GCF’s framework agreement 
with the firm. The project will address gaps identified via the se assessments, build capacity, and developed a tailored 
partnership and capacity building approach. After this, the Pro ject Management Committee will approve the delegation 
of activities to the respective EE for the EDA project activiti es in that country.  
 The Executing Entities, their bas eline capacities, and institut ional arrangements are presented below.   
 The Executing Entity in Antigua and Barbuda is the same as the AE – the Department of Environment . The Department 
of Environment has a Project Management Unit (PMU) to manage th e day-to-day activities of the  EE, as well as to achieve 
efficiency and coordination in the management of projects from a variety of contributors, inc luding government projects. 
The team has implemented two Readiness projects in Antigua and Barbuda, as well as Readiness grants from the 
Adaptation Fund. The PMU in the Department of Environment ensur es that there is effective co ordination when there are 
project activities that are inter-dependent for execution. Anti gua and Barbuda is a small island developing state (SIDS) 
and technical capacity, staff turnover and lost institutional m emory is one of the core risks to successful project 
implementation. The PMU consists of regional and national proje ct coordinators and consultant s, and is structured to 
draw on expertise from the public sector (through civil servant  secondment) and the private sector (contracted long- or 
short-term consultants) in accordance with its Operational and HR procedures. The structure and operations of the PMU 
is a risk mitigation measure that has been built using a progra mmatic approach from experience implementing projects 
in the SIDS context. The PMU meets monthly and project outcomes  are reported to the Technical Advisory Committee 
(TAC) and the Project Management Committee (PMC). 
 Project Management Committee (PMC)  – Consists of the Permanent Secretary, deputy Permanent Secretary
 of the 
Ministry responsible for the environment and a representative o f the Budget Office of the Ministry of Finance.  The 
signatories to the accounts include the PS of Agriculture, Depu ty PS of Agriculture and the PS responsible for Energy. 
The PMC holds monthly meetings.   Members are normally members o f the Civil service. The Cabinet may appoint any 
member it would like, including NGO members, and the Chair of t he National Steering Committees in Dominica and 
Grenada respectively will be invi ted to attend (virtually) PMC meetings when sub-regional EDA activities are being 
discussed. The roles and responsib ilities of the Steering Commi ttee are:


---
*Page 44*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 148 
	
	C
(a) To approve selection criter ia and ensure that there is poli cy cohesion between project decisions and activities 
and the work of the central government. Project activities must  conform to any central government financial 
and general policies;  
(b) To make final procurement decisions for the projects being executed by or on behalf of the Department; 
(c) To act as the Audit Committee for the projects and the Depa rtment. A subcommittee may be appointed to 
perform this function; 
(d) The Committee is responsible for the procurement of the aud itors for the projects and to ensure that the 
Government Audit Department completes the annual Audit of the D epartment by March of the following year;
(e) The Committee will also ensur e that the project activities adhere to Financial and Management legislation as 
well as the Procurement and Audit standards of the Accredited E ntity and any other national legislation that 
is relevant to the function of the Executing Entity and its Pro gram of Work and projects. 
(f) To ensure that the use of G overnment Technical officers as well as project staff is conducted within the 
Labour Laws of the country as well as any relevant policies or Labour agreements. 
 
Audit Committee  – The Audit Committee is a subcommittee of the PMC and meets a t least three times per year 
to consider financial matters a s well as matters related to com plaints (Independent Redress Mechanism).   
 Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)  – This committee currently consists of over 15 members from Go vernment, as well 
as several NGO and the private se ctor representative.  The TAC performs the function of providing technical advice on 
projects, technical assessments of bid documents, ESS and gende r oversight and provides financial oversight from a 
technical perspective through it s representative on the Audit C ommittee. 
 The Department of Environment, formerly known as the Environmen t Division, was formed in 1996 by a decision of the 
Cabinet of Antigua and Barbuda, to perform coordination and pro ject management functions relating to the environment. 
In 2015, with the passage of the En vironmental Protection and M anagement Act by Parliament, the Division became a 
Department of the Government. One of the purposes of the Act wa s to establish and consolidate into one legal regime 
the implementation of the multilateral environmental agreements  to which the country is a Party, and to establish and 
make operational the framework financial mechanism to implement  the Act – the Sustainable Island Resource Framework 
Fund (SIRF Fund). 
 
The SIRF Fund  is governed by a General Board and provides the legal and oper ational framework for on-granting and 
on-lending. The SIRF Fund is a sustainable financing mechanism established by the laws of Antigua and Barbuda and 
administered by the Department of Environment for the purposes of financing the implementation of multilateral 
environmental agreements, including for the most vulnerable peo ple and communities. Due diligence is conducted by a 
Technical Expert Committee (TEC) and funding decisions are made  by a Finance Evaluation Committee. The TEC 
consists of finance experts from the Ministry of Finance, and s ocial services, persons with expertise in compliance, and 
in credit union operations.  The General Board meets at least t hree times per year to review Calls for Proposals (grants 
to NGOs and community centers) a nd Calls for Applications (Revo lving Fund loans). 
 The Department of Environment a s the national focal point for c limate change in Antigua and Barbuda has a mandate to 
develop and implement projects and programmes that will achieve  lasting impact in the vulnerable small island state. The 
Department has facilitated identif ication of ambitious National ly Determined Contribution (NDC) goals covering adaptation 
actions, with an estimated implementation cost of USD 450 – 670  million, and low-carbon development mitigation goals 
estimated at USD 350 – 500 million.  
 Within this portfolio of priorities, the Department of Environm ent’s prior experience has focused on ecosystem-based 
adaptation in waterways, water re sources, coastal protection, r esilient (grid-interactive RE) energy systems, and climate-
proofing of buildings. Notable activities include revising the building code for climate adaptation standards, establishing 
a Revolving Fund Programme for A daptation to provide affordable  loans to low-income female-headed households, and 
equipping desalination reverse osmosis plants with off-grid ren ewable energy to achieve a l ow-carbon resilient water 
supply in Antigua and Barbuda.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 148 
	
	C
The Department’s experience includes a range of projects and pr ogrammes, from technical assistance grants of USD 
150,000, to transformational programmes of USD 36 million in th e case of approved funding for the Department of 
Environment’s adaptation programme.  
  
  
Figure	13.	Project	Management 	Arrangements 	of	the	Accredited 	Entity	–	the	Department 	of	Environment 		
The 3rd Council of Ministers on Envir onmental Sustainability (COMES) u n d e r  t h e  O E C S ,  w a s  h o s t e d  i n  t h e  
Commonwealth of Dominica from 4 – 5th May 2016. At this meeting , the Ministers mandated the Commission to work 
with Antigua and Barbuda to implement key decisions. The decisi on from the 2016 COMES meeting includes the 
following, in accordance with Se ction 4.2 (e) of the Revised Tr eaty of Basseterre: 
1. The OECS Commission will explore accreditation to climate fu nds, including the Green Climate Fund (GCF), 
consistent with their mandate; and 
2. The Ministers requested the OE CS Commission to fulfil its ro le to support member states in accessing and 
negotiating climate finance, with reports on this effort reques ted at all future meet ings of the Council; 
3. The Commission is to work with Antigua and Barbuda to implement these decisions. 
 
Following this Ministerial mandate, Antigua and Barbuda develop ed the project proposal for Enhanced Direct Access, to 
facilitate sub-regional adaptat ion in line with the objectives of the Paris Agreement.  
 Ministry with responsibility for Environment – Executi ng Entity in the Commonwealth of Dominica . The Ministry 
with responsibility for Environm ent, which is currently the Min istry of Health and Environment (formerly of the Ministry of 
Environment, Natural Resources, Physical Planning and Fisheries ) will serve as the Executing Entity in Dominica. The 
Environment Coordinating Unit (ECU) which is the agency within the Ministry was established by Cabinet Decision in 
1999, to coordinate environmental a ctivities in Dominica and to  serve as the focal point for the implementation of all 
Multilateral Environmental Agreements to which Dominica is a si gnatory. Dominica’s National Adaptation Planning 
project, which has been submitted to the GCF, includes activiti es to upgrade the ECU to the level of a Department with 
responsibility for clim ate change and environment.  
 The ECU has served as Executing  Entity for the following climat e and environment projects: Project  Manager
Project  Coordinator
Community  Interests  
Rep
Technical  Office r s Pr oje ct  Assistants
Pr oject  Management  
Unit (PMU)Project  Management
Committee  (PMC)
PS Environment
PS EnergyBudget  Office  Rep. 
MOF
PS Agric ulture
Pr ocur ement  Un itNGOsTechnical  Advisory  
Committee  (TAC)
Relevant  expertise  
from Ministries  and 
Departments
Barbuda  rep
Administrative  
StaffDonor  Representative
Audit  
Sub‐CommitteePrivate  Sector  rep
Data Management  
Unit (DMU)Data Manager
Data Officer sDepartment  of Environment SIRF Fund


---
*Page 46*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 148 
	
	C
• June 2016 to December 2019. Supporting Sustainable Ecosystems by Strengthening the Effectiveness of 
Dominica’s Protected Areas System project funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP); 
• June 2016 to June 2019.  Low Carbon Development Path: Promotin g Energy Efficient Applications and Solar 
Photovoltaic Technologies project funded by the Global Environm ent Facility (GEF) and United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP); 
• December 2014 to December 2018. Third National Communications under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) funded by the Global Envi ronment Facility (GEF) and United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP); 
• January to October 2015. Intended Nationally Determined Contri butions (INDCs) to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climat e Change (UNFCCC) funded by the G lobal Environment Facility (GEF) and 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP); 
• March 2013 to August 2015. National component of the Regional Project for Implementing National Biosafety 
Frameworks in the Caribbean sub-region funded by the Global Env ironment Facility (GEF) and the United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP); 
• August 2011 to June 2012. Led the development of US$65 million  Strategic Program fo r Climate Resilience 
(SPCR) funded through the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) under the Climate Investment Fund 
(CIF) and implemented by the World Bank – Project received spec ial commendation by the Climate Investment 
Fund for the formulation of the Dominica Low Carbon Climate Res ilient Development Strategy (see 
https://www.climateinvestmentfund s.org/country/dominica) which was submitted as Dominica’s Nationally 
Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) and was the first register ed from a Caribbean small island developing 
State); 
• December 2008 to December 2012. Second National Communications  under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) funded by the Global Envi ronment Facility (GEF) and United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP); 
• January 2009 to August 2011. Sustainable Land Management (SLM)  project funded by the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) – received special commendation by GEF 
after project completion evaluation; 
• January 2010 to August 2011. Special Program on Adaptation to Climate Change (SPACC) funded by the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) and World Bank; 
• January 2006 – May 2007.  National  Implementation Plan for the  Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic 
Pollutants (POPs) funded by the Global Environment Facility (GE F) and United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNDP) – ECU received S pecial Award from UNDP for the  delivery of the project which serves as 
a model for other developing countries; 
• January 2005 – December 2005.  National Capacity Self-Assessme nt (NCSA) project funded by the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) and Unit ed Nations Environment Progr am (UNEP); 
• February 2004 – December 2005. National Biosafety Framework pr oject funded by the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) and United Nations  Environment Program (UNEP); 
• February 2001 – September 2001. National Biodiversity Strategy  and Action Plan funded by the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) and United Nations Development Progr amme (UNDP); 
• June 2000 – June 2001. Coordinated the National Component of t he Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to 
Global Climate Change (CPACC) project funded by the Global Envi ronment Facility(GEF) and World Bank – 
ECU coordinated and directed the development of the Dominica Cl imate Change Adaptation Policy that was 
adopted by Cabinet in 2002.  
 
In addition to the above, Dominica has been included in regiona l Readiness and capacity building programmes. However, 
as indicated in Dominica’s Low Carbon Climate Resilient Strateg y, despite significant investments for capacity building 
in Dominica, the ECU suffers from a lack of sustained, long-ter m capacity, because capacity has been built up on a 
project basis. When a project is closed, the project management  unit is disbanded and the project staff leave. Many of 
the gaps will be addressed throu gh the National Adaptation Plan ning (NAP) project that has been submitted to the GCF 
for Dominica, with the Department of Environment in Antigua and  Barbuda serving as Delivery Partner. The NAP project 
will support the enactment of legislation to legally establish the Department of Climate Change, Environment and 
Development and its Trust Fund and also build capacit y for pro ject and financial mana gement. This is a ke y capacit y


---
*Page 47*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 148 
	
	C
constraint that seriously undermi nes Dominica’s ability to gain  direct access to the GCF and support sustainable national 
implementation arrangements, whi ch is the focus of the EDA. 
 Ministry with responsibility for Environment – Executing Entity in Grenada . The Ministry with responsibility for 
Environment is currently the Ministry of Education, Human Resou rce Development and the Environment, with the primary 
agencies as Environment Division. National project management a rrangements for GEF-funded projects in Grenada have 
generally consisted of extensive experience with the Work Bank and UNDP serving as the Accredited Entity, the Ministry 
serving as Executing Entity and the Project Coordination Unit ( PCU) serving as the entity responsible for day-to-day 
project management.  
 A NIE gap assessment report was conducted by the firm Æquilibri um Consulting GmbH in 2016 , assessing the capacity 
of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and the Grenada Developm ent Bank (GDB) with funding from Grenada’s first GCF 
Readiness grant. Surprisingly, the report found that the PCU’s track record with projects would enable it to apply for Small 
(< USD 50 M) to the GCF due to its extensive World Bank and UND P project experience, however the report identified 
major compliance gaps for accreditation of the NIE to the GCF –  these include legal status, small staff size, no dedicated 
website, and absence of key policies and procedures for accredi tation, namely the following: accounting, internal and 
external audit, control framework, code of ethics, disclosure o f conflicts of interest, financial management and other forms 
of malpractice, investigations, anti-money laundering and anti- terrorist financing. In addition, per the report, procurement, 
fiduciary functions and services required by the GCF were not c arried out at institutional (PC U) level, but rather at Ministry  
of Finance level.  
 With these gaps filled through the EDA project, and a transitio n from the PCU from a project-specific structure that is 
disbanded after each project, to a programmatic approach, in ad dition to benefitting from lessons learned from Antigua 
and Barbuda and additional Readiness support from Grenada, the PCU will be well positioned to build on significant 
experience in project cycle management, including for grant awa rd schemes (on-granting), environmental and social 
safeguards, and gender gained by coordinating World Bank projec ts. The EDA project will support the institutionalization 
of the PCU within the Ministry and long-term capacity building.   
 Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Commission Headquartered in St. Lucia, the Organization of Eastern Caribbe an tates (OECS) is an inter-governmental organization 
dedicated to: 
1. Establishing an Eastern Caribbean Common Market; 
2. Protection of human and le gal rights; the environment, and w ell-being of its citizens; and 
3. Encouragement of good governance among its Member States. 
 The OECS Commission is the administrative body of the Organisat ion, and it comprises the Director General and a 
Commissioner of Ambassadorial rank named by each Member State w ho also represents the Commission in that Member 
State. The OECS Commission can ma ke recommendations to the OECS  Authority and the Council of Ministers regarding 
the formation of Acts and Regulations of the Organisation. It u ndertakes other work and studies, and performs other 
services relating to the functions of Organisation as required under the OECS Treaty, the OECS  Authority or by any other 
Organ. 
 In 2017, the OECS Commission initiated a process for Accreditat ion to the GCF and is currently undergoing capacity 
assessments. The OECS Commission has a monitoring and evaluatio n unit with specialized expertise that has 
experience monitoring projects financed by EU DEVCO, USAID, and  other international donors. The OECS Commission 
M&E Unit will perform the independent monitoring and evaluation  of project activities. This  arrangement will benefit all 
parties, with the project securing the support of an institutio n with regional experience, managing complementary projects 
and coordinating at the sub-regional level. The M&E arrangement s will be designed to build capacity at the national level. 
 PROJECT PARTNERS 
 
To ensure that the project maintains a high level of country ow nership, capacity building impact and scaling-up potential, 
project partners have been identified to provide high-level gui dance and alignment with national priorities.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 148 
	
	C
ANTIGUA & BARBUDA 
Ministry of Finance 
The Ministry of Finance shares NDA responsibilities with the De partment of Environment. The Ministry of Finance has 
the role of project sponsor, wit h responsibility for ensuring t hat the project continues to enjoy high level support, and that  
EDA activities continue to be aligned with national development  priorities. 
 Antigua & Barbuda Public Sector  Investment Programme (PSIP)  
The Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP) reflects the acti vities undertaken by the Government of Antigua and 
Barbuda to facilitate development. The PSIPS is hosted in the E conomic Policy and Planning Unit (EPPU) in the Ministry 
of Finance, and was established in 200. The Economic Policy and  Planning Unit (EPPU), in collaboration with the 
Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Centre (CARTAC), prepar ed a Manual/Guidance Document
69 for the 
Development of Investment Proposal Submissions. The PSIP has be en identified as a mechanism for integrating climate 
adaptation projects into the Government’s portfolio. GCF EDA cl imate adaptation pilot projects can via the PSIP benefit 
from synergies with ongoing Government development and investme nt projects. 
  DOMINICA 
Ministry of Finance – NDA The Ministry of Finance has the role of project sponsor, with r esponsibility for ensuring that t he project continues to enjoy 
high level support, and that EDA a ctivities continue to be alig ned with national development priorities. 
 Dominica Public Sector Inv estment Programme (PSIP) 
The Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica’s Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP) is an important factor 
in the country’s ability to susta in and improve its growth perf ormance. The PSIP is set within the medium term macro-
economic framework. For FY 2016/2017, the Public Sector Investm ent Programme (PSIP) budget was $184.2 million, 
and projects were implemented in a ll Ministries and sectors. Th e PSIP has been identified as a potential mechanism for 
integrating adaptation into the Government’s portfolio. GCF EDA  climate adaptation pilot projects can via the PSIP benefit 
from synergies with ongoing Government development and investme nt projects. 
  GRENADA 
Ministry of Economic Development – NDA The Ministry of Finance has the role of project sponsor, with r esponsibility for ensuring that t he project continues to enjoy 
high level support, and that EDA a ctivities continue to be alig ned with national development priorities. 
 Grenada Public Sector Inv estment Programme (PSIP) 
The Government of Grenada in 2015 established an enabling legal  framework for public sector investments. The Minister 
of Finance under Sec. 88 of the Public Finance Management Act c reated the Public Financial Management (PFM) 
Regulations 2015. Part XIII of t he Regulations establishes the Prioritization and Selection Criteria and Reporting 
Procedures for the Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP) co vering Identification and Development, Project 
Appraisal & PSIP Screening, Project Approval & Financial Mobili zation, and Project Implementation & Governance.  The 
PSIP process in Grenada will be an important way of maximizing synergies with ongoing public sector development 
projects, and cost-effectively integrating adaptation at the ou tset, ensuring that new and planned investments are climate 
resilient and also aligned with national development priorities . 
  EXPERIENCE IMPLEMENTING P ROJECTS IN THE OECS 
 Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada have been working col laboratively together as members of the Economic 
Union of the OECS since its formation in 1981. The purpose of t he economic union is for economic harmonization and 
                                                 
69 Antigua and Barbuda Manual on the Public Sector Investment Pro gramme (PSIP): 
http://www.antigua.gov.ag/pdf/treasury/PSIP_Manual.pdf


---
*Page 49*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 148 
	
	C
integration, protection of human and legal rights, and the enco uragement of good governance in the Lesser Antilles. In 
September 1999, OECS Ministers of the Environment requested tha t the OECS Secretariat prepare an “OECS Charter 
for Environmental Management” and “a regional strategy... that will become the framework for environmental 
management” in the region. In accordance with the Ministers’ re quest, the OECS Natural Resources Management Unit 
(now the Environment and Sustainable Development Unit, ESDU) de veloped the St. George’s Declaration of Principles 
for Environmental Sustainability in the OECS (SGD). This Declar ation has since provided for a collective and collaborative 
approach to ratifying and implementing multilateral environment  agreements in the OECS. For example, the following 
projects have been implemented with the OECS Commission serving  as the executing entity with the EDA pilot countries 
as beneficiaries: 
 The OECS Project, Reducing the Risks to Human and Natural Asse ts Resulting from Climate Change (RRACC) 
drew from regional and national climate change plans and addres sed high priority vulnerabilities in sectors key 
to the region’s development and economic growth, while identify ing specific interventions that would contribute 
to greater resilience in the East ern Caribbean. The project was  implemented in Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, 
Grenada and Petite Martinique, St. Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia  and St. Vincent and the Grenadines between 
2011 and 2016. The project was funded under the Climate Change programme of the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAI D) with in kind contributions fr om governments of the participating countries. 
 The OECS secured financing from the European Union (EU) acting  through the European Commission for a 
Global Climate Change Alliance (GCC A) Project on Climate Change  Adaptation (CCA) and Sustainable Land 
Management (SLM) in the Eastern Caribbean 
 The OECS Commission, through the GCCA "iLand Resilience" Proje ct and financial assistance from the 
European Union, launched the 6th Edition of the OECS Building C ode (2015) 
 
Part of the purpose of the OECS economic union is also to perfo rm the role of spreading responsibility and exposure in 
the event of natural disaster, s uch as an extreme hurricane. Fo r example, Antigua and Barbuda is housing 3,000 
Dominican nationals after the devastation of Hurricane Maria. I n addition to providing for human wellbeing, countries can 
provide food, goods, police/militar y services, project coordina tion and management for recovery efforts, and any other 
needs that may be requested by t he impacted island state. As su ch, Antigua and Barbuda has experience implementing 
projects in other countries of the OECS, in coordination with t heir Governments. The propos ed EDA project will build on 
three decades of disaster recovery collaborative action to focu s on climate adaptation and resilience to reduce exposure 
to climate extremes in the OECS.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 148 
	
	C
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Market demand for concessional adaptation 
financing via the Revolv ing Fund was assessed 
using the following parameters: 
 Building exposure (replacement value) as 
an indication of total potential market demand for adaptation in buildings 
 Ease of access to credit as an indication of 
unmet demand 
 Percent of population that meets 
Revolving Fund borrower criteria and interest in accessing the Revolving Fund 
 
Building exposure (replacement value)  w a s  
estimated using a World Bank study for Grenada where building exposure totaled US$2.1 billion for 
a population of 106,000
70, or US$19,800 per 
capita. Assuming this figure is representative of the OECS, which shares geophysical, legal and 
governance characteristics, the building exposure 
(replacement value) for Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada is approximately US$5.5 billion.  
 
Ease of access to credit  using the World Bank Doing Business 
Database (2017) indicates that access to capital remains one 
of the most challenging factors in the Eastern Caribbean pilot 
countries for doing business (Figure above). The report highlights the difficulty that individuals and micro-SMEs in th e 
pilot islands have in accessing credit. Imperfect capital marke ts 
– when financial markets are unable to efficiently allocate capital or transfer risk – is one of the key barriers to channe lling 
adaptation finance from the private sector.
71 The G20 Global 
Partnership for Financial Inclusi on estimated that 9% of formal  
and informal MSMEs in Latin America and the Caribbean have 
access to credit, but need more, and that 18% are unserved 
and need access to credit.72 
 The percent of the population that meets Revolving Fund 
borrower criteria and interest in accessing the Revolving Fund  
is estimated at 40,000 people across the three islands based 
on the following criteria: over 18 years old; must own building ; 
and have a source of income. Approximately 15% of the population owns their own hom e in the pilot countries.  
 
Based on the above parameters, the market demand for the 
Revolving Fund loan in the three countries is estimated at USD 213 million, which exceeds th e USD 6 million that will be 
available in the EDA project. 
                                                 
70 World Bank. 2016. Grenada Hurricanes and Earthquakes Risk Profile . Washington, DC: World Bank. http://bit.ly/2uRCwBR 
Accessed 12 July 2017. 
71 UN Environment, 2014. Demystifying adaptation finance for the private sector. http://www.unepfi.org/wordpress/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/demysitif ying-adaptation-finance-for-th e-private-sector-aw-full-report.pdf  Accessed 11 September 2017 
72 G20 Global Partnership for Finan cial Inclusion, 2017. Alternat ive Data: Transforming SME Finance. Mary. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/701331497329509915/pd f/116186-WP-AlternativeFinanceReportlowres-PUBLIC.pdf 
Accessed 11 September 2017 
Figure	14.	A	comparison 	of	how	the	pilot	country	economies 	of	Antigua	&	
Barbuda, 	Dominica 	and	Grenada	rank	on	the	ease	of	getting	credit.	Source:	
World	Bank	Doing	Business	Database, 	2017. 
Case Study 4: Cost of Rebuilding Houses 
after Category 5 Hurricane Irma 
 
On 7 September 2017, Antigua and Barbuda 
sustained a direct hit by Hurricane Irma (Cat. 5). The island is counting the cost of the 
damage, with the expense of rebuilding houses 
alone expected to top US$66m.  
 
Photo of homes destroyed in Barbuda. (Gemma Handy independent.c o.uk)


---
*Page 51*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 148 
	
	C
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation a nd Insurance (if applicable)  
Provide details of government licenses or permits requir ed for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations. Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  The Privileges & Immunities tha t has been signed between the GC F and Antigua and Barbuda ensures that all taxes 
will be waived. Antigua and Barbu da will also facilitate Domini ca and Grenada to sign Privileges & Immunities as 
appropriate with the GCF. Under O utput 4, recipients of the rev olving loan program are ex pected to pay taxes on the 
building and other supplies, unle ss the respective Governments decide that this can be waiv ed. For example, in Antigua 
and Barbuda the Cabinet as decide d that approved Revolving Loan  beneficiaries will be eligib le for the benefits under 
the Construct Antigua and Barbuda  Initiative (CABI), which exem pts materials and supplies from sales tax, along with 
other selected benefits.  
 The project will be implemented co nsistent with national laws. The following is required: 
 A decision of the Cabinet of t he respective pilot country (wit hin 2 months of project approval) 
 Environmental Impact Assessmen t (EIA) for Physical Planning ap provals (see  
 Regulations for the Revolving Fund (regulations specific to th e GCF EDA project will be passed by negative 
resolution in Parliament in each country within Year 1 of proje ct implementation); and 
 Where appropriate, By-laws or operational procedures for natio nal decision-making bodies (during project 
inception within 6 months of project approval) 
  
C.7.   Institutional / Impleme ntation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the 
organization structure, roles and res ponsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, 
executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  Also describe which of these structures are 
already in place and which are still pending. For the pendi ng ones, please specify the requirements to establish 
them. Describe construction and supervision me thodology with key contractual agreements.  
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction. If 
applicable, provide the credit analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements an d/or structural mitigants to 
cover the counterparty risks 
 Project Decision-making Strategy and Approach  
Countries participating in the enhanced direct access pilot – A ntigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada – have 
implemented a range of national  and sub-regional projects, all of which have been completed within the last two years 
and/or are still under execution. These include full-size natio nal and sub-regional GEF projects as well as the GEF Small 
Grants Program (GEF SGP), the Climate Resilient Eastern Caribbe an Marine Managed Areas Network (ECMMAN) 
project funded by KfW, the EU-funded Global Climate Change Alli ance (GCCA) project in the Eastern Caribbean, as well 
as national Government-funded projects.  
 The EDA project approach, validated through the Pre-Feasibility  studies, is to use existing structures that are in place, 
and building the capacity and transparency of these structures through an inception and capacity building phase (Output 
1 of the project). Decision-maki ng will be devolved to the nati onal level pending that the trans parency and accountability 
requirements are met, and the OECS  Commission M&E Unit will ser ve as independent evaluator to monitor and support 
these national arrangements.   
 
The organizational structure for the EDA is to have the followi ng Committees and institutions designated and operational 
in each of the three pilot countries:


---
*Page 52*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PRO GRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 148 
	
	C
 Steering Committee, with the NDAs  represented, public, private , NGO and/or women’s organization (oversight 
function). NB: Responsibilitie s and obligations are "imposed" o n the Steering Committee via Cabinet decisions 
and regulations. 
 NGO Committee to make on-granting funding decisions (majority NGO representation) ( decision-making body 
for NGO activities)* 
 Loans Committee to make on-lending funding decisions (majority  Private Sector representation) (decision-
making body for the Private Sector)* 
 Public Sector Technical Advisory Committee to make on-granting  decisions for the public sector (decision-making 
body for the public sector)* 
*Note : All decision-making bodies will have multi-stakeholder repres entation and/or observers from key sectors per the 
multi-stakeholder engagement plan. The loan/grant applications in the respective sectors will be required per the criteria 
to demonstrate alignment with nat ional strategic climate priori ties. The oversight committee will monitor the decision-
making body’s compliance with the guidelines, and results of th e decision-making outcomes will be posted online prior to 
the start of implementation. The proposed constitution of the d ecision-making bodies is in line with national best practices 
of the GEF Small Grants Programme, which has a majority NGO but  has members from all sectors as well as participants. 
 The decision-makin g bodies will include: 
 National Climate Change Focal Point (Government) 
 Government expertise from the re levant sectors (e.g. Physical Planning, Public Works) 
 CSO representative 
 Private Sector Representative 
 Environmental, Social and Gender Safeguards Expert (e.g. Direc torate of Gender Affairs; Community 
Development Division, social/gender focused NGO) 
 Youth Representative 
 
The Pre-Feasibility studies ident ified that these arrangements are in place in each country, with varying degrees of 
capacity, transparency, and mult i-stakeholder representation. O utput 1 of the project will form alize and build capacity of 
the respective oversight and decision-making bodies, such that they meet the standards of the GCF best practice 
guidelines. The NDAs in each pilot country endorsed the finding s of Pre-Feasibility studies t hrough a validation meeting 
that was held in Grenada in Apr il 2017, and the oversight funct ions will be formalized upon app roval of the EDA project. 
 
Women’s CSOs in Antigua and Barbuda  
 
Figure	15.	Women’s 	Organizations 	in	Antigua	and	Barbuda, 	identified 	by	the	Directorate 	of	Gender	Affairs.	Source:		
https://genderaffairs.gov.ag/uploads/1494248893ANTIGUA %20&%20BARBUDA%20CEDAW% 20REPORT.compressed.pdf


---
*Page 53*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 148 
	
	C
Criteria and guidelines for the selection of enhanced direct ac cess activities  
 
The criteria presented below ar e indicative criteria that will be tailored by the respective national decision-making bodies, 
with input from the Accredited Entity and approval of the Steer ing Committee, prior to issuance of any calls for 
proposals/invitation of applications under the project. This ta iloring of criteria will result in, for example, guidelines for  
poverty levels that are country-specific.  
 The process for approval of the criteria are: decision-making b ody to tailor indicative criteria to national circumstances, 
guided by national policies and priorities; validate and incorp orate input from stakeholders during project inception phase, 
in particular women’s groups, pe rsons with disabilities, and ot her vulnerable groups identified in the ESMS and Gender 
Action Plan; present criteria to  the Steering Committee; and pu blish criteria as part of the EDA request for proposals.  
 
Table	3.	Criteria	and	guidelines 	for	the	selection	of	enhanced 	direct	access	activities 	by	the	decision‐making	bodies	
Output/Activity Checklist of required 
material Evaluation Criteria  
Portfolio 
considerations Status of sub-national 
distribution  Balanced sub-national di stribution of approved 
activities 
Adaptation in the 
public sector  
(<US$1.5 million GCF 
contribution per 
project) Application form 
Technical Designs  
Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
Environmental and Social 
Management Plan 
Gender Assessment and 
Action Plan 
Physical Planning 
Approvals  
M&E Plan 
Co-financing  
 
  
 
  Ability of the proposed inte rvention to cope with IPCC 
and regional climate model projections  
 Number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 
(including, where possible: women, youth, adolescent mothers, working class men, the homeless, the 
disabled, the elderly) 
 Poverty levels of target b eneficiary populations 
 Alignment with national development plans and 
climate change strategi es (Country Programme, 
NDC, NAP, etc.) 
 Co-financing contributions (target: 60% co-financing 
per project) 
 Impact on life and property 
 Impact on biodiversity and ecosystem services 
 Impact on community/ national economy 
 Impact on physical infrast ructure (value of physical 
assets to be strengthened by  proposed intervention) 
 Impact on social infrastructure and cohesion 
 Economic value of losses to be mitigated 
 Evidence of and capacity for operations, 
maintenance, and sustai nability of intervention 
 Capacity to replicate and commitment to scale-up 
intervention 
 Capacity to complete detailed design and 
procurement actions before due date 
 Feasibility of implementatio n/ construction within 
deadline 
 Absorptive capacity o f the executing agency 
 Availability of requisite technology  
 Feasibility of benefit cost analysis 
 ESS risk rating Categ ory B or Category C 
 Excludes ineligible activities*


---
*Page 54*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 148 
	
	C
Small grants 
programme for community adaptation 
(<US$50,000 per 
project of GCF contribution)  Grant application 
Environmental and Social 
Impact Screening  
Gender screening 
M&E Plan 
Co-financing   Ability of the proposed inte rvention to cope with IPCC 
and regional climate model projections  
 Number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 
(including, where possible: women, youth, adolescent 
mothers, working class men, the homeless, the 
disabled, the elderly) 
 Poverty levels of target b eneficiary populations 
 Alignment with national development plans and 
climate change strategi es (Country Programme, 
NDC, NAP, etc.) 
 Co-financing/in-kind contributions (target: 50% in-kind 
contribution per project) 
 Linkages to disaster/ climate vulnerability 
assessments  
 Impact on life and property 
 Impact on biodiversity and ecosystem services 
 Impact on community  
 Evidence of and capacity for sustainability and 
maintenance 
 Capacity to replicate and up-scale 
 Ready availability of requisite technology and 
capacity for implementation 
 Feasibility of costs against budget 
 Feasibility of implementatio n/ construction within 
deadline 
 Assessment of potential encumbrances 
 ESS risk rating Category C  
 Excludes ineligible activities* 
Revolving Fund 
Programme for 
Adaptation concessional loans 
(<US$75,000 per loan) Loan application 
Credit score 
Environmental and Social 
Impact Screening  
Gender screening 
Co-financing  
M&E Plan  Ability of the proposed inte rvention to cope with IPCC 
and regional climate model projections  
 Alignment with national development plans and 
climate change strategi es (Country Programme, 
NDC, NAP, etc.) 
 Adaptation rationale 
 Compliance with the climat e resilient Building Code 
 Credit assessment (debt-to-income ratio) 
 Ability to repay Revolving Loan (e.g. willingness to 
participate in automatic wage deductions; cost of living before and after impl ementing interventions to 
accrue savings) 
 ESS risk rating Category C  
 Excludes ineligible activities* 
 
*Ineligible/excluded activities  Per the Environmental Social M anagement Plan are, EDA project f unds shall not be directly o r indirectly used for: 
 Operation or administrative cost s of ministries, departments o r agencies of the participating Governments; 
 Salaries for executive officers and core staff of civil societ y or non-governmental organizations, except for such 
salaries related to services performed by such persons specific ally for the purposes of achieving the objectives 
of the funds received from the pr oject, in which case these amo unts will be capped.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 148 
	
	C
 Activities relating to the extraction or depletion of non-rene wable natural resources (including inter alia forests, 
trees, beach sand, ghut sand and oil/gas); 
 The involuntary resettlement of people, economic activities, o r the removal or alteration of any physical cultural 
property under any circumstances; or 
 Any other uses that are deemed to be inconsistent with the gen eral objectives of national environmental 
legislation. 
 
Implementation Arrangements 
 The EDA project will be demonstrating enhanced direct access in  the public (Output 2 via On-granting), private (Output 
4 via On-lending) and NGO (Output 3 via On-granting) sectors. I mplementation arrangements are tailored to the EDA 
mechanism for each Output, and thes e arrangements are visualize d below. 
 
The Executing Entities have been identified at this stage, and their capacities have been assessed using the Readiness 
support of the respective countries. Capacity building activiti es of these agencies are ongoing through GCF Readiness 
and NAP support, and the EDA will provide all stakeholders with  a better understanding of the purpose and impact 
potential of successful capacity building activities.  
 
Table	4.	Summary 	of	implementation 	arrangements 	in	each	of	the	three	pilot	EDA	small	island	states.	Source:	EDA	Pre‐feasibility 	studies	
 Antigua & Barbuda Dominica Grenada
National Oversight 
Committee (multi-
stakeholder) Antigua and Barbuda’s Project Management 
Committee (this committee has overall Steering 
Committee functions to mon itor project activities 
in Dominica and Grenada in a SIDS mentoring approach to build capacity for direct access 
while ensuring that the decentralized project 
activities meet GCF criteria
)Dominica’s National Climate 
Change Steering 
Committee (NSC)  Grenada’s 
National Climate 
Change 
Committee (NCCC) 
Overall Executing 
Entit y Department of Environment ( same as AE) Ministry of 
Environment Ministry of 
Environment
Implementing 
Partner for Output 1 Same as above Same as above Same as above 
Implementing 
Partner for Output 2 Same as above Same as above Same as above 
Implementing 
Partner for Output 3 Marine Ecosystems Protected Areas Trust 
(MEPA Trust) National GEF 
Small Grants 
Programme Basic Needs Trust 
Fund (BNTF) 
Implementing 
Partner for Output 4 Sustainable Island Resource Framework Fund 
(SIRF Fund) Climate Change 
Trust Fund Grenada 
Development 
Bank (GDB )
 
The EDA project will manage the varying capacity risks of the E xecuting Entities by starting with a risk-averse approach, 
and over Year 1 will delegate resp onsibilities to the Executing  Entities. The process is as follows: 
 The Governments of Dominica and Grenada sign Privileges and Im munities with the GCF (Antigua and Barbuda 
has already signed) 
 The Subsidiary Agreement will be entered into by the DoE, acti ng as the Accredited Entity, and the Ministries 
with responsibility for Environm ent in Dominica and Grenada, re spectively, acting as Executing Entities for the 
implementation of this Project. For the purposes of Project Imp lementation in Antigua & Barbuda, the Accredited 
Entity will act as the Executing Entity 
 The Accredited Entity, in its capacity as the Executing Entity , shall manage direct paym ents to beneficiaries until 
the GCF has approved the Financial Management Capacity Assessme nt for the Ministry of Environment of 
Dominica and the Ministry of Environment for Grenada, who shall  act as Executing Entities. The AE will also 
oversee that the Executing Enti ties will have requisite complia nce with GCF Standards


---
*Page 56*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 148 
	
	C
 The Accredited Entity begins lim ited disbursements to the Exec uting Entities, following a process of limited cash 
advances, moitoring progress, demonstrated strength and capacit y with managing own disbursements on an 
advance basis (required 6-monthl y budget preparation and 6-mont hly work plans prior to limited disbursements)
 Pending the results of a ca pacity audit at the end of Year 1, the AE will fully delegate re sponsibility to the EEs 
 The EEs will apply to the GCF for Accreditation with the aim o f serving as national accredited entities by the 
completion of the EDA project 
 
Public sector project implementation arrangements  
 
Public sector project implement ation under EDA Output 2 will be  managed by the respective Executing Entity (EE). The 
EE will liaise with relevant stakeholders and will solicit conc epts for adaptation pilot projects from public sector 
Government Agencies. The concepts will be evaluated by the Nati onal Steering Committee using transparent and 
previously agreed criteria per the project’s Results Framework and vetted by the OECS M&E Unit. Once concepts are 
selected by the National Steering Committee, the EIA (including  ESS and gender) as well as  technical and financial 
studies will be done. Upon receiving national physical developm ent planning permissions, the projects will be financed 
for implementation. The Steering Committee in Antigua and Barbu da will serve both in a national and a sub-regional 
capacity. 
 
The diagram below illustrates co ntractual arrangements/flow of funds and flow of communication. For the first year, the 
Department of Environment will enter into contra cts for goods, works and services directly with the services providers, 
during which time the EEs will fill capacity gaps using their r espective country’s GCF Readiness support as well as a 
limited amount of funds budgeted under this EDA project. The OE CS Commission will play an important role in 
standardizing policies, procedures and operational manuals acro ss Member States, per their mandate to promote 
integration and harmonization under the Revised Treaty of Basse terre. The EEs will manage national implementation, 
including project work plans, the call for applications, and pr ocurement (drafting TORs, advertising, evaluations and 
procurement report). Goods, works and services will be procured  in accordance with the project’s Sustainable 
Procurement plan (ISO 20400:2017 – Sustainable procurement) whi ch will be tailored to the OECS context under Output 
1 of this project.  
 
   
Figure	16.	Contractual 	arrangements 	and	flow	of	funds	(red)	and	flow	of	reporting/communication 	under	Output	2		Green  Climate  
Fund
Public  Sector  
majority  bodyExecuting  Entity
OECS  Commission  
M&E  UnitOECS  Council  of 
Ministers  for 
Environment
Department  of 
Environment,  A&B (AE)
Internal  Auditor
Contractors  and 
consultants
M&E  Associate
Project  Execution Project  GovernanceCabinetOECS  Climate  
Finance  Working  
GroupContractual  
arrangements  
and Flow of funds
Flow of 
communication
Steering  
Committee  
Decision‐making
bodyOversight  function
ContractsAMA  & FAA
Project  
Agreement
Government  
Agencies


---
*Page 57*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 148 
	
	C
The Pre-Feasibility studies identif ied existing institutions an d committees in place in each of the countries to fulfill the 
required roles. The project inception phase will ensure that th ese entities are operating in accordance with GCF standards 
and guidance.  
 
Under the umbrella of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean Sta tes (OECS), the Council of Ministers for 
Environmental Sustainability (COMES) , which includes climate chang e issues, have been meeting on a regular basis 
since the St. George’s Declaration for Environmental Sustainabi lity was signed in 2006. The project results and progress 
will be reported to this Ministerial forum on an annual basis, to solicit high level input and buy-in. 
 
The OECS Climate Finance Working Group  was established by the Ministers at their third Council meetin g in 2016, as 
an appointed group of experts to work between meetings on clima te finance. The Working Group consists of the OECS 
Commission and appointed representatives from each Member State  and Associated Member State. The Working Group 
had its first meeting in February 2017, at which it adopted its  Terms of Reference (see Appendix). The Working Group 
will serve as a key means for sharing lessons learned and scali ng up EDA for the sub-region. The Working Group will 
meet each quarter, either in person or online.  
 
Dominica’s National Climate Ch ange Steering Committee (NSC) – the country’s National Steering Committee – was 
approved by Cabinet in 2000 and reconstituted in 2009. The NSC is mandated to hold quarterly meetings and 
extraordinary meetings will be c onvened if necessary. Currently , it is activated once there is a project related to climate 
change issues and it is chaired by the Environmental Coordinati ng Unit (ECU). The committee includes technical 
personnel, representatives from Government, and NGOs. Its Terms  of Reference state that the NSC, “will facilitate 
coordination of project activit ies among national stakeholders and will provide guidance and su pport for the execution of 
national climate change projects, programmes and activities to the Environmental Coordinating Unit. Individual members 
may also be responsible for overseeing specific components of t he climate change programmes and processes. 
Collectively the NSC will be res ponsible for the final review o f climate change reports, programmes and documents”.  The 
NSC reports to the Honourable Minister for Health and the Envir onment through the Environmental Coordinating Unit. 
The pre-feasibility study for Dom inica identified capacity buil ding needs of the Committee t hat will be implemented under 
Output 1 (see Appendix).   
 Grenada’s National Climate Change Committee (NCCC)  – the country’s National Steering Committee – was formed 
in 2002 to act predominately as an oversight and advisory body.
 Secretariat support is provided by the Climate Change 
Focal Point within the Environment Division. With support from GIZ, the Committee was reinvigorated and given a 
stronger focus on providing advis ory services to the Government  of Grenada. The NCCC’s revised TOR through this 
process provides for a greater role of private sector and the N GO community. There are four standing Working Groups 
under Grenada’s NCCC, these are: A daptation; Mitigation; Intern ational relations and negotiations; and Finance and 
Sustainable Development.  The Working Groups report monthly to the national committee. Th e Secretariat of the NCCC 
via its Chair reports monthly t o the Senior Management Board, a nd quarterly to Cabinet. The Committee is required to 
prepare a report about the Committee’s activities during the fi nancial year, including any advice given or 
recommendations made to the Minister/Cabinet. The pre-feasibili ty study identified capaci ty building needs of the 
Committee that will be implemented under Output 1 (see Appendix ).


---
*Page 58*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 148 
	
	C
 
On-granting implementation arrangements 
 
	
Figure	17.	Contractual 	arrangements 	and	flow	of	funds	(red)	and	flow	of	reporting/communication 	under	Output	3		
 
The community adaptation projects are capped at USD 50,000 per project. The entity that will issue community adaptation 
project call for proposals (“National NGO Fund” in the diagram above) will be selected during the project inception phase 
by identifying all eligible institutions to fill this role in t he respective EDA pilot countries, and issuing a closed solicit ation 
and negotiation with the National NGO Funds to agree to the ter ms and conditions of the arrangements. Based on the 
Feasibility Studies conducted duri ng project preparation, the m ost competitive national institutions to serve as NGO funds 
are: 
 Antigua and Barbuda: Marine Ecos ystems Protected Areas Trust ( MEPA Trust) 
 Dominica: National GEF Small Grants Programme 
 Grenada: Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF) 
 
See Section C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor for background information on National 
NGO Funds identified to date, w hich will be confirmed during pr oject inception.  
 
              Green  Climate  
Fund
National  NGO 
CommitteeNational  NGO 
FundOECS  Council  of 
Ministers  for 
Environment
Department  of 
Environment,  A&B
Internal  AuditorNGO/CSO  
beneficiaries
Project  Execution Project  GovernanceSteering  
Committee  OECS  Climate  
Finance  Working  
Group
OECS  Commission  
M&E  UnitM&E  AssociateExecuting  Entity
Decision‐making
bodyOversight  functionContractual  
arrangements  and 
Flow of funds
Flow of 
communicationAMA  & FAA
Grant
Agreement
Project  
Agreement


---
*Page 59*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 148 
	
	C
 
On-lending implementation arrangements  
  
Figure	18.	Contractual 	arrangements 	and	flow	of	funds	(red)	and	flow	of	reporting/communication 	under	Output	4	
The MSME Revolving Fund microfinancing for adaptation loans are  capped at USD 75,000 per loan. The entity that will 
manage the Revolving Fund loan programme in each of the countri es (“National Financial Mechanism” in the diagram 
above) will be selected during the project inception phase by i dentifying all eligible institutions to fill this role in the 
respective EDA pilot countries, and issuing a closed solicitati on and negotiation with the National Financial Mechanism 
to agree to the terms and conditions of the arrangements. Based  on the Feasibility Studies  conducted during project 
preparation, the most competitiv e national institutions to serv e as Financial Mechanisms are: 
 Antigua and Barbuda: Sustainable Island Resource Framework Fun d (SIRF Fund) 
 Dominica: Climate  Change Trust Fund 
 Grenada: Grenada Development Bank (GDB) 
 
See Section C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor for background information on National 
Financial Mechanism identified  to date, which will be confirmed  during project inception.   
 
Decision-making/Approval process  
 The respective national decision-making bodies in each country will be empowered to make funding decisions. 
Per the EDA RFP, the decision-making body should include civil society, the private sector and other relevant 
stakeholders, and should be sensitive to gender considerations.   
 
In the EDA pilot project, Output 1 will provide technical suppo rt to evaluate the performance, transparency and 
multi-stakeholder representation of the respective decision-mak ing bodies, and will build capacity in order to 
meet GCF criteria (for example, amend TORs, appoint NGO represe ntatives, improve secretariat support, 
among othe rs). Green  Climate  
Fund
National  Loans  
CommitteeNational  Financial  
MechanismOECS  Council  of 
Ministers  for 
Environment
Department  of 
Environment,  A&B
Internal  AuditorPrivate  Sector  loan 
beneficiaries
Project  Execution Project  GovernanceSteering  
Committee  OECS  Climate  
Finance  Working  
Group
OECS  Commission  
M&E  UnitM&E  AssociateExecuting  Entity
Decision‐making  
body Oversight  functionContractual  
arrangements  
and Flow of funds
Flow of 
communicationLoan 
AgreementAMA  & FAA
Project  
Agreement


---
*Page 60*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 148 
	
	C
Figure	19.	Decision‐making	approval	process	for	the	EDA	project	in	the	public,	NGO	and	private	sectors	
 
Construction and supervision methodology  The Executing Entity will identify expertise within the public sector to conduct construction and supervision 
under the Project Management modality (Output 2). Where experti se or human resources are not available 
within the Government, UNOPS may be contracted through an exist ing Memorandum of Understanding with 
the AE to oversee construction works, and train civil servants.  Under Output 3 (on-granting) and Output 4 (on-
lending), the National NGO Committee and the Loans Board will c onduct field visits to recipients, and the M&E 
Associate will conduct site visits according to the OECS M&E Po licy guidelines.   
 Institutional arrangements for EDA Monitoring and Evaluation  The OECS will provide project support through Monitoring and Ev aluation (see Section H.2. Arrangements for 
Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation ), and technical and management assistance by supplying a membe r of 
the PMU, TAC and the PMC at the appropriate level. For the purp oses of this enhanced direct access project, 
the OECS Commission will serve on the TAC and the PMC. The fina l agreement and arrangements will be 
executed via a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the DO E and the OECS Commission.  
 The OECS Commission recently went through structural re-organis ation with part of the vision being to 
operationalize its monitoring and evaluation functions. Prior t o October 2016, each project being managed by 
the Commission would have an M&E Officer directly assigned to t he Project Coordinator/Director; this results 
in, at the end of the project, the officer and along with the i nstitutional knowledge would be lost. Also, with a 
single M&E resource person, there was the inherent risk of dela ys due to unforeseen personal circumstances 
such as illness and/or exit of the officer from the organizatio n. This is a common challenge faced by all small 
islands.  
 Under the revised M&E Policy, projects being implemented by the  OECS Commission have a regional and 
national Output, and M&E is conducted at both levels. With the new organizational arrangement, the capacity 
for M&E is built at the Commission’s core administrative manage ment level and the national management 
rather than at the level of the individual projects. This rearr angement is designed to build capacity for M&E at 
the country level to facilitate the OECS’ aggregation role.  Decision  published  
onlineSubmit  adaptation  
Concept  NotesOn‐granting  
(public  sector)Line MinistriesPublic  Sector  
Investment  
Programme  (PSIP)  Evaluates  CNs using  
pre‐determined  
criteria;  makes  
funding  decision
Decision  published  
onlineResponds  to a Calls 
for Proposals  for 
adaptation  projectsOn‐granting  
(NGO  sector)Community  
groups,  NGOs  and 
CSOsNational  NGO 
CommitteeEvaluates  Proposals  
using  criteria;  makes  
approval  decision
On‐lending  
(private  sector)Decision  published  
onlineSubmit  applications  
for loansHomeowners  and 
BusinessesNational  Loans  
CommitteeEvaluates  
applications  and 
approves  loansNational  Steering  
Committee  oversight
ESS and Gender  screening
ESS and Gender  screening
ESS and Gender  screeningESS and Gender  provisions  
in application  template
Technical  & financial  studies
EIA development
Planning  approvals


---
*Page 61*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 148 
	
	C
 
The OECS Commission PMU does not currently provide M&E services  to agencies external to the OECS 
Commission and, therefore, the EDA would be piloting this appro ach. Nevertheless, the Commission’s vision 
with respect to its future M&E role is to transition into a Cen tre for Excellence, especially in areas of 
Programme/Project Management, which will be responsible for M&E  initiatives and capacity building at the 
regional and national levels.  The project hopes to work closel y with the IEU of the GCF to build capacity at 
the sub-regional level with the intention to transfer experienc es to pilot countries.


---
*Page 62*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 148 
	
	C 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrati ve purposes. If the table format 
below is used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Sect ion H. In the case of outputs, please mark when all the requir ed activities will be 
completed. 
IMPLEMENTATION TIMEFRAME : 2018  – 2022 YEAR 1 Y EAR 2 Y EAR 3 Y EAR 4 
TASK Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q12 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q 
Output 1. Enhanced capacity for climate adaptation planning, implementation, and 
monitoring and evaluation via direct access                  
Activity 1.1. Appoint implementation, ov ersight and transparency mechanisms with 
adequate capacity  X X               
Activity 1.2. Design a Sustai nable Procurement system for c onstruction supplies in pilot 
countries  X X               
Activity 1.3. Support accreditation of di rect access entities in pilot countries   X X X X X X         
Activity 1.4. Facilitate effective projec t management, monitoring and evaluation, and 
lessons learned consistent with an enhanced direct access approach (inception report, 
interim evaluation in year 2, final evaluation in year 4, and final APR (or project 
completion report ). X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Output 2. Governments implement concrete adaptation measures using 
ecosystem-based approaches where appropriate                  
Activity 2.1. Competitively solicit priority adaptation interventions for adaptation in the 
public sector  X X               
Activity 2.2. Undertake due diligence an d studies on public sector adaptation 
interventions as needed; details of indivi dual projects made accessible via website    X X             
Activity 2.3. Implement pilot approaches  for adaptation in public infrastructure      X X X X X X X X X    
Output 3. Community resilience to climate impacts is enhanced through tangible 
adaptation benefits                 
Activity 3.1. Select community adaptation projec ts through a call for proposals; details of 
individual projects made accessible via website     X X           
Activity 3.2. Communities implement ad aptation projects wi th tangible benefits       X X X X X X X X   
Activity 3.3. Develop knowledge products and communicate impact       X X   X X   X X 
Output 4. Privately owned physical assets of vulnerable populations are more 
resilient to climate variability and ch ange through concessional microfinancing                  
Activity 4.1. Identify and stre ngthen existing systems and procedures for the Revolving 
Fund loans programme for adaptation     X X


---
*Page 63*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 148 
	
	C 
Activity 4.2. Launch the private sector Revolvi ng Fund for adaptation in buildings via calls 
for application; details of individual projects made accessible via website       X  X  X  X    
Activity 4.3. Finance adaptation in buildings        X X X X X X X   
Activity 4.4. Implement and manage reflows 
          X X X X X X X


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 148 
 
	
	
	D
                                                 
73 World Bank, 2012. New Report Examines Risks of 4 Degree  Hotter World by End of Century . http://bit.ly/1b5lwGy  Accessed April 
9, 2016. 
74 Simpson, M. C., et al, 2012. CARIBSAVE Climate Change Risk Atl as (CCCRA) - Antigua and Barbuda. DFID, AusAID and The 
CARIBSAVE Partnership, Barbados, West Indies. 
75 CARIBSAVE, 2012. The CARIBSAVE Climate Change Risk Atlas: Clim ate Change Risk Profile For Grenada  
76 World Bank, 2015. Dominica Lost Almost All its GDP due to Clim ate Change 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/12/01/dominica-lo st-almost-all-gdp-climate-c hange Accessed 14 September 2017 D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
 
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consideration of other alternatives. 
 Financing Adaptation in a “4 Degree world”
73 
 On September 6, 2017, the second most powerful hurricane on rec ord made direct landfall on Barbuda, the northern 
island of the twin island state of Antigua and Barbuda. This is  one of the projections of the Regional Climate Model for 
the Caribbean, which projects an increase in the intensity of h urricanes of between 5% and 15%
74. Hurricane Irma 
destroyed 90% of the building stock in Barbuda, and all communi cations we destroyed, leaving the community without 
access to Antigua for days. All cr itical facilities (air strips , sea port, schools, hospital, po lice station) were destroyed. The 
sand spit which formed the protective barriers for the Codringt on lagoon national park (the second largest frigate bird 
sanctuary in the western hemisp here and the Nation’s only Ramsa r site) was breached. 
 
In August of 2015, Tropical Storm Erika impacted the island of Dominica. In just a few hours, the strong winds and rains 
destroyed critical infrastructur e that eliminated an estimated five years of normal investment for the country. According 
to the World Bank, the total damage and loss was estimated at U S$483 million, equivalent to 90 percent of Dominica’s 
Gross Domestic P roduct (GDP).  
 
The devastating losses borne to G renada’s economy in 2004 and 2 005 from the passage of Hu rricanes Ivan and Emily 
respectively put the country’s inherent vulnerability in stark relief, with some of the impacted industries still in recovery 
10 years later. The total damage from Hurricane Ivan alone was estimated at EC$2.4 billion, or twice the value of 
Grenada’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (OECS, 2004). Direct and  secondary losses were experienced in virtually 
every sector and these damages were compounded by the passage o f Hurricane Emily just 10 months later. 
 Just under 28,000 houses or 89% o f the country’s housing stock of 31,122 houses were damaged by Hurricane Ivan. 
Near 10,000 houses, or 30%, were so damaged that they required complete replacement. Approximately 22,000 or 70% 
required repairs.  The cost of damage to the housing sector was  estimated at $EC1, 380 million dollars
75. 
 
These three case studies from each of the participating EDA isl and states examples illustrate the vital importance of the 
GCF to SIDS including those involved in this project, to offset  the costs of climate change, which are negatively altering 
the development trajectories, economies, landscapes and livelih oods of the SIDS involved in this project. The small 
populations of SIDS results in  relatively higher adaptation and di saster risk reduction costs per capita. 
 Climate change is increasing the exposure to natural disasters and this represents a real threat to development 
prospects in the Caribbean. An earlier study from the Caribbean  Catastrophic Risk Insuranc e Facility (CCRIF) showed 
that annual expected losses from wind, storm surge and inland f looding amount to up to 6 percent of GDP in some 
countries.
76 
 The private sector and communities are bearing the costs of cli mate variability by borrowing at high rates to meet 
adaptation needs for their businesses and homes. Local borrowin g for the private sector can only take place if the value 
of the property can be held as col lateral. Further, interest ra tes are at 8% and above.


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 148 
 
	
	
	D
                                                 
77 World Bank, 2012. New Report Exa mines Risks of 4 Degree Hotter  World by End of Century. http://bit.ly/1b5lwGy Accessed April 
9, 2016. In many communities, however, e ven at these high costs to indiv iduals, community groups and businesses cannot 
access the needed capital since they do not qualify for loans. With the World Bank estimating the economic costs of a 
4-degree world77 and the IPCC AR5 Chapter 29 report for small island states, th e Eastern Caribbean small island states’ 
lack of access to grants and concessional loans to prepare for projected impacts spells disaster for its communities, 
populations, and economic growth.   The private sector targeted in this proposal are homeowners and small business 
owners whose property and assets  are exposed to c limate risks. This group has difficulty ac cessing credit at affordable 
rates to prepare for climate variability and change, are genera lly indebted due to past losses and damages, and high 
costs of electricity and water,  and as a result are generally a t risk of falling below the poverty line due to a natural disas ter 
or slow onset climate impacts.  
 
Economic declines as well as demands from sectors such as healt h, education and debt servicing has made it extremely 
challenging for Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada to co ntinue self-financing the cost of adapting to climate 
change. This is particularly important when the need to adapt w ill require large amounts of a ccessible and predictable 
resources. The nature and size o f the problem cannot be address ed with the current flow of donor resources, which, 
while important, lack predictabilit y, scale and therefore impac t. 
 
The value added of this EDA funding proposal is to provide an o pportunity for the Direct Acc ess entity in Antigua and 
Barbuda to work with Dominica and Grenada and other countries i n the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States 
(OECS) to move beyond the financing of individual climate chang e projects towards a more comprehensive, stakeholder 
driven and pro grammatic approach to pro jected climate impacts, which is based on transparent criteria a nd lon g-term Case Study 5. Why is the cost o f adaptation to climate change s o high in small islands? 
Source: Adapted from IPCC WGII AR5 – Chapter 29 (SIDS) 
 
Adaptation to climate change that involves infrastructural work s requires large up-front overhead costs, which in the 
case of small islands cannot be downscaled in proportion to the  population’s size. This is a major socioeconomic 
reality that confronts small islands, notwithstanding the benef its of adaptation.  
 Moreover, the relative impact of an extreme event such as a hur ricane that can affect most of a small island’s 
territory has a disproportionate impact on that state’s gross d omestic product, compared to a larger country where 
an individual event generally a ffects a small proportion of its  total territory and its GDP. T he result is relatively higher 
adaptation and disaster risk reduct ion costs per capita in coun tries with small populations and areas—especially 
those that are also geographica lly isolated, have a poor resour ce base, and have high transport costs. 
 
 
Before (left) and after (right) images of Hurricane Irma’s impa ct on the main village in Barbuda, where 90% of buildings were damaged or 
destroyed Source: UNOSAT, September 2017


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 148 
 
	
	
	D
                                                 
78 IMF, 2016. Grenada Debt Sustainability Analysis https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/pdf/2016/dsacr16133.pd f Accessed 7 
September 2017 capacity building to support implementation of national priorit ies that are aligned with the GCF’s investment criteria and 
results management framework, the Paris Agreemen t and the UNFCC C.  
 
D.2. Exit Strategy  
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3 . This should include a description of strategies  for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable). 
 
The Governments and citizens of Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica a nd Grenada are already self-financing adaptation 
and disaster recovery, and paying for the maintenance of physic al assets, and they will cont inue to do so after the EDA 
project has concluded. It is est imated that a total of 5 percen t of GDP in the two years following a hurricane is what 
Eastern Caribbean SIDS pay to re cover from an extreme hurricane78. Furthermore, the public sector has been recovering 
from Category 5 hurricanes, adapt ing coastlines, coping with th e three-year meteorological drought that the Eastern 
Caribbean experienced from 2014 – 2016, responding to zika and other vector-borne illness outbreaks, among other 
adaptation strategies. The Governments and stakeholders in the target SIDS will continue to finance adaptation to 
climate variability after the project has ended, including main tenance of physical assets and scaling up of successful 
initiatives.  
 
The project will invest in adapt ation interventions to build re silience in populations that are disproportionately suffering 
the impacts and costs of climate change and have difficult acce ssing finance – this is the purpose for which the Fund 
was established under the UNFCCC.  
 The intention with this project is to pilot innovative devolved  adaptation decision-making processes and maximize 
learning-by-doing opportunities for each pilot country and the OECS Commission. The project will support the 
accreditation of three Accredited Entities, such as: the Grenad a Development Bank and the OECS Commission. 
Through the EDA pilot of the Revolving Fund, the Eastern Caribb ean will be better positioned to access the on-lending 
window of the GCF for the Revolv ing Fund innovative sustainable  financing mechanism.  
 Countries will also apply for Readiness from the GCF to facilit ate accreditation of the national  entities. This is consistent 
with the project approach to use  and strengthen existing intuit ions and arrangements.  
 With lessons learned from a strong monitoring, evaluation and l earning framework for the pr oject, the EDA will assist 
these entities to apply for additional funds from a variety of international and domestic sources within the third year of 
the project. This will allow for scaling up to provide addition al areas of funding for other results areas of the GCF, with 
secured co-financing. The OECS C ommission is applying for Readi ness support  from EDA the pilot countries to develop 
a Sub-Regional GCF Programme tha t will provide a pipeline of pr ojects to achieve scale in the Eastern Caribbean.  
 Sustainability of Processes and Sy stems enhanced by the project  
 
The Enhancing Direct A ccess pilot project uses existing country  arrangements and builds ca pacity in ESS and gender, 
transparency decision-making, and good governance. By identifyi ng existing financing processes and mechanisms in 
climate change adaptat ion, the institutions  will be empowered t hrough devolved decision-making to make funding 
decisions. Since these are existing arrangements, their long-te rm sustainability is more likely  after the project ends. For 
the interventions in the public sector (Output 2), the EDA proj ect will draw on experiences from Antigua and Barbuda’s 
Public Sector Investment Proce ss (PSIP). This process will allo w for a systematic approach to the identification and 
monitoring of the projects in this Output by the Government age ncies themselves. It also takes into consideration and 
use the resources of the Government for project execution.  Thi s will also allow for the projects to be aligned with the 
Government investment programs , thus drawing on national source s of funds beyond the life of the project.


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 148 
 
	
	
	D
For adaptation in the NGO sector (Output 3), the Call for Propo sals will require applicants to elaborate how their 
interventions will be sustained over time, and this will be con sidered by the national decision-making Committee. For 
the interventions in the priv ate sector the home owner will be expected to maintain their property as per normal and 
there are considerations for insurance. The role of the OECS Co mmission M&E Unit as an independent evaluator is 
also to maximize learning opportunities through the EDA, and id entify strategies that could be institutionalized across 
Member States, such as sustainable financing innovations. The p rocess for institutionalizing is via a recommendation to 
the Council of Ministers, and onward recommendation to the OECS  Parliament, for laws and policies.   By Using the 
OECS Commission it ensures that t he results of the project are included in all of the 6 countries in the region. 
 Ultimately, the best exit strategy  is to design a project that is aligned with the relevant climate change strategy and 
national development goals, because these will complement domes tic funding streams. This concept is well documented 
in the Terminal Evaluation of the RRACC and others, where proje ct activities that meet the objectives of the stakeholders 
were subsumed into work plans and budgets. In contrast, activit ies that did not have buy-i n or engagement were either 
not finished or were finished but not maintained even during th e period of the terminal evaluation. This EDA project’s 
exit strategy is demonstrating dev olved decision-making that wi ll be transparent and responsive to priorities, needs and 
systems of recipient countries and communities, and maximize co untry ownership at all levels. A robust monitoring, 
evaluation and learning framewo rk will be established via the O ECS Commission in partnership with 
regional/international research in stitutions and national count erparts. Evaluative research  approaches will examine the 
following questions: 
 
• Are the EDA project decision-ma king processes targeting the vu lnerable section of the population? 
• Are the EDA project’s on-granting and on-lending awards leadin g to increased adaptation action of the target 
population? If yes, by how much? 
• Are people becoming more resilient as a consequence of the on- granting and on-lending awards? 
• What type of adaptation actions/ options are being pursued by t he target population through the EDA’s on – 
granting/on – lending approaches (e.g. economic, ecological ada ptations; social vulnerability approaches 
aimed at addressing underlying social issues; approaches focuse d on enhancing a sy stems resilience; 
adaptation approaches which targe t actions to specific climate change risks)? 
• What knowledge has been gathered, what are the lessons learned  and what is the scop e for replication?  
The results of this investigative monitoring, evaluation and le arning partnership will up-scali ng strategy and partnerships 
with a variety of international and domestic sources


---
*Page 68*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 148 
 
	
	E
In this section, the accredited ent ity is expected to provide a  brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme agains t each of the Fund’s six inves tment criteria. Activity- specific sub-criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, w hich can be found in the Fund’s  Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any reque st for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/progra mme to contribute to the achieve ment of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into  account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework .  
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock-in of long-lived, high emission or 
climate-vulnerable infrastructure. 
 
This EDA project will contribute to the achievement of the GCF’ s objectives and result areas by serving as a pilot 
project for the enhanced direct access modality. The EDA initia tive is designed to provide an opportunity for accredited 
entities and countries to move beyond the financing of individu al, bankable projects towards a more comprehensive, 
stakeholder driven programmatic a pproach, which is based on tra nsparent criteria that are aligned with the Fund’s 
investment criteria and resu lts management framework79. 
 This EDA project will assist the Fund to pilot a country-driven  approach towards the achiev ement of climate-resilient 
sustainable development consistent with the Paris Agreement. Sp ecific to the EDA Request for Proposals, the project 
will meet the expectations and objectives of the GCF pilot by d emonstrating enhanced direct access for adaptation in 
three vulnerable small island developing states, in a variety o f sectors (Government, priv ate sector, and CSOs), to 
maximize learning opportunities. The project will also pilot co llaborative direct access implementation arrangements 
for additional lessons learned to inform GCF mechanisms.  
 Impact of the EDA project, aligned with GCF investment criteria
80: 
 Approximately 13,200 direct project beneficiaries, totaling 5%  of the population of the three pilot SIDS. Direct 
project beneficiaries are those who receive direct access to pr oject funds to build thei r resilience under Output 
3 (adaptation grants to NGOs) and Output 4 (Revolving Fund loan s to beneficiaries). Under Output 3, grant 
size is benchmarked against the GEF Small Grants Programme at U SD 50,000 per grant, with approximately 
200 beneficiaries per grant; with USD 3 M, this Output will sup port approximately 60 grants for CSOs, or 1,200 
people. For Output 4, the average loan size is estimated at USD  15,000 per household; on average, there are 
3 people per household, and with USD 6 M, approximately 400 hou seholds will be able to access to the 
Revolving Fund, directly benefitting 1,200 people 
 Indirect beneficiaries are est imated at 87,000 people, or 32% of the population of the beneficiary SIDS. Indirect 
beneficiaries are those who benefit from Output 1 (capacity bui lding and knowledge products reaching 51,000 
people in total) and Output 2 (public sector grants). Output 1 beneficiaries will have improved knowledge of 
projected downscaled climate im pacts, technical adaptation opti ons and means for evaluating appropriate 
actions. For Output 2, resilienc e will be built indirectly thro ugh watershed-scale adaptation interventions, for 
example creation and rehabilitating ponds and natural wetlands to facilitate infiltration and attenuation of peak 
storm flows where feasible ( depending on prevailing soils); amo ng other interventions. It is estimated that 
public sector grants will total USD 3 million in each country, with 6,000 beneficiaries per intervention. These 
two components are estimated  to indirectly benefit 68,100 peopl e. 
 
                                                 
79 Green Climate Fund, 2016. Enhancing Direct Access Request for Proposals 
80 A person can be both a direct b eneficiary (e.g. a loan or gran t recipient) and an indirect benef iciary (e.g. receive training  or be 
exposed to knowledge products). Onl y the direct beneficiaries a re considered in the evaluation of the project impact, in order  to 
measure real impact and to avoid  any risks of double counting b eneficiaries.


---
*Page 69*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 148 
 
	
	E
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
 
Note about gender disaggregation:  
 
The GCF core indicators are gender disaggregat ed, all of the "o ther relevant indicators" are gender disaggregated, 
and all of the Gender A ction Plan indicators  are gender disaggr egated. Further the entire M&E plan for the project 
per the M&E and Gender policies is gender disaggregated.  
 
GCF 
core 
indicators Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) Annual N/A 
Lifetime N/A 
 Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) Total Number of direct beneficiaries: 13,200 
(50% women ) 
Number of indirect beneficiaries: 69,000 
(50% women ) 
Percentage 
(%) 5% of total population (of which 50% is 
women) 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  
 Number of people trained to identify, prioritize, implement, m onitor and evaluate adaptation 
strategies and measures (ta rget: 100 people trained, disaggregated by gender ) 
 Proportion of beneficiaries who believe project-related decisi on making is inclusive and 
responsive, by sex, age, disability and population group (targe t: 90% of beneficiaries are satisfied, 
disaggregated by gender, ability, age ) 
 Public awareness activities carried out and population reached  (target: 5 knowledge products 
reaching 50,000 people of which 50% are female ) 
 Number of transparent sustainable  financing mechanisms support ing adaptation in the OECS 
sub-region (target: creation or enhancement of 3 sustainable fi nancing mechanisms, and 
accreditation of 3 Direct Acce ss entities in the OECS sub-regio n to either the GCF, AF, and other 
funds) 
 Number of vulnerable households and businesses that use Fund-s upported microfinancing to 
respond to climate change and variability (target: 300 vulnerab le households and 100 businesses)
 Number of physical assets made more resilient to climate varia bility and change, considering 
human benefits (target: 9 assets – types and extents to be dete rmined during project inception) 
 Number of males and females benefiting from the adoption of climate resilient technologies and 
practices (target: 15,650 males, 15,650 females) 
 Coverage/scale of ecosystems re stored, protected or strengthen ed in response to climate 
variability and change ( target: restoration of 9 ha of wetlands , 6 km of waterways, 15 ha of forests)
 
See the Tracking Tool Appendix for more information on the base lines and project targets for the indicators 
listed above.  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values co mpare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator 
values for a similar project/programme in a comparable context). 
 
The OECS Commission M&E Unit w ill provide monitoring and indepe ndent evaluation services to the project. The 
OECS M&E Policy specifies comp liance against the following stan dards:


---
*Page 70*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 148 
 
	
	E
 The Organisation for Economic C ooperation and Development (OEC D); 
 The Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC) quality standa rds, 
 Evaluation Cooperation Group (ECG) Guidelines; 
 UNEG Norms, Standards and Code of Conduct and Ethical Guidelin es and 
 The OECS Project Management Guidelines 
 
The excel spreadsheet containing corresponding source data and calculations is attached in the Tracking Tool 
Appendix. 
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed acti vity can catalyze impact beyon d a one-off project/pro gramme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme ’s expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or climate-resilient 
development pathways could be scaled- up and replicated including a descripti on of the steps necessary to 
accomplish it. 
 This project’s innovation is in its delivery of climate financi ng, which moves beyond the financing of individual, bankable 
projects towards a more comprehen sive, stakeholder driven and p rogrammatic approach.  
 
The business-as-usual situation is that climate finance receive d, from inception to first disbursement, is a multi-year 
and highly unpredictable process, ranging between 2 in the best -case scenario and 8 years from the time of application 
to first disbursement for tradi tional individual, bankable proj ects. In contrast, the private sector such as those targeted 
in this proposal (home and business owners) operates on a timel ine of a few weeks to a few months; in the public 
sector, budget decisions are made between September and Decembe r for full expenditure the following year. This 
disconnect between private and public national budgetary cycles  and multi-year multilateral climate financing cycles is 
a key barrier to achieving trans formational adaptation outcomes , where various different revenue streams are required 
to implement a large-scale, transformational project. 
 OECS member states that have had climate finance committed to d ate, for example, have received relatively little 
benefit from this in terms of  material financial support
81. Enhanced direct acc ess is an opportunity to pilot approaches 
that will overcome a key barrier  to achieving transformational adaptation outcomes, namely, the lack of predictability 
and timeliness in the delivery of climate finance. This EDA pro ject will pilot a strategy for overcoming climate finance 
delivery barrier by devolving decision making at the country an d local/sectoral level, thereby allowing greater 
involvement and input from impact ed stakeholders and, important ly, providing predictability as to when financing will 
be disbursed to direct beneficiaries in order to leverage compl ementary sources of funding in both the public private, 
and CSO sector.  
 
This EDA proposal is innovative in its use of concessional micr o-financing loans (from the Revolving Fund) in 
adaptation. Micro-financing has  significant potential for adapt ation investments, such as making homes more climate 
resilient. This pilot project c ould unlock potential in the cro wdfunding sector to contribute to adaptation, either through 
an initiative by the GCF Private Sector Facility, in establishe d crowdfunding platforms such as Kiva82, or by 
mainstreaming with domestic funding, such as localized pollutio n permits to finance adaptation, offering a climate-
resilient sustainable development pathway. 
 
The EDA project will provide the following conditions to furthe r scale up activities to support a paradigm shift in the 
mechanisms for delivery of climate finance:  
                                                 
81 SEI, 2017. Climate finance to the Small Island States of the E astern Caribbean. 
82 von Ritter, K., Black-Layne, D. 2013. Crowdfunding for Climate Change: A new source of finance for climate action at the local 
level? European Capacity Building Initiative, May.


---
*Page 71*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 148 
 
	
	E
1. The proof of success in the projects and lessons learnt can be used to access funding at a larger scale at 
the GCF and other channels, inclu ding through catalyzing privat e sector financing, 
2. The pilot of indicators and monitoring of results to evaluat e whether the EDA modality can facilitate more 
financing to reach vulnerable populations, and whether the fina ncing is having intended impacts on building 
resilience  
3. Improved understanding at the household/community/government  department level of how to integrate 
safeguards into projects and how to scale up adaptation financi ng from various sources (domestic, 
international, public, private, etc.); and 
4. Lessons learned for integrat ed resilience at the community l evel to maximize impact. 
 The case for paradigm shift is built into the EDA Request for P roposals pilot: the GCF is piloting the EDA access 
mechanism and, if successful, the GCF will scale up and mainstr eam EDA in its access mechanisms. To maximize the 
benefits and lessons learned of the EDA pilot, scaling up and l essons will also need to be addressed at the GCF level. 
As stated in the EDA Request for Proposals: A final evaluation at the country level and over all pilots will consolidate 
the lessons learned, allowi ng scalability and mainstreaming... The pilot phase will be evaluated and lessons learned 
will lead to potential scaling up. The evaluation timing will be set for assessing mid-term outcomes (two to three years) 
and longer-term impacts and lessons to be learned (five years or more).  The Department of Environment as Accredited 
Entity will transfer data and les sons learned, and cooperate wi th the GCF Secretar iat, in this regard. 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 72*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creat ion or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions. 
 
The EDA project will work with ex isting institutions and decisi on-making bodies to build adaptation-specific knowledge 
and learning of good governance practices. The project will pro vide learning opport unities in areas of:  
 Adaptation technology in buildings; 
 Sustainable financing mechanisms  for climate change and enviro nment; 
 Ecosystem-based adaptation and linkages with flood and vector controls measures;  
 The benefits of NGO and Private Sector participation in decisi on-making processes; 
 Best practices in GIS-based dat a collection, monitoring and ev aluation. 
 
The project’s potential for knowledge and learning is enhanced through the involvement of the OECS Commission 
M&E Unit, which will for the first time provide external M&E se rvices to a project to independently evaluate project 
results ( Sub-component 1.3 Monitoring, evaluation and promoting learning with a budget of USD 0.5 M). In the context 
of the EDA this will promote acco untability and maximize learni ng opportunities for the sub-region. 
 
The project will develop at least five knowledge products, whic h will include comprehensive information on the project’s 
adaptation pilots, the enhanced direct access modality, and oth er innovations identified under the project. These 
outputs will be disseminated throu gh the UNFCCC R egional Collab oration Centers, communities of practice, centers 
of excellence, and the information products will be publicly av ailable on the OECS website. The outputs will be 
uploaded to the Climate Technology Center and Network (CTCN), t he CARICOM Climate Change Center website, and 
other networks to promote shared knowledge and learning on clim ate adaptation and enhanced direct access 
modalities.  
 
The EDA project will present the impact evaluation results and lessons learned to all OECS Member States at the 
annual Council of Meetings for Ministers of Environment. Partic ipating Member States are also members of the 
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and the EDA proj ect will present  findings, impact evaluation and lessons learned 
with the regional community at various forums, and upload proje ct information to the CARICO M Climate Change Center 
information repository83. The EDA project will share less ons learned with Pacific SIDS under the umbrella of the 
Alliance of Small Island States ( AOSIS), the COP meetings, and through South-South cooperation. 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creat ion of an enabling environment  
                                                 
83 CARICOM Climate Change Center Cl earing House http://clearingho use.caribbeanclimate.bz/


---
*Page 73*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low-carbon and/or resilient development 	that go beyond the program. 	
Describe how the proposal contributes to  innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include: 
 Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
 Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for 
projects/programme 
 
The proposed measures under this EDA project will contribute to  conditions for effective and sustained participation of 
private and public-sector actors in climate resilient developme nt that go beyond the initiative. The EDA pilot will achieve 
this by addressing barriers across three key areas84: 
 Data, information, and capacity  for implementation: Through Sub-component 1.1 Capacity building to 
strengthen financial institutions, devolve decision -making, stakeholder engagem ent for transparency, and 
sustainable procurement (USD 0.5 M), this activity will produce decision- support tools to understand and 
assess risks and opportunities, and support the identification and selection of adaptation actions elaborated 
for specific sectoral and geographic needs. 
 Institutional arrangements: The project will strengthen existi ng institutions and decision-making processes in 
each of the pilot countries, and increase the transparency and inclusiveness of these processes. The project 
will promote coordinating bodies made of government, private se ctor, civil society, NGOs and/or academia 
with activities focused on climate risk and adaptation, includi ng funding for climate change adaptation in the 
private sector 
 Economic incentives: The proj ect will demonstrate innovative q uasi-public, quasi-private financing instruments 
(the Revolving Fund programme for adaptation) in support of cli mate change adaptation in the building sector. 
Through the Revolving Fund structure, this initiative will cont inue to generate adaptation benefits long after the 
project ends.  
 
There is no foreseeable anticipate benefits to the Bond markets , but the project will monitor benefits in the insurance 
market from the increase resilie nce of the housing sector.  Ove r time, more resilient buildings  may result in the reduction 
of insurance premiums, in particular for low income homes, whic h would also enable more people to buy insurance 
coverage if it is affordable. At present, vulnerable groups inc luding female-headed homes have a low uptake of 
insurance coverage.  
 
Using such financing mechanisms to fund targeted concrete adapt ation activities provides a novel approach to access 
to climate finance for adaptation in the Eastern Caribbean.  Fu rthermore, innovative financing in addition to ecosystem-
based adaptation can result in cost-effective adaptation interv entions to improve climate res ilience by securing multiple 
benefits for vulnerable communities and sectors85 and making the Country, once again, a good place to invest and  
build markets.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
                                                 
84 Stenek, V., Amado, J.C., and Greenall, D., 2013. Enabling Envi ronment for Private Sector Adaptation: An Index Assessment 
Framework, International Financ e Corporation, Washington DC 
85 Nicholls et al. 2007. Ranking por t cities with high exposure a nd vulnerability to climate extr emes–exposure estimates. OECD 
Environmental Working Paper no. 1. OECD, Paris.


---
*Page 74*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Describe how the project/programme strengt hens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low-emission technologies or activiti es, promote development of addi tional low-emission policies, 
and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development. 
 
This project is designed to res pond to the GCF’s Request for Pr oposals to demonstrate dev olved decision making, in 
this case in small islands states public, private and community  sectors. This project is designed to complement the 
implementation of new or existi ng legal frameworks that have or  are being developed for the implementation of the 
Paris Agreement.  This project w ill demonstrate lessons learned  from the implementation of a regional Building Code 
and the impacts on low-income per sons who have to pay more (as a percentage of their income) to build and 
maintain their homes.    
 
The project implementing entity will work with t he NDAs to acce ss Readiness support to develop new polices and 
regulations to support the result s of the implemented pilot pro jects, such as the National  Adaptation Planning window 
of Readiness under the GCF.  The EDA project will not be develo ping new policies or leg islation; this would be 
outside the scope of the projec t and the purpose of the EDA Req uest for Proposals. How ever, the EDA project will 
inform and contribute to polic ies and frameworks that are being  updated and/or develop ed in the near future, these 
include: 
 Revision of the OECS St. George’ s Declaration for Environmenta l Sustainability 
 Development of an OECS Sustainab le Procurement Policy, includi ng climate resilience standards 
 Case studies and lessons learned  to present in each country’s National Communications and Biennial 
Update Reports  to the UNFCCC 
 Nationally Determined Contribut ions and National Adaptation Pl ans  
 Climate Change, Environment and Natural Resource Management Bi ll 2016 (Dominica) 
 Revision of Dominica’s Low-Car bon Climate Resilient Developmen t Strategy 
 
The selection of activities to  be funded under the EDA project requires that access to financing will be contingent on 
consistency of the proposed measur es with the respective nation al and sub-regional policies and laws. 
 
 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and ec onomic co-benefits, includin g gender-sensitive development impact  
The EDA project will contribute  to the achievement of several S ustainable Development Goals in the EDA countries:


---
*Page 75*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 148 
 
	
	E
 
Figure	20.	Linkages	between	improvements 	in	housing	and	buildings 	and	the	Sustainable 	Development 	Goals	(source:	IDB,	2016.	The	State	
of	Social	Housing	in	Six	Caribbean 	Countries. 	Inter‐American 	Development 	Bank.)	
 
SDG 1 End poverty in all its forms everywhere: All people everywhere, including  the poorest and most vulnerabl e, 
should enjoy a basic standard o f living and social protection b enefits. Currently , approximately 10% of the population 
in the target countries are at r isk of falling below the povert y line due to an extreme climate event, such as a 
hurricane86. Tangible economic benefits w ill be enjoyed by the beneficiary  population through project interventions 
that will enhance access  to concessional microfinancing for vul nerable homes and businesses. The Revolving Fund 
loan facility for adaptation will benefit at least 300 househol ds and at least 100 small businesses through the loan 
disbursement of the US $6 million principal (U S$2 M in each coun try).  
 SDG 3 Ensure healthy lives and pr omote well-being for all at al l ages: Neighborhood upgrading, which is a co-
benefit to the Revolving Fund init iative, can reduce infectious  disease by increasing access to potable water, 
sanitation, and waste removal. T he public-sector waterway and d rainage interventions under Output 2, using 
ecosystem-based adapt ation where appropri ate, will be designed to prevent the breeding of the Aedes aegypti  
mosquito which is the vector fo r Zika virus that is present in the Eastern Caribbean, a s well as dengue fever, and 
Chikungunya. The mosquito breeds in stagnant water especially w ater containing bacteria associated with the 
breakdown of organic matter suc h as. Interventions in the water way so there are fewer places where water can 
stagnate will ease this problem. 
 
SDG 5 Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls: Flooding is a common hazard across the pilot 
countries, and women-headed households can be disproportionatel y affected. The proposed adaptation measures in 
waterway and drainage systems under Output 2 will have a positi ve impact on the community, particularly women. 
 The project is expected to posit ively impact people’s wellbeing  particularly that of women:  
Women participants from a focus group discussion held  in the community shared t he frustration with the poor 
drainage systems and highlighted how it affected their heal th, security and livelihood. They further described 
how they have had to negotiate the high levels of water to  save their lives, such as the use of sticks and pipes 
to pull each other out of their homes. The flooding has  impacted children’s access to school. Flooding also 
makes mobility difficult for both men and women.  – Gender Expert reporting on Focus Group Discussions held 
for the Revolving Fund in Antigua and Barbuda   
 The project’s logframe includes gender-disaggregated indicators  (Indicator 3, 4, 5, and 7). These indicators will track 
the profile of beneficiaries in the following areas: number of people trained and represented on decision-making 
committees and units; beneficiaries who believe pro
ject-related decision makin g is inclusive and responsive; public


---
*Page 76*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 148 
 
	
	E
awareness outreach (where possible); and beneficiaries of Fund- supported microfinancing to respond to climate 
change and variability. 
 
The Revolving Fund loan programme for adaptation is gender-resp onsive. Micro, small and medium enterprises are 
noted as critical to the generation of economic activity and lo ng-term stability, and women are considered to dominate 
this often-informal sector87. By reducing the vulnerability of this informal home and small  business sector, and by 
tracking project interventions t o ensure that benefits reach ta rget populations, this project will support national gender 
equity goals and the SDG 5. 
 SDG 8 Promote sustained, inclus ive and sustainable economic gro wth, full and productive employment and 
decent work for all: Effective housing policies can ex pand employment in the buildin g sector and foster local economic 
development. Housing programs can promote mixed-used neighborho ods with more economic opportunities and 
improve the functioning of urban labor markers. This project ex pects to create an estimated 400 national and sub-
regional jobs; however, this will be further refined as project  interventions are presented by stakeholders. 
 The Revolving Fund intervention can also provide options for co mmunities to secure their lives and livelihoods beyond 
securing their homes. In the OECS, the informal sector and subs istence livelihoods typically operate out of their homes. 
Farmers for example usually store produce in refrigerators in t heir home as part of the supply chain distribution; 
therefore, improving resilience of homes will also support prod uctivity of self-employed livelihoods
88. 
 SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries: The project will provide financing to communities that 
have traditionally had difficulties accessing financial resourc es. As opposed to centralizing support for hurricane 
shelters, the structure of thi s project is to allow people to s afely live in their homes that a re upgraded to be resilient to 
the impacts of extreme weather: a Category 5 hurricane, atmosph eric temperature increase of 2
oC, and a 3-month 
drought. These resilience measures in buildings will address dr ought and other extreme events – meaning that they 
can go to work, school and take care of families. The EDA proje ct will benefit vulnerable groups, and indicators are 
disaggregated to track impact. Vulnerable groups include women,  young men, the indigenous Kalinago (Carib) people 
of Dominica, and persons with disabilities.  
 
SDG 11 Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resil ient and sustainable: The Revolving Fund 
supports Target 11.1, which calls on countries to “ensure acces s for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and 
basic services and upgrade slums [by 2030].” Adequate housing i mproves the health of its occupants and school 
performance by children, reduces domestic violence, and leads t o higher satisfaction in terms of security and quality 
of life89. 
 SDG 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns:  Output 1 of the project will build capacity in 
sustainable procurement, and the project’s procurement plan wil l be designed to meet ISO 20400:2017. Sustainable 
procurement is an opportunity for market transformation in comm oditized markets with com petitive supplier pools. 
There the process of embedding sustainability requirements into  procurement has been shown to cause a so-called 
green bullwhip effect
90, whereby environmental requirement s can become a signal that t hen transfers vertically down 
a supply chain from buyer to distributor to assembler to manufa cturer. Given the increasingly global nature of many 
supply chains, small shifts upstream have the propensity to dri ve outsized sustainability e ffects down the chain. The 
adoption of the ISO standard into t his project’s procurement co uld support a greater shift in awareness in new sectors, 
such as construction. The OECS Council of Ministers for Environ mental Sustainabilit y also mandated the Commission 
                                                 
86 Antigua and Barbuda National Poverty Reduction Strategy, 2011 – 2015. 
87 Huggins, T. 2014. Country Gender Assessment for Antigua and Ba rbuda. Prepared for the Caribbean Development Bank 
(CBDB). http://www.caribank.org/uploads/2014/ 12/CGA-AB-Vol-I-_JUNE-2014 _FINAL.pdf  Accessed September 15, 2017. 
88 G20 Global Partnership for Finan cial Inclusion, 2017. Alternat ive Data: Transforming SME Finance. Mary. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/701331497329509915/pd f/116186-WP-AlternativeFinanceReportlowres-PUBLIC.pdf 
Accessed 11 September 2017 
89 Magalhães and Di Villarosa, 2012; S canlon and Page-Adams, 2001  in IDB, 2016. Social Housi ng in Six Caribbean Countries. 
90 Zagorin, E. 2017. ISO 20400: What You Need to Know About the N ew Sustainable Procurement Standard 
http://spendmatters.com/2017/03/ 17/iso-20400-need-know-new-sust ainable-procurement-standard/ Accessed 14 September 2017


---
*Page 77*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 148 
 
	
	E
to develop a sub-regional sustainable procurement policy, which  could scale up the project’s demonstration of this ISO 
standard. 
 
The EDA project will use the 10 YFP Programme on Sustainable Pu blic Procurement (SPP) for Activity 1.2. Design a 
Sustainable Procurement system for co nstruction supplies in pilot countries  – which will ensure that project activities 
procure goods for all work and services in buildings using the new ISO standard for Sustainable Procurement. The 
SPP is led by UN Environment, co-led by Korean Environmental In dustry and Technology Institute (KEITI) and Local 
Governments for Sustainability (I CLEI). Implementation of SPP u nder the EDA project will be used as a case study for 
the SPP. Lessons learned from this project will: i) build a cas e for SPP by improving the knowledge on SPP and its 
effectiveness as a tool to promote SCP, as well as to support g reener economies and sustainable development; and 
b) support the implementation of SPP on the ground through incr eased collaboration and better access to capacity 
building tools and support from SPP experts. 
 The EDA project will also use t he Sustainable Buildings and Con struction 10 YFP framework  to maximize co-benefits 
and contribute to SDG 12. Project  activities will provide case studies for and advance the Programme goal(s) of: i) 
stakeholders involved in the planning, design, construction, co mmissioning, management operation and 
deconstruction of buildings hav e a common understanding of sust ainable buildings and the knowledge, resources and 
incentives required to create, maintain and use them; and ii) s tructures that are healthy to live and work in, that 
sustainably utilise ener gy, water, land and other key resources , respecting environmental lim its, and ultimately have a 
minimally adverse impact on the natural world, supporting socia l and economic development. This 10 YFP programme 
is led by Finland, and co-led by the World Green Building Counc il (WGBC), the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology 
(RMIT) and UN Environment. The ED A project will wo rk with these  partners, particularly Activity 4.2. Finance adaptation 
in buildings  (private sector Output). 
 
SDG 15: Protect, restore and prom ote sustainable use of terrest rial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, 
combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation a nd halt biodiversity loss: The EDA project will 
use ecosystem criteria for evaluating interventions, with the g oal of promoting ecosystem-based adaptation where 
appropriate. Baseline pilot interventions under the RRACC and G CCA projects have used plants to secure the 
buffer/easement areas for the community, which have added benef its such as food (mango trees are typically used to 
stabilize waterways as they have large buttress roots) or for r ecreational well-being and shade. Output 1 will maximize 
environmental co-benefits through the procurement process, by d esigning a Sustainable Procurement system for 
construction supplies in pilot countries (ISO 20400:2017 – Sust ainable procurement). 
 The specific interventions under Output 2 (public sector adapta tion) will have the following  positive environmental 
benefits: i) reduced rate s of run-off; ii) decreased soil erosi on; and iii) regulated flow of water in waterways flowing 
through local communities. The project activities will be desig ned to be ‘no regret’ interventions because they will 
improve upon the baseline condi tions regardless of the severity  of expected climate chan ge effects. Environmental 
benefits are derived from the project’s impact to improve funct ioning of watershed ecosystems and enhance the 
capacity of local communities to implement climate-resilient me asures in these watersheds . Indicator 10 will track 
environmental co-benefits during EDA implementation (Coverage/s cale of ecosystems restored, protected or 
strengthened in response to climate variability and change), an d will be measured by ha of wetlands, km of waterways, 
ha of forests, and others. 
 
SDG 16: Promote peaceful and incl usive societies for sustainabl e development, provide access to justice for 
all and build effective, accounta ble and inclusive institutions  at all levels: Improved housing conditions can 
reduce inequality, ensure citizen security and better integrate  neighborhoods and their residents to form a sense of 
community  
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country an d population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of countr y and beneficiary groups (Adaptat ion only)


---
*Page 78*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e .g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and 
groups, overall inco me level, etc). 
 
Antigua and Barbuda  
Antigua and Barbuda is an island s tate located in the eastern r egion of the Caribbean Sea. M ost of the country’s land 
area consists of two large islands, namely Antigua and Barbuda,  along with a number of smaller inhabited and 
uninhabited islands. Antigua and Barbuda’s population was estim ated at ~91,295 in  2014 and it is anticipated that the 
population will reach ~115,000 by 2050. Antigua and Barbuda’s G DP in 2013 was ~US$1.1 billion with a growth rate 
of 1.7%. In 2009, Antigua's economy was severely affected by th e global economic crisis. From 2009–2011, there was 
a steep decline in tourism which  provides the largest number of  employment opportunities wit hin the country’s private 
sector.  
 
In Antigua and Barbuda, 4% of t he population lives in indigent poverty; 15% are poor bu t not indigent, and 10% of the 
population are at risk of falling into poverty due to an unanti cipated event such as a natural disaster91.  
 
 
Mitchum (67 years old) lives 
alone and has hearing problems and is an amputee. 
He uses walking sticks and 
has no electricity or running 
water. His house is in very bad 
condition. He is very innovative in his water 
harvesting methods where an 
old spout has a hole and a piece of old metal spouting 
running the water to a plastic 
container. Wherever the spouting has a hole or a dip, 
he collects the water in a 
container. His income comes from burning wood at the back 
of the yard in a large kiln to 
make coal. He made a cart and adapted it for pulling the 
wood to the kiln. 
 
Box	2.	Persons	who	are	exceptionally 	vulnerable 	to	climate	change	impacts,	but	who	would	not	be	able	to	repay	loans	even	at	concessional 	
rates	under	the	Revolving 	Fund	Programme, 	can	benefit	from	resilience 	building	support	via	the	CSO	grant	Output	of	the	EDA	project	
(Output	3) 
In September 2017, Antigua and Barbuda was hit by Category 5+ H urricane Irma with sustained wind speeds at 195 
mph when it struck the island of Barbuda. Hurricane Irma is the  strongest hurricane on record in the Atlantic, and it has 
caused devastation in Barbuda. The island’s population was eval uated to Antigua as the Category 5 hurricane Jose 
was approaching, and it took weeks before people were permitted  to return and start rebuilding their homes and 
community.   
                                                 
91 Kairi, 2002. Living conditions  in Antigua and Barbuda: Country  Poverty Assessment.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Table	5.	Summary 	of	effects	and	recovery	needs	in	Antigua	and	Barbuda	as	a	result	of	Hurricane 	Irma	(Source:	Preliminary 	World	Bank	
damage	assessment) 	
Sector Damage Changes in flow 
(Losses )Recovery needs 
Infrastructure Transpor t 43,649,340 860,040 78,459,340
Water 788,000 - 938,000
Electricit y 8,921,739 699,600 9,675,739
Telecoms 1,896,440 100,000 1,896,440
Social Health 1,581,620 40,987 2,000,000
Education 4,931,000 609,379 13,215,439
Housin g 134,475,000 (49%) 6,496,050 (12%) 214,968,745 (53%)
Productive Tourism 73,330,664 40,608,398 85,043,675
Agriculture 1,500,000 - TBD
Fisheries 565,241 1,000,000 1,000,000
Civil Governmen t 2,900,434 3,406,100 TBD
 Environment - - 13,500,000
TOTAL (EC$) 274,629,478 53,910,554 407,197,378
TOTAL (US$) 102,857,482 20,191,219 152,508,381
 
According to preliminary post-hurricane damage assessments, Ant igua and Barbuda has experienced damages 
totaling over USD 102 million, changes in flow (losses) over US D 20 million, and its estimated recovery needs are USD 
152.5 million (12% of Gross Domestic Product). The housing sect or accounted for half of all damages and recovery 
needs; post-Hurricane Irma recovery needs in the housing sector  in Antigua and Barbuda over USD 80 million; this 
EDA project will provide approxim ately USD 4 million via on-len ding and on-granting (5 % of estimated needs).  
 
 
Figure	21.	Barbudans 	being	evacuated 	to	Antigua	as	the	second	Category 	5	hurricane 	approached 	in	September 	2017	(left);	aftermath 	of	
Hurricane 	Irma	in	Barbuda	(right).	The	housing	sector	in	Antigua	and	Barbuda	suffered	an	estimated 	USD	80	million	in	hurricane 	damages. 	
Hurricane Luis (1995), one of the most devastating hurricanes t hat hit Antigua and Barbuda, resulted in a 17% decrease 
in tourist arrivals, left 7,000 people unemployed, 90% of build ings destroyed or damaged, and economic losses 
amounting to 30.5% of GDP92. It took three months to fully res tore electricity, highlighti ng the need for resilient energy 
systems. Economic impacts of hurricanes and flooding, and resul tant costs of adaptation, are proportionately extremely 
costly to small island states. 
 
In 2008, Hurricane Omar resulted in precipitation of 56.4 mm pe r hour at its peak93, and flood water levels reached 4 
to 12 feet in vulnerable parts of the island. As a result of Om ar, 1,339 homes were flooded, and four homes located in 
close proximity to watercourses were washed away – in total, at  least 5,088 persons suffered significance losses94. 
Similar flood conditions were ex perienced during Hurricane Earl  in 2010.


---
*Page 80*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Dominica  
 
The Commonwealth of Dominica is a mountainous island between tw o French dependent territories; Guadeloupe to 
the north and Martinique the so uth.  Dominica’s location makes it susceptible to hurricanes. It has active volcanoes 
and high rainfall which contributes to an abundance of biodiver sity. The Country Poverty Asse ssment (2010), the Social 
Livelihood Assessment (2016), and the National Census (2011) pr ovides information on the socioeconomic status of 
Dominica. The 2011 census cites the population at 71,293 with m ost of the population living on the coast. Like other 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) it is economically vulner able. The unemployment rate is 23% (NAN Business 
Editor 2016), and the population living below the poverty line is 28.8% (Country Poverty A ssessment 2010). Based on 
the Country Poverty Assessment, most houses are constructed wit h concrete blocks (48.4%) and wood/timber (24.8%).
 
Exceptionally vulnerable person s, such as in Box 1 above 
and those persons who are unemployed and/or living 
below the poverty line will benefit from the EDA grant 
resources under Output 3, who would not be able to repay loans even at highly concessi onal rates, so that they can 
improve their resilience to climate change. 
 Criteria to determine households that are eligible for grant 
funding will be agreed by the CSO Steering Committee 
with transparency and strong community ownership. CSOs such as the local Association of Persons with Disabilities 
or a church could apply for grant funding to support the 
most vulnerable community groups. 
 
Dominica’s economy is heavily dependent on agriculture and more recently tourism. Ther e is an increased risk of 
exposure to climate change related events such as level 
rise and flash flooding because most of the Dominican population lives along the coast or in steep river valleys. 
Numerous assessments have been conducted in Dominica 
over the years which has enabled the country to identify vulnerable communities. The most recent is the Rapid 
Damage and Impact Assessment 2015, conducted by the 
World Bank post-Tropical Stor m Erika. Disasters such as 
floods and landslides have destroyed or damaged critical 
infrastructure, therefore, recovery and reconstruction have 
absorbed an increasingly large share of annual budgets. Following the devastating impacts of Tropical Storm Erika, 
90% of Gross Domestic Pr oduct (GDP) or $483 million 
USD was affected. Most of the damage was sustained in the transport sector (60 perce nt), followed by the housing 
sector (11 percent) and agriculture sector (10 percent). 
Approximately 7,229 people w ere impacted by the event 
(see Figure above). 
 Grenada  
Grenada’s landmass is 344 sq. k m and population is approximatel y 111,000.  Its open economy is heavily dependent 
on a relatively small number of economic sectors whose activiti es and outputs are highly climate-dependent and 
weather-sensitive. The negative impacts of climate change creat e additional financial strain fo r the tri-island state and 
the economic and social development of the countr y.
                                                 
92 Solomon et al, 2011 and Gores-Francis, 2013 in CARIBSAN Nation al Vulnerability Impact Assessment 
93 Ho, B. 2008. Agricultural losses amount to $11M. Antigua Sun. 
94 CARIBSAVE, 2015. National Vulnerability Impact Analysis for An tigua and Barbuda 
Figure	22.	A	map	of	the	villages	that	were	declared	disaster	areas	as	
a	result	of	Tropical	Storm	Erica,	which	dumped	12	inches	of	rain	in	
10	hours	on	the	island.


---
*Page 81*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 148 
 
	
	E
 
Grenada relies on tourism as its  main source of foreign exchang e especially since the construction of an international 
airport in 1985. Strong performances in construction and manufa cturing, together with the development of tourism and 
higher education - especially in medicine - contributed to grow th in national output; however, economic growth 
remained stagnant in 2010-14, after a sizable contraction in 20 09, because of the global economic slowdown's effects 
on tourism and remittances. Gross  national saving – and wealth – has been declining since 2010. 
 
Hurricanes Ivan (2004) and Emily (2005) severely damaged the ag ricultural sector - particularly nutmeg and cocoa 
cultivation - which had been a key driver of economic growth. G renada has rebounded from the devastating effects of 
the hurricanes but is now saddled with the debt burden from the  rebuilding process. Public debt-to-GDP is about 110%, 
leaving the administration in 2013 announced a structural adjus tment program that includes a plan to increase tax 
revenue.  
Extreme weather and short-term c limate variability has already had a tremendous impact on the country. The 
devastating losses borne to Grenada’s economy in 2004 and 2005 from the passage of Hurricanes Ivan and Emily 
respectively put the country’s inherent vulnerability in stark relief, with some of the impacted industries still in recovery 
10 years later. The total damage from Hurricane Ivan alone was estimated at EC$2.4 billion,  or twice the value of 
Grenada’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (OECS, 2004).   
Dire ct or indi rect lo sses were expe rien ced in virtuall y every s ector and these damages were compounded by the 
passage of Hurricane Emily just 10 months later. The damage bro ken down by sector is as follows: 
 
Housing:   Just under 28,000 houses or 89%  of the country’s housing stoc k of 31,122 houses were damaged by 
Hurricane Ivan. Near 10,000 houses, or 30%, were so damaged tha t they required complete replacement. 
Approximately 22,000 or 70% requi red repairs.  The cost of dama ge to the housing sector was estimated at $EC1, 380 
million dollars.  
Education:   Damage to the education sector was second only to the housing  sector in its severity. The estimated cost 
to the sector is $EC196 million dollars, however a more correct  figure would be approximately $EC215 million. This 
figure would accurately reflect the damage to the entire networ k of schools and skills training institutions in the country.
 
Health:   The damage to the major public hospitals, health centres and other health care instit utions was estimated at 
$EC 11 million dollars following t he aftermath of hurricane Iva n 
 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries:    The impact of hurricane Ivan was widespread throughout the i sland inflicting 
severe damage to the agriculture sector. The damage was most in tense in the parish of St. Andrew accounting for 60 
percent of total damage, followed by St. David with 20 percent,  St. Johns 10 percent, St. Georges 5 percent with St. 
Mark, and St. Patrick sharing the remaining 5 percent. As a res ult of the high velocity winds experienced with hurricane 
Ivan, extensive losses were recorded in the crop sub sector, li vestock, fisheries and in the seventy-two (72) water 
catchments.  The total direct and indirect damage s were estimat ed at EC$55 and EC$46 million respectively. 
 Tourism and Accommodation:   When valued in monetary terms tourist accommodations reported  through their 
respective assessor’s evaluations varying degrees of damages. A  quick sample of a subset of tourist accommodations 
representing 38% of the saleable room capacity indicated that t he extent of the damage ranged from EC$650,000 to 
EC$40 million. It was estimated by  the Assessment Mission that the direct losses born by t ourist establishments to 
their buildings and infrastructure amounted to EC$305 million.  
 
Manufacturing:   The direct damage suffered with the passage of Hurricane Ivan  was related to the destruction of 
assets at the time of the hurricane namely, buildings, equipmen t and machinery, and inventories. The indirect costs 
were related mainly to the loss in flows of income and addition al cost as a result of the hurricane. The direct damage 
was much higher than the indirect damage, and this was associat ed with the high cost of buildings and equipment. 
The direct damage to the sector was estimated at $17 million EC $ and the indirect cost at $4 million. Among the 
manufacturing industries, the rum, furniture and garment indust ries suffered the most significant damage. In the case 
of the production of rum, buildin gs were most severel y affected while for the furniture and garment industries both


---
*Page 82*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 148 
 
	
	E
buildings and inventories were damaged. The beverage sub-sector , which dominates the industry, was affected by 
damage to buildings but operations were not halted for a length y period. A number of light manufacturing industries 
lost substantial portions of inv entories and suffered from dama ge to buildings. 
 
Wholesale and Retail:   The direct damage was related to that of physical assets and stocks. The sector was seriously 
affected by the loss of inventories due mainly to the looting t hat occurred immediately after the hurricane. This 
contributed to indirect damage as entities did not immediately reopen because of the general impact of the devastation; 
the loss of stocks from the hur ricane and the subsequent lootin g; and the need to s ecure available st ocks.   The value 
of the indirect damage was estima ted at EC$11 million in Grenad a. 
 
Public Utilities:   Total damages, both direct and  indirect, to public utilities (Electricity, Water and Sewage, 
Telecommunication and Broadcasti ng and Cable) were estimated to  be EC$250.9 million. 
 
Long-term climate change could make what would otherwise be rar e, devastating occurrences such as these into a 
more frequent reality for Grenad a and the rest of the Caribbean . Grenada is already experiencing some of the effects 
of climate variability through dam ages from severe weather syst ems and other extreme events, as well as more subtle 
changes in temperatures and rainfall patterns. Climate change p rojections for Grenada predict an increase in average 
annual temperature, reduced average annual rainfall, potential for an increase in the intensity of tropical storms and 
increased Sea Surfac e Temperatures (SST)95.  
 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
 Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
 Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fisc al or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of  depth and history in the local capital market) 
 Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
 
The OECS economies are small and highly open, which makes them volatile and prone to external shocks. OECS 
economies rely extensively on tourism and to a lesser extent ag riculture, and are dependent on external markets for 
food and fuel imports. The countries also receive high worker r emittances inflows. As a result, they are subject to 
excessive terms of trade volatility. Despite high human develop ment indices, OECS have not succeeded in reducing 
poverty to levels compatible with their level of per capita inc ome. Unemployment, especially among women and youth, 
remains high, which also contributes to high emigration rates96. Since 2010, some of the OECS countries have 
implemented strong fiscal consolidation programs and engaged in  debt restructuring agendas. At the end of 2014, 
Antigua and Barbuda’s debt-to-GDP had increased to 98.7 percent  of GDP97.  
 Despite a more recent small rebound in economic growth rates, h owever any gains are subject to natural disaster 
shock. Economic assets such as residential and nonresidential b uildings are at risk. These assets that are exposed to 
natural disasters are referred to as a country’s Building Expos ure. Grenada’s total building exposure is estimated by 
the World Bank at US$2.1 billion (Replacement Value). Single-fa mily, wood light unbraced post and beam frame are 
the buildings most vulnerable  to hurricanes, accounting for app roximately 20% of Annual Average Loss (AAL)
98. 
 
                                                 
95 The CARIBSAVE Partnership, 2012; CCCCC, 2015 
96 The World Bank in Organization of Eastern Caribbean States: Ov erview. http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/oecs/overview 
Accessed 7 September 2017 
97 IMF, 2015. IMF Executive Board Concludes the Third Post-P rogram Monitoring discussion for Antigua and Barbuda . No. 15/244, 
May 29. https://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2015/pr15244.htm  Accessed 9 April 2017. 
98 World Bank. 2016. Grenada Hurricanes and Earthquakes Risk Profile . Washington, DC: World Bank. http://bit.ly/2uRCwBR 
Accessed 12 July 2017.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 148 
 
	
	E
The Global Climate Risk Index 2017 ranked Dominica as one of th e top three countries most affected worldwide by 
climate impacts in 201599. The Index analyses to what ext ent countries have been affecte d by the impacts of weather-
related loss events (storms, floods, heat waves etc.). The most  recent data available from 2015 (Table 4) and 1996–
2015 (Table 5) is presented below for the three EDA pilot count ries. 
 
Table	6.	Climate	Risk	Index	for	the	Year	2015	(Source:	Germanwatch) 		
CRI Rank  Country CRI 
Score Fatalities  in 2015 Fatalities  per 
100k peopleLosses in M US$ 
(PPP)Losses per unit 
GDP in %
Total  Rank Total  Rank Total  Rank Total  Rank 
135 Antigua & Barbuda 124.50  0.00 114  0.00 114  0.000 135  0.00 135 
2 Dominica   13.00  31.00 42 43.66 1 611.219  32  77.37 1
135 Grenada  124.50  0.00 114  0.00 114  0.000 135  0.00 135 
 
Table	7.	Climate	Risk	Index	for	the	period	1996–2015 	(Source:	Germanwatch) 	
CRI Rank  Country CRI 
Score Fatalities  in 2015 Fatalities  per 
100k peopleLosses in M US$ 
(PPP)Losses per unit 
GDP in %
Total  Rank Total  Rank Total  Rank Total  Rank 
72 Antigua & Barbuda 74.50  0.25 163  0.31  53  15.553 132  0.98  23 
17 Dominica   42.00  1.80 135 2.54 6 46.023 101  7.89 2
16 Grenada  40.33  2.00 132  1.94  9  78.734  86  7.87  3 
 
The Global Climate Risk Index for the period 1996 – 2015 highli ght the vulnerability and needs of the three SIDS 
measured in terms of losses per unit GDP. Access to capital to recover from the climate-induced losses remains one 
of the most challenging factors in the pilot countries ease of “Doing Business”. Adaptati on measures for SIDS are 
expensive, with significant cost implications for both the Gove rnment and its citizens. Ad aptation costs for many 
buildings and services, such as homes, churches, schools, clini cs and hospitals, emergency response, supermarkets, 
and the Public Utility’s desalination plants, are being borne b y the Government and its citizens. The high cost of finance 
and limited access to financing for private citizens is becomin g increasingly difficult, resulting in higher levels of 
vulnerability. This affects all classes of citizens, both publi c and private, and especially marginalized groups, and 
justifies the urgent need for th is project and the level of con cessionality.  
 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ie s) ownership of, and capacity to impleme nt, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national c limate strategy and coherence w ith existing plans and polic ies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to co untry’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is  supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional 
framework, or includes poli cy or institutional changes. 
 
The EDA project is a direct access project that has been develo ped through a “bottom-up” approach. The project 
objectives and outcome are closely aligned with the sub-regiona l institutional framework of the OECS, for example the 
OECS Commission through the GCCA project has just developed a m odel climate resilience building code, which is 
being adopted in Antigua and Barbuda and other member states. T his building code will provid e the technical basis for 
the adaptation measures to be piloted under Output 4. In additio n, the ED Aproject has been developed at the request 
                                                 
99 Kreft, S. et al. 2017. Global Climate Risk Index 2017: Who Suffers Most from Extreme Weather Events? Weather-related Loss 
Events in 2015 and 1996 to 2015 . Published by Germanwatch e.V. https://germanwatch.org/en/down load/16411.pdf Accessed 13 
September 2017


---
*Page 84*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 148 
 
	
	E
of the Council of Environmental Ministers meeting in 2016 to sc ale up climate financing in order to meet adaptation 
and mitigation goals under the Paris Agreement. The project is aligned with the national and sub-regional policies and 
laws listed below. 
 Antigua and Barbuda has undergone extensive stakeholder consult ation to develop the following laws and policies to 
adapt to the projected impac ts of climate change:  
a) Ratification of the Pa ris Agreement in 2015 
b) Nationally Determined Contri bution, which identifies inter a lia adaptation in buildings and adaptation in 
waterways as priorities 
c) Antigua and Barbuda’s Co untry Programme to the GCF 
d) Environmental Protection and Management Act of 2015 (EPMA, 2 015) 
e) National Comprehensive Disa ster Management Policy and Strate gy for Antigua And Barbuda (2015– 2017) 
f) National Adaptation Plan and Strategy for the Water Sector, 2015 
g) National Physical Developmen t Plan, 2012 (titled the Sustain able Island Management and Zoning Plan) 
h) The Building Code is currentl y under revision for climate re silience updates 
 
Dominica includes the following laws, policies and regulations:  
a) Ratification of the Pa ris Agreement in 2015 
b) Climate Change, Environment and Natural Resource Management Bill 2016 
c) National Land Use Policy, 2015 
d) Draft National Physical Deve lopment Plan of the Commonwealth  of Dominica, 2016 
e) Low-Carbon Climate Resili ent Development Strategy 2012 
f) National Climate Cha nge Adaptation Policy 2002 
g) Nationally Determined Cont ribution (NDC), submitted 2015 
h) Caribbean Regional  Strategic Program for Climate Resilience 
 Grenada has in place the following laws and policies to adapt t o the projected impacts of climate change:  
a) Ratification of the Pa ris Agreement in 2015 
b) Revised Building Code for Grenada  
c) Draft National Land Use Policy d) National Disaster Plan 2011 
e) The National Climate Change Policy for Grenada, Carriacou an d Petite Martinique  
f) The National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (NAP) for Grenad a, Carriacou and Petite Martinique  
g) The Nationally Determined C ontribution (NDC), submitted 2015  
h) The National Agriculture Plan 
i) Blue Growth Coastal Master Plan, 2016 j) Caribbean Regional  Strategic Program for Climate Resilience  
k) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
 
The EDA is designed to support t he implementation of these poli cies and laws. The criteria developed to evaluate the 
selection of sub-activities under  the EDA draws linkages with t he above policies and laws.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entit ies and executing entities t o deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the activities 
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 The Department of the Environment is a Government entity with a  staff Compliment of over 50 individuals. It has 
coordinating committees that it manages with over 40 experts in  Government, NGOs and the private sector. The 
Department of Environment (DOE) in Antigua and Barbuda as direc t access Accredited Entity has extensive 
experience in project design and implementation.  The DOE is al so a coordinating entity and will use a coordinating 
approach to work with executing entities and project management  structures, to build the capacity of these using in-
house lessons learned, in a peer-to-peer learnin
g approach. This will provide a readil y available and experienced


---
*Page 85*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 148 
 
	
	E
network of professionals to the project. Antigua and Barbuda is  a SIDS and access to technical expertise is a risk to 
the project. The DOE is therefore building on its framework agr eement with the OECS Commission, UNOPS, among 
other entities, and its relationship with the Climate Technolog y Center and Network (CTCN) to fill gaps that may be 
identified during project execution. 
 The Department of Environment in Antigua and Barbuda was accred ited to the Adaptation Fund (AF) in October 2015 
and its direct access USD 10 M project with the AF was approved  in March 2017. The project has a similar structure 
to the EDA, where the project demonstrates enhanced direct acce ss for the public sector, for NGOs and for the private 
sector. This project will be sca ling up activities nationally a nd sub-regionally to work with Dominica and Grenada under 
the umbrella of the OE CS economic union. 
 
The A&B Department of Environment  was accredited to the Green C limate Fund at the 17
th meeting of the Board for 
Category B risk and the following mechanisms: Project Managemen t and On-granting (Small) and On-lending (Micro). 
The Department’s accreditation was fast-tracked to the GCF sinc e it was already accredited to the Adaptation Fund. 
The Department has undergone rigorous scrutiny and capacity ass essments as part of the GCF Accreditation process. 
In the other pilot countries, the project will build on the cap acities built by over 15 years of implementing Government, 
GEF, CIF and EU-funded projects.  Within each country, the enti ties implement over USD 50 M in project funding per 
year.   
 
For the experience and track reco rd of the executing entities r elevant to this project’s activities, please see Section 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity).   
 At the regional level, the scope of the EDA project is within t he abilities of the Eastern Caribbean Commission and 
Member States to deliver concrete adaptation results. There is strong government and NGO technical support that 
covers natural resource management, adaptation in buildings, in stitutional backstopping (including financial 
management and governance), and monitoring and evaluation. The EDA has been designed to build on these existing 
institutions and scale up deliv ery of climate financing to vuln erable communities. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civ il society organizations and ot her relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ens ure country ownership, including the engagement with NDAs 
on the funding proposal and the no-objection letter. 
Please also specify the multi-stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this 
proposal was developed.  
 Selection of Accredited Entity 
 
Nomination of Accredited Entity by the Government of Antigua and Barbuda/NDA . The Department of Environment in 
Antigua and Barbuda has served as the national focal point to a ll multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) and 
executing entity to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) since  the GEF began supporting the implementation of 
multilateral environmental agreements in Antigua and Barbuda. I n February 2013, the Cabinet decided that the then 
Environment Division should initiate the process to become a Na tional Implementing Entity (NIE) to the Adaptation 
Fund. The Department of Environment was accredited to the Adapt ation Fund in October 2015.  As an accredited entity 
to the Adaptation Fund, the Department was eligible for fast-tr ack accreditation to the GCF. In GCF/B.12/32 Annex 
XXV, the GCF Board noted that the Department of Environment wou ld be eligible for fast-track accreditation to the 
GCF. 
 The Government of Antigua and Barbuda subsequently nominated th e Department of Environment to apply for fast-
track accreditation from the GCF, which the entity commenced. T he DOE was approved as an Accredited Entity by the 
GCF Board in October 2017.


---
*Page 86*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Selection of direct access accr edited entity for the EDA project . The Department of Environment is the national focal 
point for Antigua and Barbuda to the UNFCCC. In 2015, the Gover nment of Antigua and Barbuda passed 
comprehensive MEA legislation via the Environmental Protection and Management Act – a model Act developed by 
the OECS Commission to support the implementation of the Rio Co nvention and the OECS St. Georges Declaration 
for Environmental Sustainability in a coordinated and comprehen sive approach for the Eastern Caribbean. 
 
The passage of the Act in Antigua and Barbuda formalized a nati onal sustainable financing mechanism, the SIRF 
Fund, to serve as the primary channel for environmental, climat e mitigation and adaptation funding from international 
and domestic sources: “By serving as the National Implementing Entity for all environment-related finance and 
technical assistance, the SIRF Fund will catalyze internal and external funding sources to enable the country to meet 
its climate and sustainability goals in a coordinated, systemat ic and cost-effective manner.”100 The SIRF Fund business 
model includes a concessional Revolving Fund programme for adap tation in traditionally high-risk groups, where loan 
payments are re-disbursed to maximize impact. The Cabinet of An tigua and Barbuda and the NDA nominated the 
Department of Environment to serve as Accredited Entity for the  EDA project in the GCF Country Programme, per its 
legal mandates.  
 Country ownership 
 The EDA project’s initial scope was at the national level, for Antigua and Barbuda. However, at the OECS Council of 
Ministers Environmental Sustainability on 4-5 May 2016 in the C ommonwealth of Dominica, the Council deciding on 
Post-COP 21, strategic actions , engagements and collaboration, inter alia  requested Antigua and Barbuda’s assistance 
to support Member States with t he climate finance and accredita tion processes. The OECS Commission Director 
General Dr. Didacus Jules subsequently on 5 July 2016 issued a communique to Member States about the EDA project 
being developed by Antigua and Barbuda, inviting those who wish ed to participate to submit a letter of interest from 
their respective NDA to the OECS Commission copied to Antigua a nd Barbuda. The NDAs of the Commonwealth of 
Dominica and of Grenada responded with letters of interest, and  the three countries continue to collaboratively develop 
the EDA project document. 
 Member States interested in par ticipating submitted letters of interest to participate in the EDA project, and also 
allocated a portion of their Readiness funding to allow the OEC S to provide capacity building support and M&E to 
Member States on GCF engagement. The three countries that respo nded were Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and 
Grenada, and the member states also agreed to allocate USD 100, 000 each to the OECS Commission for Readiness 
support towards accreditation and developing a Regional Program me.  
 
Antigua and Barbuda has used part of its first and second Readi ness grants to undertake consultations for the EDA 
project. This consultative proc ess has been extensive since the  funding proposal was first developed in June 2016. In 
addition to the consultations summarized below, the in-country consultants for the Pre-Fe asibility Studies held one-on-
one meetings with stakeholders. T hese reports and the minutes o f the consultations are provided in the Appendix.  
 
The consultations have been very effective with the public sect or and key NGO representatives. Engagement with the 
private sector has been more limited with consultations, since this group is diverse and not as well organized or 
represented. Barriers to engaging the private sector include a perception of multilateral financing channels as slow and 
bureaucratic, and low levels of awareness about technical adapt ation options and specific p rojected climate risks. 
However, representatives from t he private sector attended sever al of the consultations listed below, and confirmed the 
urgent need for the project approach, and the findings of the l iterature review. Private sector stakeholders consulted 
to date via attendance at the consultations listed below includ e home and building owners, national Development 
Banks, and Co-operative Credit Unions.  
 
                                                 
100 SIRF Fund Business Concept, 2016. Investing in Antigua & Barbuda: Capitali zation Rationale for the Sustainable Island 
Resource Framework (SIRF) Fund . Approved by the Cabinet of Antigua and Barbuda in 2016.


---
*Page 87*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 148 
 
	
	E
To strengthen consultations with the private sector and overcom e barriers to engaging the private sector in the 
Caribbean, Antigua and Barbuda is procuring a Private Sector Re adiness Consultant for one year, subject to extension. 
The Consultant will also work in Dominica and Grenada to get th e private sector “ready” for the EDA pilot countries via 
targeted consultations. 
 EDA Consultation 21 April 2016 – Location: St. Lucia 
The meeting was held on the margins of the Caribbean Biodiversi ty Fund (CBF) and the Caribbean Challenge Initiative 
(CCI) meeting held in St. Lucia, and benefited from a high invo lvement of NGO representatives.  The Caribbean 
Biodiversity Fund (CBF) is a regional fund established for the management of the funds for Biodiversity on behalf of 
the Caribbean region.  The purpose of this meeting is to assess  the interest of the National Trust Funds to determine 
if they are interested in acting as executing entities for the EDA project by programing GCF funds via calls for proposal.  
 OECS Council of Ministers Envir onmental Sustainability 5 May 20 16 – Location: Commonwealth of Dominica 
The OECS Council of Ministers deciding on Post-COP 21, strategi c actions, engagements and collaboration, endorsed 
the constitution of a high level OECS working group that would support Member States with the Climate Finance 
accreditation process, and the Ministerial body requested Antig ua and Barbuda’s a ssistance to suppor t this process. 
 Communique from the OECS Commissi on Director General to OECS Me mber States 5 July 2016  
Letter subject, “OECS Commission’s Actions in Pursuit of Climat e Finance Mandate” from the Director General Dr. 
Didacus Jules of the OECS inter alia  notified Member States of the GC F Enhancing Direct Access (EDA ) project being 
developed by Antigua and Barbuda, including a short project bri ef, and invited Member States who wished per the 
Ministerial mandate to participate in the EDA project, to submi t a letter of interest from their respective NDA to the 
OECS Commission copied to Antigua and Barbuda.  
 
EDA Consultation 17 October 2016 – Location: Grenada 
The meeting was held on the margins of the Global Environment F acility (GEF) Caribbean C onstituency Meeting, 
where the Department of Environment in Antigua and Barbuda pres ented on the EDA project and solicited feedback 
on the design and linkages with national work programmes funded  by the GEF in the Eastern Caribbean.  
 EDA Consultation 7 December 2016 – Location: Antigua and Barbud a 
An EDA workshop with participants from all 3 pilot countries, f inanced with Readiness support, was convened in 
conjunction with the SCCF Project Launch in Antigua and Barbuda , titled: Building Climate Resilience through 
Innovation Financing Mechanism  Climate Change Adaptation . The SCCF project is a baseline project establishing the 
Revolving Fund in Antigua and Barb uda, and therefore participan ts benefited from learning more about the Revolving 
Fund sustainable financing mechani sm. At the workshop, particip ants discussed Readiness support, the OECS 
Commission presented their roadmap for accreditation, and Antig ua and Barbuda present ed the EDA project.  
 EDA Consultation 15 February 2017 – Remote presentation via the  Climate Finance Working Group  
Antigua and Barbuda presented on the EDA project at the first C limate Finance Working Group remote meeting, which 
included focal points from across the Eastern Caribbean. 
 EDA Consultation 26 April 2017 – Location: Grenada 
This consultation hosted on the sidelines of the OECS Sub-Regio nal Structured Dialogue with the Green Climate Fund. 
The consultation was facilitated by Antigua and Ba rbuda to pres ent an update on the Enhance Direct Access (EDA) 
project proposal, and to discuss and validate the findings and recommendations of the baseline Pre-Feasibility Studies.
 
The Ministers of Environment in the participating countries at their annual meeting of the OECS Council of Ministers of 
Environmental Sustainability on 28 April 2017 in Grenada, have pledged to make the required human resources 
available to support enhanced direct access implementation unde
r Output 1 (project management). Within the first 6 
months of pro ject approval, durin g a pre-inception sta ge, the EDA pro ject will be presented to the Cabinets in the


---
*Page 88*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 148 
 
	
	E
respective countries to secure additional commitments (Cabinet decisions) to build the capacity and staff of the relevant 
ministries and divisions to a le vel that allows them to perform  their functions (project management, M&E, evaluation of 
projects, etc.). Project incepti on will also consider prioritiz ation and sequencing of activ ities, identifying dependencies 
so that dependent activities c an be scheduled to follow those t hat they are dependent upon. 
 Multi-stakeholder engagement plan 
 Upon approval of the project, t he EDA project will transition i nto a pre-inception process that will facilitate targeted 
consultations to identify any changes in baseline conditions, v alidate work plans and the proposed approach, in 
accordance with the GCF Guidance  as set out in Annex XIV to dec ision B.08/10
101.  
 The consultative process should aim to be an ongoing process ra ther than a discrete activity only occurring once 
without the possibility of follow up, continuous update and reg ular assessment of progress. Consultative processes 
should be inclusive and seek to engage all relevant actors with in the government, the private sector, academia, civil 
society and other relevant stakeholder groups or sectors.  
 
Table	8.	Multi‐stakeholder 	engagement 	plan	(draft)		
Stakeholder Group Primary role in EDA pr oject implementation 
Oversight 
functionDecision-
makin g bod yM&E Lessons learned / 
scalin gupRecipients Farmers  X
Banks X
Credit Unions/Associations X
Insurance companies X
Individual homeowners  X
MSMEs X
Hoteliers Associations X
NGOs X X
Community groups  X X  X 
Women’s or ganizations XDecision-
makers OECS Council of Ministers of 
Environmental Sustainabilit y X    
Cabinet of respective country X    
Ministr y of Finance   X
Attorne y General’s Office X
GCF National Designated 
Authorit y  X   Technicians & 
Experts Physical Plann ing Authority   X  
Environment Ministries 
(Units/Departments )   X  
Social Gender Affairs Division X    
UNFCCC Focal Point  X   
Electricit y providers  X
Transportation  X
                                                 
101 GCF Board decision B.08/10 – A nnex XIV: Initial best-practice options for country coordinat ion and multi-stakeholder 
engagement, page 91 http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/24946/GCF_B.08_45_ -_Decisions_of_the_Board_-
_Eighth_Meeting_of_the_Board__14-17_October_2014.pdf/1dd5389c-5 955-4243-90c9-7c63e810c86d


---
*Page 89*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 148 
 
	
	E
 
The following private sector representatives will be engaged to  finalize loan applications, evaluation criteria, receive 
nominations for the Private Sector  steering committee, galvaniz e buy-in and empower leader s in the private sector: 
• Insurance providers 
• Credit Unions and domestic branches of international banks 
• Business owners and entrepreneurs 
• Local professional organizations 
 GEF SGP National 
Coordinator X    Donors Green Climate Fund    X 
Adaptation Fund    X 
Global Environment Facility     X 
EU    X 
GIZ    X 
USAID    X Regional OECS Commission   X X 
OECS Climate Finance 
Workin g Group X    
OECS Eastern Caribbean 
Central Bank   X  
CARICOM Climate Change 
Center    X 
Caribbean Development Bank    X 
UNDP/UNEP    X 
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fi nancial soundness of the  proje ct/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reason able in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment. 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into  account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achi eve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
 
Rationale for grant financial instrument  
 
This project’s choice of financial instrument, a full grant req uest, is necessary for the project to overcome barriers 
confronting small island states and achieve the project’s objec tives to build resilience in vulnerable populations. The 
project is designed to maximize the impact of the grant financi ng through a Revolving Fund for enhancing direct access 
in the private sector. The private sector targeted in this prop osal are homeowners and small business owners whose 
property and assets are exposed to climate risks, and who requi re upfront financing to implement cost-effective 
measures to protect their prope rty from climate extremes.  
 The Revolving Fund, an unsecured, concessionary debt fund targe ting vulnerable populations, is a quasi-debt/quasi-
grant facility. The debt structure of the facility is primarily  driven by the creation of new  concessional financing by the 
recycling of the principal repaym ents of initial concessional f inancing through amortization – this process is known as 
the “revolver”. The “
grant” fundin g occurs throu gh discretionar y financin g forgiveness and pa yment flexibilit y to certain


---
*Page 90*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 148 
 
	
	E
categories of borrowers for whom repayment, even at concessiona ry rates may be difficult, instead of pursuing legal 
recourse against such defaulted borrowers.  
 
The Revolving Fund is designed to programme multilateral climat e finance directly to beneficiaries for the incremental 
cost of adaptation. Direct grant f inancing to the private secto r could be seen as “handouts” and may entail political 
risks. However, the Revolving F und must provide unsecured and c oncessional funds to vulnerable populations. To 
analyse the trade-offs, a financial model was developed for the  Revolving Fund loan programme, assuming an initial 
capitalization of USD 3 million (see Appendix): 
 The financial model suggested that approximately US$5.8 millio n in additional concessional financing can be 
created without replenishment of the initial US$3 million throu gh the revolving fund structure over the financial 
model’s 10-year projected period.  
 An average sum of US$645,000 is projected to be annually origi nated through revolving fund disbursal, 
primarily using principal repayments and other cash surplus, an d assuming average repayment terms of 5 
years. The model includes sensitiv ities analysis around the rev olver’s impact. 
 Due to modelled net write-offs of 2.5% of the gross portfolio annually102, an average of US$78,000 is expected 
to be lost due to defaulted fund s. These accumulated write offs  total US$774,000 over the projected years. 
 
The Revolving Fund will not be increasing its capital base thro ugh interest income returns. Due to a) concessionary 
debt interest rates averaging 3%, b) estimated net write-offs a t 2.5% of the gross portfolio, and c) additional balance 
sheet allowances built to protect against write-offs, there is an annual deficit rather than profit in the model and this 
contracts the portfolio at a rate of 2.5% annually. At the time  of a natural shock such as post-disaster recovery, the 
Revolving Fund can aggressively “ kick-in” with flexible payment  structures and funding to home and business owners. 
 The Revolving Fund will not require leveraged loans from privat e sector financial institutions – i.e. loans from the 
revolving fund cover a certain %, but not the totality, of adap tation investments in Output 4. The fund will target persons 
who are not normally able to ge t financing from the banks. Thes e are two main types:  
(a) They already have a mortgage on the building and do not qua lify for the additional funds to make the existing 
building more resilient. The Easte rn Caribbean Ce ntral Bank lim its how much can be lent to an individual.   
(b) Persons who own a home but who cannot qualify because of lo w salary or lack of job security (e.g. working 
in the hotel sector, after a storm, hotel workers can be laid o ff. In Barbuda, over 90% of the island residents 
are now unemployed). Finally, it is socially irresponsible to r equire persons to borrow more when we know 
they cannot. This would trigger t he GCF ESS. The purpose of the  Revolving Fund is to find a solution that 
works.   
 
The financial analysis in the appendix explored Revolving Fund “guarantee” to loans by private banking institutions, 
when a bank lends to the target population (who they would not normally lend to) on the condition that the Fund will 
pay for any default in the repaym ents – the Fund would therefor e serve as a “guarantor” to previously un-bankable 
persons. While this has been floated as an idea for the Revolvi ng Fund, this is not a recommended approach for the 
pilot for several reasons. Firstly, it is risky to hand over de cision-making for granting loans to banks. Private banks 
lending to individuals may inadequately assess credit risk beca use their own money is not a t stake. This creates a 
moral hazard with inappropriate incentives where the bank captu res the interest income, but places all the credit risk 
on the Fund. Secondly, allowing people to borrow from third-par ty banks with these loans secured by the Revolving 
Loan Facility would displace the Fund from an active role in as sessing borrowers. This would make the Fund a passive 
capital source, which prevents it from gaining critical in-hous e credit risk and assessment capabilities for scaling up 
going-forward. Furthermore, third-party banks may also have bia ses in assessing creditworthiness for the target 
borrowers, and it is this bias against the target population th at the Fund is attempting to support – this would also 
tri
gger environmental and social safe guards risks for vulnerable populations, and could prevent the R evolvin g Fund 
                                                 
102 Gross portfolio write-offs are relatively high because the Rev olving Fund will lend to high risk groups in order to meet the goal of 
adaptation that ‘leaves no one be hind’. High risk groups includ e the Kalinago indigenous community  in Dominica, and the island  of 
Barbuda, where the land is owned by the governing Council and n ot the individuals themselves.


---
*Page 91*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 148 
 
	
	E
from meeting ESS disaggregated i ndicators. In practical terms, as the Fund wishes to prior itize a hands-on approach, 
it should minimize its exposure as a guarantor for a third-part y bank.  
 
The Revolving Fund will complement (not leverage) debt from the  private sector, such as local banks. In the hierarchy 
of human needs, a climate resili ent building to live and conduc t business is a basic need ; once this is met through the 
Revolving Fund, beneficiaries will be in a better position to i ncrease productivity and borrow from local banks. Pending 
independent evaluations of the results of the Revolving Fund pi lot activities, it is expected that funding streams will 
increase and will be diversified, including funding from the re spective national Governments, international partners, 
among others.  
 This project will leverage over U S$11 million of private sector  financing through repayments in the revolving fund 
structure in Output 4 over the co urse of 10 years. Civil societ y organizations will contribute an estimated US$1.5 million 
of their own financing and in-kind suppor t to the interventions  under Output 3.  
 Rationale for co-financing   The Governments and stakeholders of the pilot countries were un able to provide co-financing that meets the GCF 
criteria of “new and additional” upfront, since the specific ac tivities are not fully defined as per the goal of devolving 
decision-making; therefore, this project does not include upfro nt co-financing. However, meeting co-financing 
commitments during implementation is a required for project dis bursements.  
 The Ministers of Environment in the participating countries at their annual meeting of the OECS Council of Ministers of 
Environmental Sustainability on 28 April 2017 in Grenada, have pledged to make the required human resources 
available to support enhanced direct access implementation unde r Output 1 (project management), and the 
Governments are expected to provide counterpart and in-kind sup port of US$6 million for Output 2. Across sectors, 
the project will attract at est imated US$18.5 million of counte rpart and leveraged financing and in-kind support. Co-
financing and in-kind contributions will be secured during proj ect implementation (see Table below) and tracked as part 
of the mid-year project reporting using the template in the App endices. 
 
Table	9.	Counterpart, 	leveraged 	financing 	and	in‐kind	support	to	be	realized	during	EDA	implementation 		
  GCF 
contribution 
(million 
USD) Counterpart, 
leveraged 
financing, in-
kind support 
(million USD) Process for securing co-
financing during project 
implementation Source of verification 
Output 1.  
(Devolving 
decision-
making) 2 0.6 Appointment of PMUs, oversight 
committees, decision-making 
bodies; Agreements and TORs in 
place to cover in-kind contributions  Agreements and TORs 
for the respective bodies 
Output 2  
(Public 
sector) 9 5.4 Approval criteria for the project 
document requires at least USD 1.8 
M co-financing per country Approved project 
applications 
Output 3  
(Civil 
society) 3 1.5 Approval criteria for grant 
applications includes at least 50% 
in co-financing from proponents Approved on-granting 
applications 
Output 4  
(Revolving 
Fund private sector) 6 11 Loan agreements with borrowers 
establish agreed repayment 
schedules Financial statements 
tracking reflows into the 
Revolving Funds


---
*Page 92*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 148 
 
	
	E
Total Co-
financing 20 18.5   
 
Across sectors, the project will attract at estimated US$18.5 m illion of counterpart financing and in-kind support. This 
project will leverage over US$11 million of private sector fina ncing through repayments in t he revolving fund structure 
in Output 4 over the course of 10 years. Civil society organiza tions will contribute an estima ted US$1.5 million of their 
own financing and in-kind support to the interventions under Ou tput 3. Governments are expected to provide 
counterpart and in-kind support of US$6 million for Output 1 an d Output 2. For more information, see Section E.6. 
Efficiency and effectiveness . 
 The Governments are already self-financing adaptation and are i nvesting millions into natural disaster shock recovery. 
The IMF has estimated that Grenada increases expenditure by a t otal of 5 percent of GDP in the two years following 
a hurricane to cover reconstruct ion costs resulting from the hu rricane
103.  
 
Natural disaster shocks in the Eastern Caribbean result in lowe r growth scenarios and higher debt paths. Each of the 
pilot countries have experience d devastating hurricanes, which have resulted in economic shocks, increased debt, and 
resulted in constrained fiscal space and debt restructuring pro grammes. As a result, the participating Governments, 
which are currently or have rec ently undergone IMF restructurin g measures, do not have the fiscal space to contribute 
“new and additional” financing fo r the project. Furthermore, th e OECS is already borrowing ap proximately one third of 
its climate finance. The total amount of climate finance for th e 2010-15 period to the 6 OECS members was US 101 
million, of which one third (USD 30 million) was in the form of  loans. This contrasts with other SIDS regions where all 
climate finance so far has been grant-based104. 
 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveragi ng and mobilized lo ng-term investm ents (mitigation only)  
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
N/A 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practi ces are considered and applied.  If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
The End of Project Monitoring and Evaluation for the USAID RRAC C (Rallying the Region to Adapt to Climate Change) 
was produced in September 2016 for the USAID project implemente d in Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada 
and Petite Martinique, St. Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia and St.  Vincent and the Grenadines between 2011 and 2016.  
 
Lessons learned from the RRACC will support the EDA to use the best available technologies and practices. The 
terminal report is provided as an Appendix, however some of the  key findings of the evaluation are presented below. 
 
Best practices from the RRACC: 
 Community based revetment and drainage projects are good examp les of how SIDS can adapt to climate change. 
In particular, the Mero community in Dominica benefited from dr ainage enhancements that prevented significant 
losses when Tropical Storm Er ica struck the island in 2015.  
 Dominica’s demonstration project in Mero is also a model of pr oject synergies. This was primarily the 
implementation of a Climate Chan ge Adaptation Plan based on work conducted under the CDEMA/OECS 
                                                 
103 IMF, 2016. Grenada Debt Sustainability Analysis https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/pdf/2016/dsacr16133.pd f Accessed 7 
September 2017 
104 Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), 2017. Climate finance t o the Small Island States of t he Eastern Caribbean: An overview  
of financial support provided from 2010 to 2015. Fourth Council  of Ministers, Environmental Sustainability, April 2017, Grenad a.


---
*Page 93*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 148 
 
	
	E
implemented Comprehensive Disaster Management Harmonized Implem entation Program (CDMHIP). The project 
therefore found ready acceptance  and has great potential for re production and su stainability. 
 There were a number of rainwater  harvesting projects which whi le not being very innovativ e, show how SIDS can 
use low impact technology to mitigate increased periods of drou ght, especially for schools, disaster shelters and 
the agricultural sector 
 Geographic Information System (GIS) activities that produced m aps and data were very well received and 
impactful, particularly for water sector monitoring  
 The Communications Strategy succeeded in the engagement and ed ucation of media professionals on climate 
change issues 
 
Table	10.	Lessons	learned	from	the	RRACC	project	and	corresponding 	innovations, 	modifications 	and/or	adjustments 	in	the	EDA	project	
Lessons learned from the 
RRACC pro ject Innovations/modifications/adjustments under the EDA 
There was no evidence of 
uptake of legislation or policy 
that was developed under the project. The evaluators noted 
that this result could improve 
over time as stakeholders may return to the documents 
developed when they are ready 
to be implemented The RRACC project developed the following policies: OECS Model Integrated 
Coastal Zone Management Policy , Model Water Policy and Act, and  a National 
Land Use policy for Grenada, Car riacou and Petite Martinique. 
 
The fact that the legislation and policy was developed under th e RRACC 
project but there was no evidence of uptake suggests that the l egal and policy 
environment was not the key barrier to achieving the intended o utcome. As 
illustrated in Section E.5.1., ther e is quite a comprehensive l egal and policy 
framework for implementing clim ate change in the Eastern Caribb ean. The 
region was some of the first cou ntries to ratify the Paris Agre ement and pass 
national climate change laws.  
 The EDA project has determined t hat the key barriers to mainstr eaming 
adaptation are: 1) lack of institutional capacity in key depart ments and 
executing entities to sustain  long-term adaptation impact, and 2) lack of 
adequate and predictable finance for adaptation and resilience in MSMEs and 
the public sector.  
 The EDA project there is designed not as a policy-focused proje ct, but rather it 
is an implementing and mainstr eaming project to promote adaptat ion and 
climate resilience. This will in centivize complia nce with the l egal and policy 
framework, thereby mainstreaming  the laws and policies in a lea rning-by-doing 
approach.  
Knowledge products were highly 
oriented to utilizing wording that 
may not be understood by the general public. The materials 
reviewed also failed to strongly 
link key national issues like crime, unemployment and 
poverty to that of climate 
change, which was a recommendation in the 
Communications Strategy but 
not followed in implementation The EDA project will use GIS as t he basis for knowledge product s. Maps and 
visual illustrations are highly effective knowledge and communi cation tools, 
from the local/community level right up to high level decision- makers, and this 
was also documented as a best practice in the RRACC. The EDA pr oject’s 
M&E system will be GIS-based to  easily track and present projec t results using 
maps and visual formats.  
Much of the activities undertaken by the Public 
Awareness Output are actually Tailor knowledge products to audi ences and make the products mo re issue-
focused and less project-focused. For example, knowledge produc ts will focus 
on the national Climate Funds a nd access mechanisms as opposed to EDA 
pro
ject brandin g.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 148 
 
	
	E
not sustainable because they 
were ver y project specific  
Project outputs were not able to 
be clearly linked to the national 
development agenda Evaluation criteria for Outputs 2, 3 and 4 for the public, priv ate and CSO 
sectors respectively  will require that direc t linkages with the  national 
development and climat e change goals of the respective country are explicit in 
the funding proposals Relevant national development and climate  change 
policies for each participating country are listed in Section E .5.1. 
 
The project experienced a delay of 9 months; the demonstration 
projects also experienced 
significant delays in most countries Most projects, including the RRA CC, tend to establish project-s pecific units 
and project-specific oversight c ommittees. This arrangement is taxing on 
human resources in small island developing states, where Govern ment agency 
units can consist of j ust 3-4 staff. In additi on, creating para llel implementation 
and oversight processes duplicat es existing arrangements. 
 
To overcome the challenge of l ack of institutional capacity, th e EDA is 
structured to implement the proj ect implementation using existi ng institutions 
and decision-making pr ocesses in each of t he pilot countries, a nd building the 
capacity of the project managem ent unit. The structure and staf fing of the PMU 
will be approved by the Project M anagement Committee (PMC). The  OECS 
Commission Monitoring and Evaluation Unit will for the first ti me provide 
external M&E services to a p roject to independent ly evaluate pr oject results, 
and this will provide another la
yer of accountabilit y to deliver timel y results.
  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF 
core 
indicators Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investmen t cost / expected lifetime emiss ion reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total project fi nancing US$_______   
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$_______   
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  _______ tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c) US$_______  / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b / c) US$_______  / tCO 2eq 
 
N.A.   
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed proj ect/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financin g, disa ggregated b y public and private sources (mitigation onl y) 
N.A.  
  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. e stimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of t he project/programme)


---
*Page 95*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 148 
 
	
	F
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detail ed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3 ). 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financi al justification (both qual itative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a referenc e to the financial structure proposed in section B.2. 
 
The cost-effectiveness analysis o f the proposed project is addr essed in Section E.6.1. This section covers additional 
and specific financial analysis i nformation on the Revolving Fu nd loans for adaptation (see Appendix for full report). 
The Revolving Fund is structured as a Quasi-Debt/Quasi-Grant fa cility. The debt structure of the facility is primarily 
driven by the creation of new concessional financing by the 
recycling of the principal repayments of initial concessional financing through amortization - this process is also known as the 
“revolver”. The “grant” funding occurs through discretionary 
financing forgiveness and payment f lexibility to certain catego ries 
of borrowers for whom repaymen t, even at concessionary rates 
may be difficult, instead of pursuing legal recourse against su ch 
defaulted borrowers.   
A Detailed Credit Assessment and Loan Management Guide has 
been developed to guide the handling of distressed and defaulte d 
borrowers, outlining the approa ch towards loan forgiveness, deb t 
restructuring, write-off policies and flexible payback periods,  f o r  
example in the case of a Category 5 hurricane severely impactin g 
a significant number of borrowers  (see Case Study 6). This stra tegy 
will be supported by the following risk management measures to promote high repayment rates: 
 Automatic wage deduction for borrowers who are 
employed, such as civil servants 
 A property lien associated w ith the beneficiary facility, 
registered at Inland Revenue Department (legal claim on 
the real estate granting the SIRF Fund a specified amount 
of money upon the sale of the property). This was a 
recommendation of the Atto rney General’s Office.  
 Marketing of the loan facility as a SIRF Fund initiative, 
which is separate from the Government, to manage the right message to borrowers  
 A strong collections platform that communicates and 
reinforces the value of the financing and the interventions tha t they facilitate, in order to achieve desired low 
default rates 
 Maximizing the value to the borrowers, including through tax e xemption of purchased materials, and promoting 
the registration and review of c ontractors so that beneficiarie s get the best value for their loan 
 Mandatory workshops are also being piloted with both the benef iciaries and contractors under the Adaptation 
Fund revolving loan project in Antigua and Barbuda. If this has  a positive impact on repayment, then this can 
be implemented under the EDA (wor kshops have been included in t he budget).  
 The strong and independent M&E  framework for  the project will analyze the data and make recommendations 
for policy interventions that inc rease repayment but do not tri gger ESS risks. 
The Credit Assessment Guide will be validated and approved upon  project approval. 
 
Case Study 6: Revolving Fund debt 
forgiveness/repayment restructuring 
 On 7 September 2017, Barbuda sustained a 
direct hit by Hurricane Irma (Category 5). An 
extreme weather event of this magnitude could trigger loan forgiveness, debt 
restructuring, write-off policies and flexible 
payback periods for Revolving Fund borrowers. A Detailed Credit Assessment and 
Loan Management Guide will be developed to 
guide this process.
 
 
 
Photo of homes destro yed in Barbuda post-Hurricane Irma (Photos:


---
*Page 96*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 148 
 
	
	F
Given the relationship-based community lending approach of the Revolving Fund’s pilot, it is important to understand 
the credit context and risks that the Fund will face in order t o achieve a resilient and impactful portfolio in this pilot 
project.   
The analysis presented here considers the impact of an initial capitalization of US$3 million for the Revolving Fund to 
facilitate unsecured lending primarily to individuals, and to s mall and medium enterprises (SMEs). The proposed 
delivery mechanism is through concessional financing ranging fr om US$5,000 to US$75,000 at concessional rates 
between 2 and 4%. This focus is on individual and SME lending r ather than traditional group-based microfinance lending 
where the borrowers are joint- and-severally liable for debt. 
 
The financial analysis assesses the Revolving Fund’s pilot and considers borrower and portfolio risks, providing 
guidance and recommendations for the Financing Board and Techni cal Expert Committee on mechanics, credit 
assessment and portfolio strategies.  
 Impact of the Revolving Fund capitalization 
 The financial model suggests that approximately US$5.8 million  in additional concessional financing can be 
created without replenishment o f the initial US$3 million throu gh the revolving fund structure over the financial 
model’s 10-year projected period.  
 An average sum of US$645,000 is projected to be annually origi nated through revolving fund disbursal, 
primarily using principal repaym ents and other cash surplus, an d assuming average repayment terms of 5 
years.  See annex for se nsitivities around t he revolver’s impac t. 
 Due to modeled net write-offs of 2 .5% of the gross portfolio a nnually, an average of US$78,000 is expected to 
be lost due to defaulted funds. T hese accumulated write offs to tal US$774,000 over the projected years. 
 
Key Drivers in the Revolving Fund for Adaptation Analysis 
 The model portfolio initially assumes six concessional financi ng categories divided by size of financing 
approved. 
 The concessional financing is a ll assumed to amortize, this is  where repayments of bot h interest and principal 
are made in tandem and the principal balance outstanding decrea ses as the financing matures. Terms of the 
disbursements are averaged at 5 years. 
 The initial interest rates hav e a weighted average of 3.1%. 
 The revolving fund, which begins to be repaid in the second ye ar, are driven by the use of cash returned from 
principal repayments and other cash sources, with a residual am ount held in cash balances. They assume a 5 
year term and an interest rate of 3%. 
 Net write-offs are assumed at 2.5% annually, and the gross por tfolio decreases by 2.5% on average annually 
(2% - 3% is the target por tfolio attrition rate). 
 The model is most sensitive to the following parameters: 1) In terest rate charged; 2) Write off rates; and 3) 
Term (duration) of the financing. 
 
Strategies for Managing Portfo lio Risks of the Revolving Fund P ilot 
In addition to borrower credit metrics, the Revolving Fund pilo t may also consider assessing the portfolio along the 
qualitative metrics below that will help to identify risk, conc entration and provide indications for new directions. The 
following are recommendations for managing portfolio risk: 
 Decentralize Borrower Concentration Risk : No borrower should owe more than 2% of the gross capital allo cated 
for the financing, without special review by a Credit Committee , the Ministry of Finance or designated authority. 
The maximum financing amount outlined for this pilot is US$75,0 00 which is 2.5% of the financing allocation, 
and obtaining collateral in addition to direct salary deduction
s for any financing requests exceeding this amount 
should be considered, along with other strategies determined by  the Ministry of Finance. 
 Shorter Financing Terms (when possible):  The financing duration drives the principal repayment timing –  
Shorter financing terms will fac ilitate more cash inflows that allow greater revolver disbursal capacity, and


---
*Page 97*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 148 
 
	
	F
increases the overall impact of the Fund pilot. Up to a certain  point as well, shorter terms reduces risk of default 
because of less exposure to epi sodic impacts to people’s salary  and job status. However, this is 
counterbalanced by t he borrower’s ability to  service heavier de bt payments resulting from a shorter repayment 
timeline. An average portfolio financing term of 5 years is cur rently modeled - See sensitivity schedule and 
borrower analysis in annex for further details. 
 Diversifying Products and Services Financed by the Financing:  Certain products financ ed by the financing will 
be sensitive to natural shocks such as hurricanes, and in the e vent that there is mass damage to them, 
disruption in financing payments can be expected. Keeping track  on the use of funds and frequent reviews of 
the portfolio should be able to quantify this exposure, and obt aining guarantees or insurance structures for the 
Fund, in addition to product and se rvice warranties as discusse d above will mitigate  this portfolio risk.   
F.2.  Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspectiv e. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most approp riate for this project/programme. 
The technical solutions proposed for the focus areas of this ED A project are: 1) adaptation in buildings, 2) adaptation 
in waterways and drai nage systems, and 3) ecosystem-based adapt ation. Narrowing the focu s areas of the EDA is an 
efficient way for the project to meet its objectives by focusin g resources on devolved deci sion-making and stakeholder 
engagement. The proposed technical adaptation solutions are inf ormed by baseline work in the pilot countries, including 
inter alia the Adaptation Fund , the SCCF, the USAID RRACC, and the GCCA projects.  
 The model OECS climate resilient Building Code was developed ov er the period of 2014 – 2016 by consultants procured 
through an open and competitive international bidding process, with funding from the Global Climate Change Alliance 
(GCCA) project managed by the OECS Commission for the sub-regio n. Sections 6, 8, and 13 of the OECS model 
Building Code address
 adaptation to climate change using civil engineering methods. D esign adaptation measures in 
the revised Building Code include:  
 Low flow facilities for sanitary systems 
 Increased load on drainage sy stems due to extreme rainfall 
 Separate sewage and runoff syste ms to avoid overloading septic  systems 
 Sea level rise provisions in coastal low-lying areas: ground f loor structure shall be at least 3ft above the 
predicted high tide level; sea walls, gabions and revetments (r ock armor placed on the slope); coastal set-
backs for construction 
 Slope stabilization techniques 
During construction (Section 6) , the following adaptation measu res are advised: 
 Special hurricane precautions (clause 624): avoiding when poss ible works during peak hurricane season; tying 
down and securing all materials for hurricane preparation 
 Adaptation to temperature rise (clause 625): managing risks to  workers from temperature rise via ventilation; 
purchasing and storing materials that are adapted to higher tem peratures  
 Impact-resistant glass or shutters  
In addition, the OECS Building Code includes mitigation measure s to reduce the carbon footprint of cement, such as 
local alternatives (Montserrat ash from the volcano was cited a s a possible substitute), and repurposing the concrete 
waste from the hurricane wreckage will be investigated as a rec ycled additive to concrete. 
 
Technical quality of the adaptation interventions will be ensur ed through the flexible project implementation and 
management arrangements, which are designed to utilize experts in the local public and private sectors. A Technical 
Expert Committee (TEC) will be formed to review applications an d constituted according to required expertise, for 
example the Revolving Fund pilo t for adaptation in buildings wo uld include: 
- Building Inspectors (Phys ical Planning Authority) 
- Fire Officers (Fire Department) 
- Civil En gineer (Department of Environment )


---
*Page 98*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 148 
 
	
	F
- Electrician (private sector) 
- Carpenter (Antigua and Barbuda  Institute for Continuing Educa tion) 
- ESS and Gender Expert (Communi ty Development Division) 
 
In addition, the project will include certification or rating o f contractors that is transpar ent and will promote accountabili ty 
to the client and improve pe rformance for the project.  
 Antigua and Barbuda also has a framework agreement with the UN Office of Project Services (UNOPS)
105 Caribbean 
Office, which is headquartered in the OECS region (St. Lucia) a nd active with ongoing projects in all three of the pilot 
countries. The EDA project will engage UNOPS for the role of te chnical backstopping and quality assurance, as needed, 
in the following areas:   
 
• Evaluation of existing infrastructure 
• Design, review, pre paration of technical construction studies 
• Updating and application o f basic construction codes 
• Capacity building in sustainable procurement processes 
• Consistency checks of the maximu m value established for each c ontract 
• Maintenance and sustainable solutions for infrastructure  
• Evaluation of installed capa city and staff training plans 
• Minimum quality standards for infrastructure projects and valu e-for-money 
 
The Government of Antigua and Barbuda and UNOPS entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in March 
2017.  
 
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Consideratio ns 
Describe the main outcome of the envir onment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoi d or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operati on), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspe ct is considered in accordance with the Fu nd’s Gender Policy and 
Action Plan.  
 The Environmental and Social Ma nagement Plan assessed the likel y ESS and gender impacts  and ranked each 
Output accordingly (see table bel ow). These risks are compiled in the project Risk Regist er, which will be updated on 
a quarterly basis and inform the annual compliance reports to t he GCF.  
 
Table	11.	Risk	management 	during	implementation 	will	be	in	conjunction 	with	the	risk	categorization 	for	each	Output	
EDA Project Output  Assessment of Risk by Output Risk 
Cate gorization
Output 1. Enhanced capacity for 
climate adaptation planning, 
implementation, and monitoring and 
evaluation via direct access  No adverse  Environmental, Social and Gender 
impacts are expected to result from this Outputs’ 
activities.  Category C 
Output 2. Governments implement 
concrete adaptation measures using 
ecosystem-based approaches where 
appropriate  Potential adverse impacts r esulting from this Output 
include works that could result in adverse impacts, 
however these will be few in  number, small scale and 
less widespread. 
Through the Environmental Impact Assessment 
physical planning requirem ents, these impacts are 
reversible or easil y mitigated.Category B 
                                                 
105 United Nations Office for Projec t Services (UNOPS) https://www .unops.org/english/Pages/Home.aspx


---
*Page 99*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 148 
 
	
	F
 
Information on excluded projects  that may cause significant adv erse environmental and/or s ocial risks, as well as the 
scale of the sub-projects in Output 2 and 4 is provided in  Table 3. Criteria and guidelines for the selection of 
enhanced direct access activities by the decision-making bodies .  
 
Information disclosure requirements 
The initial Environmental and Social Management Plan will be di sclosed by the Accredited Enti ty via electronic links in 
the AE’s website and convenient locations for affected peoples,  and the GCF discloses such reports on its website, in 
accordance with the GCF Informat ion Disclosure Policy. For the EDA as a Category B/1-2 project, this is required to 
be posted 30 days before t he GCF’s Board date. 
 
Subsequent EIAs and other envir onmental reports will be posted online 30 days prior to Committee meetings where 
funding decisions will be taken for Output 2 (public sector ada ptation interventions).  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation reports will be posted on the OECS an d Department of Environment websites, in accordance 
with the GCF Information Disclosure Policy106.  
 
Prior to their implementation, details of individual projects o r programmes will be made accessible to the public via the 
websites of the respective NDAs, the OECS Commission and the ac credited entity. These websites are: 
 OECS Commission: www.oecs.org 
 Accredited Entity: www.environmentdivision.info 
 
Grievance Mechanism 
The Department of Environment has an established Complaints Pro cedure, which will be used as the project’s 
Grievance Mechanism. This is covered in the DOE’s Code of Condu ct and Ethics107, which all staff, Committee 
members, project consultants and contractors are required to si gn and adhere. Complaints pertaining to project 
activities will be direct to des ignated personnel in the Projec t Management Unit (PMU). 
The public can submit complaints related to the mandate of the Department of Environment via the following channels:
 On the DoE’s website: http://www.environmentdivision.inf o/submit_a_complaint_en_365cm s.htm   
 Filling out the form and emaili ng it to antiguaenvironmentdivi sion@gmail.com 
 In writing to: Director, Department of Environment, Ministry o f Health and the Environment, #1 Victoria Park 
Botanical Garden, P.O. B ox W693, St. John's Antigua 
 By email: antiguaenvironmentdivision@gmail.com 
 By Phone:  Monday to Thursday: 8am to 2pm, Fridays: 8 am to 12  pm, by calling: (+1 268) 462 4625; (268) 
562-2568; (268) 460-7278 Output 3.  Community resilience to 
climate impacts is enhanced through 
tangible adaptation benefits These activities will be sma ll scale adaptation actions 
based in community facilit ies and with  no adverse  
Environmental, Social and Gender impacts expected. Category C 
Output 4. Privately owned physical 
assets of vulnerable populations are 
more resilient to climate variability 
and change through concessional microfinancin
g These activities will be sma ll scale adaptation actions 
based in buildings and with no adverse  
Environmental, Social and Gender impacts expected. Category C 
                                                 
106 Summary of Information Disclosure Requirements for key GCF doc uments: 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/401322/Summary_of_ disclosure_standards_for_key _GCF_documents.pdf/7ab36636
-654e-4d0a-912d-6df445c031c4   
107 Code of Conduct and Ethics, Department of Environment: http://www.environmentdivision.info/UserFiles/File/NIE_-
_Code_of_Conduct_-_Working_draft_NN-1.pdf


---
*Page 100*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 148 
 
	
	F
 Depending on the nature of the co mplaint, or if for any reason  the complainant  is unwilling to m ake a report to 
the Department of Environment, t hey can submit a complaint to t heir parliamentary representative. 
When a complaint is communicat ed, the following information is recorded: 
 The nature of the problem 
 The location of the problem 
 When the problem occurred (date and time) 
 Who or what is the percei ved source of the problem 
 Any information or evidence y ou may have—particularly eyewitne ss information, docum ents or photographs, 
a videotape, or a water or soil sa mple (the information or evid ence must be credible and relate directly to the 
incident being reported). 
 The contact information of the complainant 
 
 
Figure	23.	YouTube	video	with	the	legal	officer	explaining 	how	to	submit	a	complaint 	to	the	Department 	of	Environment 	
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XUk77GaB2 ‐4		
 
A Grievance Mechanism will be esta blished at the OECS Commissio n sub-regional level as part of the M&E 
requirements, and at the national l evel via the Executing Entit ies. The requirement for the 
establishment/operationalization of the Complaints Mechanism is  reflected in the Subsidiary Agreement between the 
Accredited Entity and the Executing Entities.   
Environmental social and gender risk management 
 
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Management Pl an, including a Gender Action Plan, has been 
developed and included as an appendix to the project document. These documents detail project screening procedures, 
monitoring and evaluation principles, and roles and responsibil ities to provide oversight and implementation of ESS 
compliance. The AE will, along wi th ongoing Readiness support t o Dominica and Grenada, building the capacity and 
strengthen the track record of t he Executing Entities in ensuri ng that they adhere to the ESS Standards. Key aspects 
of ESS and gender risk management under the EDA project are: 
 Environmental, social and gender  considerations reflected in t he application templates  
 The national decision-making committee includes at least 1 wom an and 1 person with disabilities from a 
CSO/NGO to represent these key issues on the decision-making  
 The evaluation criteria used by the national decision-making c ommittee includes environmental, social and 
gender considerations (see Table 3. Criteria and guidelines for the selection of enhan ced direct access 
activities by the decision-making bodies )


---
*Page 101*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 148 
 
	
	F
 The Oversight Committee is responsible for monitoring that the  activities approved are in compliance with the 
project’s Environmental and Social Management Plan, as well as the AE’s and the GCF’s ESS and Gender 
Policies 
 The OECS Commission provides ongoing gender-sensitive M&E, rep orting to the AE 
The above steps are considered comprehensive for Outputs 3 and 4, which have a risk level of Category C. Activities 
to be funded under Output 2, estimated to have a risk level of Category B, are required to conduct Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs) which include social and gender aspects for endorsed Concept Notes. The EIAs are part of the 
development approval process. See Figure 19. Decision-making approval process for the EDA project in the public, 
NGO and private sectors for a diagram of the above steps.  
 An environment and social impact assessment will be conducted f or activities under Output 2, consistent with an 
enhanced direct access approach, a s activities are only indicat ive at this stage and will be  fully defined by proponents 
during EDA implementation. The figure on the following page ela borates the EIA process required to secure physical 
planning approvals. Risks identified via the EIA process will b e documented in the project Risk Register and the 
implementation of risk mitigati on measures will be monitored.


---
*Page 102*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 148 
 
	
	F
 
Figure	24.	Summary 	of	the	Environmental 	Impact	Assessment 	process	for	all	proponents


---
*Page 103*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 148 
 
	
	F
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management  and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.  
Financial Management 
 The Department of Environment has expertise in working with don or funds and has a good track record in implementing 
27 programmes and projects using its sound financial management  practices. The Accounts Unit adheres to policies 
and procedures that meets the r equirements of multilateral and bilateral requirements. Fo r this project, it will be 
responsible for fiduciary aspec ts and will be accountable for a ll financial activities. 
 
International accounting and financial reporting standards will  be applied to the project. The Department of Environment 
follows standard accounting
 procedures for auditing project expenditure, and assumes overal l responsibility for financial 
management of the projects, ensuring that funds are used effici ently to support the funded activities. A qualified, 
internationally recognized auditing firm, competitively selecte d by the AE, will audit the EDA project in compliance with 
International Standards on Auditing, and will submit all projec t-related accounts to the GCF on an annual basis. The 
audits are documented by a signed audit report. The auditor wil l submit all project-related accounts to the GCF on an 
annual basis. The audits are documented by a signed audit repor t.  
 
Procurement  
The Department of Environment’s Procurement Policy is in accord ance with the GCF’s and World Bank standards, and 
compliant with national laws. The DOE’s Procurement Policy will  be used for this EDA proje ct, in order to facilitate 
procurement within a standardized framework. These are the proc edures for which the Department of Environment was 
accredited to the GCF in 2017. As the OECS Commission and the E Es develop/update their policies and apply for 
accreditation to the GCF, once ac credited the OECS Commission a nd the EEs will use their own Procurement policies 
and procedures. 
 
Table	12.	Thresholds 	in	the	DOE	Procurement 	Policy	–	Purchases 	(Goods,	Works	and	non‐Consulting 	Services)	
Cost Threshold (EC$)  Method of 
Procurement  Approval Authority  
Less than $10,000 Price verification – non-
competitive – Shopping       Director 
$54,338 (or US$20,000) or belo w Competitive – RFQ - 3 
Quotations Director (Final Approval) 
Project Coordinator (initial approval of the requisition) 
Over $54,338 (or US$20,000) to 
$1,358,450 (or US$500,000) Competitive – ITB Director (final approval with endorsement fro m the PMC)
Project Coordinator (initial approval of requisition)  
Over $1,358,450 (or 
US$500,000) Competitive – ITB Minister of Finance (final approval) 
Director (initial approval of requisition with endorsement 
from PMC) 
 
Table	13.	Thresholds 	in	the	DOE	Procurement 	Policy	–	Purchases 	(Consulting 	Services)	
Cost Threshold (EC$)  Method of 
Procurement  Approval Authority  
$54,338 (US$20,000) or be low Competitive – RFP 
 
-3 Bids/Proposals Director (final approval) 
Project Coordinator (initial approval of requisition)


---
*Page 104*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 148 
 
	
	F
Over $54,338 (US$20,0 00) to $1,358,450 
(US$500,000) Competitive – RFP Director (final approval with endorsement fro m the 
PMC) Project Coordinator (initial approval of requisition)  
Over $1,358,450 (US$500,000) Competitive - RFP Minister of Fina nce (final approval) 
Director (initial approval of requisition with endorsement 
from PMC requisition) 
 
An 18-month procurement plan for the EDA project is included in  the Appendix. 
 The AE will conduct updated capacity  assessments to structure E xecuting Entity (EE) respons ibilities over the first year, 
consistent with a risk-based approach, upon endorsement of this  project by the GCF Board. At the end of Year 1 of 
implementation, a capacity audit will be conducted and the full  delegation of EE responsibilities will be contingent on 
the results of thi s capacity audit.  
 
Based on initial assessments, the EEs have adequate capacity in  the area of procurement. The capacity assessment 
of the EE in Grenada concluded that its procurement standards m eet World Bank standards: “The Project Coordination 
Unit (PCU) applies World Bank procurement guidelines and practi ces in case of World Bank projects and CDB 
procurement guidelines and practices in case of CDB projects…th e PCU employs two permanent staff for 
procurement... If the procurement function was eventually outso urced to the Ministry of Fi nance, this would eventually 
result in non-compliance with the GCF standard. Based on curren t arrangements the GCF standard is complied with.”
108 
 
The project is structured with flexible implementation arrangem ents, and this ensure that procurement is conducted in 
accordance with the AE standards until EEs can demonstrate that  standards meet the GCF criteria. Prior to first 
disbursement to an Executing Entity, it is a requirement that t he Parliament of the respective country pass regulations 
via negative resolution in Parlia ment specific to the funds to be managed under the GCF EDA project.  
 Oversight 
 
The Department of Environment, working with the OECS Commission  who is the independent evaluator for the project, 
will ensure: (i) the substantive quality of the project impleme ntation and compliance with procurement guidelines, (ii) 
the effective use of  resources including value for money, (iii)  the availability of national cont ributions to support project 
implementation, and (iv) the proper coordination among all proj ect stakeholders, in particular sub-regional partners in 
the three pilot countries.  
 
Output 1 of the project will build capacity in sustainable proc urement, and the project’s procurement plan will be 
designed to meet ISO 20400:2017. Sustainable procurement is an opportunity for market transformation in 
commoditized markets with competitive supplier pools. The EDA p roject will benefit from significant training and 
capacity building in procurement under this activity to demonst rate ISO standards on Sustainable Procurement under 
the project, as a pilot for establ ishing an OECS sub-regional s ustainable procurement policy. 
 
                                                 
108 Æquilibrium Consulting GmbH, 2016. Gap Analysis and Road Map f or Green Climate Fund  
National Implementing Entity Accr editation in Grenada. With sup port from GCF Readiness.


---
*Page 105*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 102 OF 148 
 
	G
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social a nd environmental and other ri sks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Al so describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 Staff and HR capacity  
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurrin g 
Risk: Unavailability of appropriate personnel to undertake the 
assignment in pilot countries 
 
The three pre-feasibility studie s for this project identified a  
lack of capacity for implement ation as a key risk to the 
project. For example, in Grenada, i t was explained that the Technical and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  High  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed de scription of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G.2. 
 
Assumptions underlying the project Proposal 
The project is conceived based on the following main assumption s: firstly, that OECS countries would partner with 
Antigua and Barbuda to participate in the project. Secondly, th e countries will remain com mitted to the provisions on 
climate change set forth in their Nationally Determined Contrib utions (NDCs); and finally, that the OECS Secretariat 
will have the requisite capacity  to successfully provide oversi ght for the effective and impl ementation of the project. 
 Risk register and methodology 
A project risk register has been developed to list all identifi ed risks that may affect the project. The register was 
compiled using the following baseline documents and records:  
• Pre-Feasibility Studies for the EDA project implementation in Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada, 
and the OECS Commission M&E Unit 
• Consultations with project partners between April 2016 and Jun e 2017 (four in-person consultations, several 
phone calls, and circulation of project update briefs) 
• Environmental and Social Impact Assessments for similar activi ties, including the seed pilot in Antigua and 
Barbuda 
• Financial model and feasibility analysis of the Revolving Fund  Programme for Adaptation in Antigua and 
Barbuda 
• IPCC AR5 (2014) and its recommendations for Small Island Devel oping States 
The register is also based on the historical knowledge of the c ulture and socio-political history of the pilot countries. 
The risks identified within the studies and consultations are l isted within the table.  
 
The risk register identifies risks in the following categories:  Strategic, Reputational, O perational, ESS and Gender, 
Legal, Compliance, Performance, F unding, and Market risks. The register lists risk mitigation measures, and ranks 
the residual risks by probab ility and impact. The risks with th e greatest potential impact are presented in Section G.2.
 The project staff, consultants, the Accredited Entity and proje ct partners will maintain continued monitoring and 
evaluation of the implementation of the project to identify new  or latent risks. Further, the audit plan for the project will 
include detailed assessment of i dentified risks to track assump tions as the project is implemented. 
 
The Project Manager with oversight by the Project Management Co mmittee and the Audit Committee, the Legal Unit 
of the Accredited Entity and the respective national decision-m aking committees will prov ide necessary technical 
support.  Detailed risk studies will be conducted by independen t consultants hired by the project during implementation. 
Miti
gation measures will be implemented b y the Pro ject Coordinator and the Pro ject Mana gement Unit.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 103 OF 148 
 
	G
Climate Change Focal Poi nt is one person and the 
Environment Division is currently staffed by four persons 
inclusive of the Permanent Secre tary. This clearly shows that 
there is a major need for stre ngthening the Environment 
Division. Similar situations were assessed for the OECS 
Commission, and Dominica.  
 
Triggers: 
 Failure in recruitmen t, retention, succession 
planning, integrity and morale among project staff 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
 
 Expand the pool of qualified people in each country: the proje ct should primarily use Local Consultants and, where 
necessary, couple local consult ants with international expertis e in a learning-by-doing approach, instead of 
outsourcing professional consulta ncies to firms that do not bui ld experience and expertise within the region 
 Transition from a project-by-pr oject approach to a programmati c implementation approach , via the establishment 
of a Project Management Unit that  is a permanent entity and not  project-specific. This will help to retain staff 
beyond the life of any one indivi dual project and improve knowl edge management systems 
 Sub-regional and flexible arrangements (such as remote staffin g arrangements) could be another option for HR 
under the project. In addition, OECS has a free movement of lab our, and the Commission can consider 
establishing a Technical Assistance programme to facilitate imp lementation across OECS member states 
 7.5% of the project budget is dedicated to building institutio nal and project management capacity of the key 
institutions in the recipient countries to implement the projec t efficiently and with maximum impact. Budget 
allocations under Output 1 include USD 500k for 1.1 Capacity building to strengthen financial institutions, devolve 
decision-making, stakeholder engagement fo r transparency, and sustainable procurement , and USD 1 M for 1.2 
Project management . Activities under this Output include: Appoint implementation,  oversight and transparency 
mechanisms with adequate capacity; Support accreditation of dir ect access entities in pilot countries, including 
conducting capacity self-assessments to build ownership over ca pacity-building activities, and; Facilitate effective 
project management, monitoring and evaluation, and lessons lear ned consistent with an enhanced direct access 
approach 
 Secure Cabinet decisions during project pre-inception phase (w ithin 6 months of projec t approval) to approve the 
required human resources and make sure they are available to su pport enhanced direct access implementation; 
promote country ownership 
 Use Government sec ondment to supplement capacity and expertise  in established project management units  
 Use existing institutions and decision-making processes in eac h of the pilot countries (do not establish new units 
or committees) 
 Promote learning opportunities and empower implementers 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 USD to ECD conversion loss 
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurrin g 
 
The Eastern Caribbean Dollar (ECD) is pegged to the USD, 
however the USD is bought a t Eastern Caribbean (ECD) 
2.67 but sold at ECD 2.71 – this w ill result in a total project  
budget conversion loss of USD 800,000. 
 Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  High


---
*Page 107*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 104 OF 148 
 
	G
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
 
 Report conversion loss in the financial audits  
 Minimize loss by avoidi ng multiple conversions 
 Account for conversion loss in a ll signed contracts, on-granti ng and on-lending transfers 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 Failure to achieve country ownership in the pilot SIDS 
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurrin g 
 
Country ownership is key to the success of the EDA project. 
Failure to empower countries, communities and businesses 
will result in low responses  to the Call for Proposals for 
grants, and low applications for  the Revolving Fund. Lack of 
capacity in pilot countries can c ause delays in overall project  
implementation. 
 
Triggers: 
 Lack of in-country absorption capacity 
 Bureaucratic and slow procedures are not 
“customer-friendly” or tailored to local circumstances 
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
 
 Streamline procedures, e.g. using  ICT solutions to make proces ses more efficient 
 Reduce duplication in approvals and decision-making processes 
 Clearly define roles and res ponsibilities, and maintain open c ommunication with staff and 
consultants 
 Establish a system for transpar ent reallocation of budget line s in case of political or operational 
barriers that prevent implement ation within the project timefra me  
 Operationalize a sub-regional O ECS sustainable fund for on-gra nting and on-lending that can be an 
alternative option for countrie s to benefit from project funds (this would enable the country to benefit 
from the project even if for ex ample, the banks are unwilling t o manage the concessional Revolving 
Fund and/or there is not capacit y or will to establish a nation al Revolving Fund) 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Scope Creep 
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurrin g 
 
Scope creep is a risk to this project given so many agencies 
and NGOs each with their pr iorities. At the end of the 
consultation exercise there are normall y more pro jects and Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium


---
*Page 108*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 105 OF 148 
 
	G
activities than budget. The proce ss of rationalizing this must 
be carefully handled. 
 
Triggers 
 Scope creep results in overruns of time 
and/or money 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
 
 Project scope is limited to demon strating devolved decision-ma king (e.g. not addressing policy and 
legal changes) 
 Limit the types (sectors) of adapt ation interventions and prog rams (ecosystem-based adaptation in 
waterways and watersheds, private  buildings, and community buil dings) 
 Build on existing syst ems and where necessary strengthen accou ntability and transparency within 
the systems 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 Timing mismatch between the cash inflows  and cash outflows 
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurrin g 
Expected disbursements to t he Accredited Entity from the 
Green Climate Fund do not mater ialize within the expected 
time frames, resulting in delays and project cost over-runs. 
 
Triggers 
 Accredited Entity is unable to on-grant or 
on-lend to recipients  
 Loss of confidence d ue to disbursement 
delays 
 Budget over-runs as staff are paid but 
activities are delayed 
 Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
 
 Reduce the number of disburs ements to facilitate the enhanced direct access approach 
 Establish responsive on-lending on-granting systems that are r esponsive to decision-making  
 Request large upfront d isbursement from the GCF 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6  Price fluctuations of goods, works and services 
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurrin g 
 
The pilot countries have smal l populations all under 150,000 
in each island, and small private sectors, which makes Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium


---
*Page 109*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 106 OF 148 
 
	G
supply and demand susceptible to price distortion. The risk is that with the activi ty of the EDA, this wil l distort prices and  
result in higher prices for goods, works and services. In 
addition, construction materi als for adaptation include sand, 
wood, etc., and the procuremen t of these materials could 
negatively impact natural resources.  
 
Triggers 
1. Distorted cost of construction materials 
(concrete, sand, wood, quarry rocks)  
2. Higher demand for limit ed supply of services in 
SIDS pushes prices up  
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
 
 Develop a Sustainable Procureme nt policy for bulk procurement to lower the cost of construction 
materials for adaptation activities 
 Conduct training on joint propo sal development and on tenderin g processes 
 Publish procurement plans online to promote advance planning 
 Raise profile of Tender opportunities 
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging ri sks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor ” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors.  
 
A risk register has been pre pared and is included in the Append ices that addresses ESS and Gender risks specific 
to each EDA Output, as well as o ther low risk strategic/operati onal/etc. to the project as a whole. 
 The project focuses its scope o f risk as those impacting the pr oject.  When working with low  income individuals the 
non-climate change related ris ks can be extensive.   The projec t will be vigilant and track  the risks to the project and 
its outcomes.    The project will also work closely with the Go vernment and the community to ensure that potential 
risk mitigation measures are available and mobilized.    
* Please expand this sub-section when needed to ad dress all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 110*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 107 OF 148 
 
	
	H
H.1.  Logic Framework.    
Please specify the logic framewor k in accordance with the GCF’s  Performance Measurement Framework  under the Results Management 
Framework . 
 
Note about gender disaggregation:   
The GCF core indicators are gen der disaggregated, which means t hat the M&E of the project sub-act ivities will track female and  male representation 
in order to track over all impact. All of the "other relevant in dicators" are gender disaggregated, and all of the Gender Actio n Plan indicators are gender 
disaggregated. Further the entire M&E plan for the project per the M&E and Gender policies is gender disaggregated. Gender dis aggregation in the 
indicators has been bolded for ease of reference. 
 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level109 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development Please elaborate on the paradigm shift objectives to which the project/programme contributes. 
 The paradigm shift objective of th is EDA project is to promote country ownership of climate adaptation actions 
through devolved decision-making  in the Government, private and  NGO sectors that, thr ough the direct access 
modalities in the Eastern Caribbean pilot countries, will set t he foundation and framework to increase access to 
financing to increase resilience  to climate variability of 20% of the population. 
 
Expected Result Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target 
Assumptions Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund-level impacts  
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods of 
the most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions 1.1 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from the adoption of 
diversified, climate – resilient livelihood 
optionsPublic sector 
funding 
proposals, 
EIAs and development 
permits0 males 
0 females 7,000 males 
7,000 
females 15,650 
males 
15,650 
females 100 people trained; 
climate resilient 
drainage benefits 
18,000; adaptation in community 
buildin
gs benefit 
                                                 
109 Information on the Fund’s expec ted results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measur ement Frameworks available at  the following link (Please note that some 
indicators are under refinement): http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operation s/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 111*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 108 OF 148 
 
	
	H
Loan and grant 
agreements 
Minutes of meetings 
M&E progress 
reports 12,000; and the 
Revolving Fund 
benefits 1,200, of which 50% are men 
and 50% are 
women
A3.0 Increased resilience of 
infrastructure and the built 
environment to climate 
change 3.1 Value of physical 
assets made more 
resilient to climate 
variability and change, considering human 
benefits (reported where 
applicable) Signed loan 
agreements Increased 
resilience of 
physical 
assets with a total value of 
$0  
 Increased 
resilience of 
physical 
assets with a total value of 
$17 M 
 Increased 
resilience of 
physical 
assets with a total value of 
$25 M  Total EDA funding 
for public sector 
interventions is USD 
9 M (USD 3 M in each pilot country). 
Climate adaptation 
cost of infrastructure projects is approx. 
35% of total value of 
physical asset
110, 
which leverages a 
dollar value of 3:1 in 
protected assets PSIP programmes 
in Antigua and 
Barbuda, Grenada 
and Dominica 
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem 
services 4.1 Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems protected and strengthened in response to climate 
variability and change Legal 
protections completed; 
Community 
reports and consultations; 
Waterway 
structures that 0 hectares of 
ecosystems protected 
and 
strengthened 30 hectares 
of ecosystems 
protected 
and strengthened45 hectares 
of ecosystems 
services 
protected and 
strengthenedApproximately 6 
hectares of direct ecosystem 
rehabilitation, and 9 
hectares of secondary 
ecosystem 
benefits
111
                                                 
110 The cost of adaptation to climate change in physical assets is  estimated to approximately 35% using infrastructure case studi es in Antigua and Barbuda: 15% increase in cost to 
adapt to flooding ‐ increase height/width of drain sy stems, raise site elevations,  etc.; 5% for back-up power (use of solar power and batteries);  and 15% for hurricane force winds. 
111 Indicative public-sector adaptatio n projects include creation and rehabilitating ponds and natural wetlands to facilitate inf iltration and attenuation of peak storm flows where feasible 
(depending on prevailing soils), among other interventions. Cal culation of coverage/scale of ecosy stems to be protected is hig hly speculative until specif ic interventions have been 
proposed, evaluated and selected. The targeted impact is calcul ated based on the physical adaptat ion interventions proposed un der the GCCA project, which includes approximately 6 
hectares of direct ecosystem rehabilitation, and 9 hectares of secondary ecosystem benefits (e.g. wetland restoration of 6 ha resulting in an additional 9 ha of improved coastal 
ecosystem quality), totalling 15 ha of ecosystem restoration pe r country


---
*Page 112*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 109 OF 148 
 
	
	H
benefit from 
interventions; Climate conditions 
do not undermine 
interventions (drought, severe 
hurricanes, flooding 
could negatively impact ecosystem 
services
)


---
*Page 113*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 110 OF 148 
 
	
	H
                                                 
112 GCF Performance Measurement Fra mework: This indicator seeks to  measure evidence of measures tak en for promoting coordination and synergy at the regional and international 
levels, including between and among relevant agencies and with regard to other multilateral environmental agreements. H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Prog ramme level 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term (if 
applicable)   Final  
Project/programme 
outcomes Outcomes that c ontribute to Fund-level impacts 
5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems 
access climate finance from the 
GCF and other 
funds. 5.2 Number and 
level of effective coordination 
mechanisms
112 
strengthening of finance related 
by-laws, 
regulations and operational procedures Number of GCF 
policies and 
procedures incorporated into 
financing policies 
and procedures; 0 effective 
coordination 
mechanisms 
that meet 
GCF criteria 3 effective 
coordination 
mechanisms 
meet GCF 
criteria 6 effective 
coordination 
mechanisms 
meet GCF 
criteria Countries are willing 
to amend their 
policies and procedures to 
access GCF 
financing.  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced exposure to climate risks 7.1: Use by 
vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and 
public-sector services of Fund-
supported tools, 
instruments, strategies and 
activities to 
respond to 
climate change 
and variability Households: 
disaggregated 
b
y male-headed Revolving fund 
loan agreements   Grant reports and 
grant agreements  0 direct 
beneficiaries 6,600 direct 
beneficiaries 13,200 direct 
beneficiaries Direct beneficiaries 
are those who 
receive the grant or 
loan awards Grants: estimate 60 
grants at 
USD50,000 each benefiting 200 
people per grant 
Loans: estimate 400 loans at USD15,000 
on average 
benefitting 3 people per household


---
*Page 114*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 111 OF 148 
 
	
	H
                                                 
113 The cost of adaptation to climate change in physical assets is  estimated to approximately 35% using infrastructure case studi es in Antigua and Barbuda: 15% increase in cost to 
adapt to flooding ‐ increase height/width of drain sy stems, raise site elevations,  etc.; 5% for back-up power (use of solar power and batteries);  and 15% for hurricane force winds. and female-
headed  
Project/programme 
outputs Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Output 1. Enhanced 
capacity for climate 
adaptation planning, 
implementation, and monitoring and 
evaluation via direct 
access Number of 
transparent 
sustainable 
financing 
mechanisms supporting 
adaptation in the 
OECS sub-region  
 Minutes of 
meetings 
Results of capacity 
evaluations 
Management responses to 
capacity 
assessments 0 
sustainable 
financing 
mechanisms 
for adaptation 3 funding 
mechanisms 
meet GCF 
criteria 6 funding 
mechanisms 
meet GCF 
criteria The Ministers in the 
OECS region 
continue to be 
supportive of 
establishing a sub-regional sustainable 
financing 
mechanism for climate change 
Output 2. Governments 
implement concrete 
adaptation measures using 
ecosystem-based 
approaches where appropriate  Number and 
value of physical assets made 
more resilient to 
climate variability and change, 
considering 
human benefits  Coverage/scale 
of ecosystems 
protected and strengthened in 
response to 
climate variability 
and change Monitoring and 
implementation progress reports 
via appropriate 
modalities, such as Public Sector 
Investment 
Programme (PSIP) 0 physical 
assets $0 value of 
physical 
assets 0 hectares of 
ecosystems 
protected and 
strengthened$17 value of 
physical assets 
30 hectares 
of ecosystems 
protected 
and strengthened $25 M value of 
physical assets 45 hectares of 
ecosystems 
services protected and 
strengthened Total EDA funding 
for public sector interventions is 
USD 9 M (USD 3 M 
in each pilot country). Climate 
adaptation cost of 
infrastructure projects is approx. 
35% of total value 
of physical asset
113, 
which leverages a 
dollar value of 3:1 
in protected assets 
PSIP programmes 
in Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada 
and Dominica. 
Includes 5 ha of restored ecosystem 
and 4,000


---
*Page 115*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 112 OF 148 
 
	
	H
beneficiaries per 
USD 1 M 
investmen t
Output 3. Community resilience to climate 
impacts is enhanced 
through tangible adaptation benefits  Number of direct 
beneficiaries 
(disaggregated 
by gender ) of 
Fund-supported 
small grants for 
adaptation to respond to 
climate change 
and variabilit
y Publicly available 
list (on a website) 
of small grant 
beneficiaries  Signed grant 
agreements 0 small 
grants  
 30 small 
grants 60 small grants 
 Total EDA 
allocation to on-
granting is USD 3 
M (USD 1 M in each pilot country), 
and the average 
grant is USD 50,000 (with 200 
beneficiaries per 
grant)
Output 4. Privately 
owned physical 
assets of vulnerable 
populations are more resilient to 
climate variability 
and change through 
concessional 
microfinancing  Number of 
vulnerable 
households and 
businesses that use Fund-
supported 
instruments to respond to 
climate change 
and variability 
(Households: 
disaggregated by male-headed 
and female-
headed
) Signed loan 
agreements 0 loans for 
climate 
adaptation At least 200 
small grants 
(150 
households; 50 
businesses) 
 50% are 
female-
headed 
homes or 
businesses  
 At least 400 
small grants (300 
households; 100 
businesses)  
50% are female-
headed homes or businesses 
 Total EDA 
allocation to the 
Revolving Fund is 
USD 6 M (USD 2 M in each pilot 
country) and the 
average loan is USD 15,000 
Impact does not 
include the added 
value of the 
Revolving loan credit and 
redistribution 
Activities Description Inputs Description 
1.1. Establish 
implementation and 
oversight 
mechanisms with adequate capacity Assess national (in Antigua and 
Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada) and 
sub-regional (at the OECS) institutional 
arrangements and capacity against 
GCF fiduciary criteria and 
environmental/social safeguards  Establish coordination mechanisms 
where necessar
y  1.1.1. Committees, Project 
Management Units, line 
ministries, 
consultancy Assess capacity building needs of 
oversight committees and Executing 
Entities using the assessment 
checklists for GCF criteria 
Review TORs for Committees and revise as necessary 
Enter into Agreements


---
*Page 116*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 113 OF 148 
 
	
	H
Address capacity gaps, review/update 
detailed guides and manuals for each 
of the countries, based on regional standards and relevant expertise, 
validate adaptation criteria, and provide 
training Support the accreditation of National 
Implementing Entities (NIEs) in 
Dominica, Grenada, and of the OECS Commission Lessons learned from project 
management arrangements of previous 
projects Prioritize and implement capacity 
building activities for the project’s 
Executing Entities and Committees  Finalize selection and evaluation criteria 
for the project approval processes 
1.2. Design a 
Sustainable Procurement system 
for construction 
supplies in pilot countries Develop criteria and identify 
sustainable source s of construction 
materials (wood, sand, quarry rocks, etc.) 
Design a sub-region procurement 
system to lower the cost of procuring building supplies and ensure that 
sustainable materials are procured1.1.2. Consultancy Assess lessons learned from the OECS 
sub-regional Procurement system that lowered the cost of medical supplies  
Sustainable Procurement system to 
follow international standards: ISO 20400:2017 – Sustainable procurement 
1.3. Support accreditation of direct access 
entities in the 
Eastern Caribbean Potential entities conduct self-
assessments  Workshop on targeted capacity 
building for nominated entities 
Endorsements from respective NDAs1.1.3. Regional travel, 
nominated entities, 
Committees, NDAs, 
consultancy Lessons learned from direct access 
AEs in the Caribbean (SIDS mentoring 
programme) 
1.4. Facilitate 
effective project management, 
monitoring and 
evaluation, and lessons learned 
consistent with an 
enhanced direct 
access approach Consultatively develop project tracking 
tools 
Monthly progress reports  Quarterly oversight Committee 
meetings 
Quarterly updates to the risk registry Annual performance reports 
Baseline assessment 
Mid-term assessment End-of-project assessment  
Develop and implement a gender-
sensitive communications plan 1.1.4. OECS M&E Unit, 
tracking tools, executing 
entities, Committees, Project Management Units, 
communications team Define roles and responsibilities for 
project management, oversight and 
update TORs accordingly 
OECS leads monitoring and evaluation frameworks, including development of 
project tracking tools for climate 
adaptation 
2.1. Competitively 
solicit priority 
interventions for Issue call for proposals for public 
sector adaptation interventions using 
the Public Sector Investment 
Programme (PSIP ) as appropriate to 2.1.1. Line ministries, 
Committees Capacity of Executing Entities was built 
under Input 1.1.1. to manage processes


---
*Page 117*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 114 OF 148 
 
	
	H
adaptation in the 
public sector  the Governments of Antigua and 
Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada 
Evaluate applications using pre-defined criteria 
Notify successful applicants  
Collect baseline gender-
disaggregated socio-economic  and 
geophysical GIS data, update national 
and sub-re
gional repositoriesSelection of priorities according to 
transparent technical and socio-
economic criteria Post all approved projects, studies, 
ESIAs, and contract awards online  
2.2. Undertake due 
diligence and studies on public 
sector adaptation 
interventions as needed Award project preparation grants 
and/or contract consultants to develop 
detailed designs of proposed 
adaptation interventions where necessary 
Conduct environmental impact 
assessments and management plans  Stakeholder consultations 
Secure relevant physical planning 
approvals 2.2.1. Project preparation 
grants, consultancy, 
Physical planning authorities  
EIAs and ESMPs to be developed in a 
learning/training-by-doing approach 
At least 1 month to secure physical planning approvals  
2.3. Implement pilot approaches for 
adaptation in public 
infrastructure  Enter into grant agreements/MOAs 
Implement the appr oved adaptation 
projects 
Monitor and evaluate results2.3.1. Works and 
services, consultancy Capacity of Executing Entities in the 
public sector was built under Input 
1.1.1. to manage implementation  
3.1. Select community 
adaptation projects 
through a competitive small 
grants facility  Thematic priorities, forms, procedures 
and criteria are finalized for the small 
grants facility in each country Public awareness and media outreach 
of grant opportunity  
Call for proposals are issued, evaluated and selected 
Project preparation grants are awarded 
for priority projects and full funding proposals are re-submitted and 
approved 3.1.1. Executing entities, 
Committees, Technical 
evaluation teams, stakeholders Capacity of Executing Entities (issuing 
call for proposals) was built under Input 
1.1.1. to manage processes 
Technical evaluation teams inspect beneficiary buildings using climate 
resilient Building Code/guidelines   
Manage websites and content 
3.2. Communities implement adaptation projects 
with tangible 
benefits  Enter into grant agreements 
Provide financing, technical assistance monitor reports and evaluate impact 3.2.1. Direct financial 
contribution, OECS M&E 
Unit Technical assistance for community 
groups


---
*Page 118*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 115 OF 148 
 
	
	H
 
      4.1. Launch the 
private sector 
Revolving Fund for adaptation in 
buildings Public awareness and media outreach 
of loan opportunity to finance 
adaptation for low income households and businesses 
Issue applications and follow 
procedures for the Revolvin
g Fund 4.1.1. Committees, 
Technical evaluation teams, Direct financial 
contribution Capacity of Executing Entities was built 
under Input 1.1.1. to manage processes Technical evaluation teams 
Manage website and content 
4.2. Finance 
adaptation in 
buildings and 
manage repayments Enter into loan agreements 
Manage repayments 
Monitor and evaluate implementation 4.2.1. Homeowners, 
businesses, executing entity, 
direct financial 
contribution  Technical assistance on adaptation in 
buildings 
OECS M&E Unit to provide training on 
best practices and 
guidance/accountabilit y


---
*Page 119*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 116 OF 148 
 
	
	H
 
                                                 
114 Social Market research on the demand for Revolving Fund loans for Adaptation: 
http://www.environmentdivision.in fo/UserFiles/File/A4.Social_Ma rket_Research_on_Demand_for_Loans.pdf  H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi-annual performance report s) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangement s for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid-term and final evaluat ions will be organized, including the timing. 
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and report ing of the key outcomes of the project/programme. 
 A robust M&E framework for enhancing direct access 
 
A robust monitoring, reporting,  evaluation and importantly a le arning framework will be established via the OECS 
Commission and national counterpart s in partnership with region al/international research institutions. This is a key feature 
of the EDA project as a new pilot modality for the GCF, and a n ew approach to programming climate financing for 
adaptation in the target populations.  
 The overall theory of change for the EDA project is that on-gra nting and concessional on-lendi ng directly to beneficiaries 
will provide resources to communities, home owners and building  owners, and that these beneficiaries will implement 
changes in their communities, homes and buildings as a result o f this financing. There are impo rtant assumptions in this 
overall theory of change. Critically, it assumes that i) the ta rget group (at risk communities, home and building owners) 
consider climate change and weat her events to be sufficiently i mportant to take loans for (and  consider paying interest); 
ii) the target group is reached through the financing mechanism  (the targeting question); iii) once a loan is secured, the 
target group spends its resources on home and building related adaptation improvements; iv) the revolving fund will 
improve the overall resilience of targeted communities and poss ibly exert some peer pressur e on others to adopt similar 
behaviors (impact).   
Baseline exploratory work has been done to examine the potentia l feasibility of these assumptions
114. Upon approval of 
the EDA project, structured and rigorous testing will need to b e undertaken if this approach is to be scaled in Antigua and 
Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada, and across the Eastern Caribbean  by working closely with the Organization of Eastern 
Caribbean States (OECS) Commission in St. Lucia. Learning from this will also help the GCF design a robust EDA 
modality, and help other island nations and vulnerable communit ies adopt impactful EDA approaches.  
 Through the implementation arrangements below, and through the development of partnerships with regional and 
international experts, evaluativ e research appro aches will exam ine the following questions: 
 
• Are the EDA project decision-making processes resulting in fun ding awards that target the vulnerable section 
of the population? 
• Are the EDA project’s on-granting and on-lending awards leadin g to increased adaptation action of the target 
population? If yes, by how much? 
• Are people becoming more resilient as a consequence of the on- granting and on-lending awards? 
• What type of adaptation action s/options are being pursued by t he target population through the EDA’s on – 
granting/on – lending approaches (e.g. economic, ecological ada ptations; social vulner ability approaches aimed 
at addressing underlying social i ssues; approaches focused on e nhancing a systems resilience; adaptation 
approaches which target actions to specific climate change risk s)? 
• What knowledge has been gathered, what are the lessons learned  and what is the scop e for replication?


---
*Page 120*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 117 OF 148 
 
	
	H
It is the intention of the project proponents upon approval of the EDA project to allocate resources to evidence informed 
evaluative learning, that can hel p all stakeholders learn what works to increase adaptation action, for whom, and under 
what circumstances. This approach will achieve the accountabili ty and transparency requirements of the EDA Request 
for Proposals.  
 Implementation arrangement s for reporting and M&E  
 
The Organization of Eastern Car ibbean States (OECS) Commission will provide monitoring and independent evaluation 
(M&E) services to the enhanced direct access project, to maximi ze learning and 
upscaling opportunities of the EDA project (see Appendix for OE CS M&E Policy 
and a terminal evaluation of the baseline USAID RRACC project).  The OECS 
Commission will also aim to build  capacity at the national leve ls to support data 
aggregation at the regional level, as presented in the OECS Sco ping Study 
appendix. This will be achieved by  through the M&E structure in  Figure 26, where 
a full-time M&E associate will be stationed in the data units o f each pilot EDA 
country. This Associate will be responsible for ensuring routin e, concurrent and 
participatory monitoring processes. 
 At the OECS Commission, the Programme Management Unit (PMU) is 
responsible for Projects, Procurement and M&E (refer to the OEC S Scoping Study 
in the Appendix). Its core functions include the coordination o f operational 
procedures for development of A nnual Work Plans, reporting proc esses, 
monitoring and evaluation. The wo rk of the PMU is complimented by that of the 
Commission’s Statistical Services Unit (SSU) which provides gen eral statistical data, where av ailable, to inform project-
level M&E. Under the OECS Treaty , Member States provide data to  the Commission.  
 
The OECS Commission will facilitate gender sensitive and gender disaggregated monitoring and evalua tion i n  
accordance with the Gender Equality Mainstreaming Policy for the Or ganisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) 
Secretariat . 
 Gender mainstreaming is defined in the policy as identifying ga ps in gender equality through gender analysis 
of sex-disaggregated data, rai sing awareness about the gaps, bu ilding support for change, developing strategies to close 
those gaps, monitoring implementation, and holding individuals and households accountable for results. The OECS 
Commission’s M&E using a gender  sensitive approach will enable the project to adaptively respond to different needs 
during implementation. 
 Inception Report 
 
The inception report provides an update on any changes in the p roject environment since the project was submitted;  
results of the baseline capacity  assessments of the Executing E ntities and the respective Committees; any changes in 
the project activities or approv al processes, and validation of  the proposed timeframes; updates and recommendations 
on key issues; a monthly work plan and procurement plan for Yea r 1; Terms of Reference for key positions; revised 
procurement plan; updated risk log; and the project budget (rev ised if necessary and adequately justified).  
 Monthly reports to the Public S ector Investment Programme (PSIP )  
 
The Public Sector Investment Pro gramme (PSIP) in the Ministry o f Finance in the EDA pilot countries require that a 
Public  Sector Investment Submission Form be prepared (irrespective of  the source of funds), and the PSIP requires 
submission of monthly update reports throughout project impleme ntation. Templates and gui delines for reporting are 
provided by the respective PSIP offices. Monthly PSIP update re ports will be prepared by the  Project Coordinator and 
submitted to the PSIP.  
 
Annual performance report (APR) 
Figure	25.	Integrated 	approach 	of	the	
OECS	M&E	Policy


---
*Page 121*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 118 OF 148 
 
	
	H
                                                 
115 EDA RFP page 4: Oversight and steering activities may include: Re view of reporting by the accredited entity.  
A reporting template for the Annual performance report will be provided by the GCF Secretar iat within three months 
from the approval of the EDA pr oject. The Project Coordinator w ith the M&E Associate in e ach country will collect and 
with the OECS Commission M&E experts prepare the information fo r the APR. The country repor ts will be submitted to 
the Accredited Entity for technical review and synthesis across  the three pilots. The De partment of Environment will 
submit these to the National Steering Committee in accordance w ith the EDA RFP115 and annually to the Secretariat 
within two months of the year end.  
 The APR will include as a minimum: 
• A narrative report on implement ation progress based on the log ical framework and project Tracking Tool 
(cumulative) 
• Project outputs delivered per project outcome (annual) 
• Considerations on the ongoing performance of the EDA project a gainst the Fund’s investment framework 
criteria, including updates on the indicators as per the guidan ce provided by the Fund’s results management 
framework  
• An overview of the project’s Ri sk Register and how the project  has been responding to risk (annual) 
• A section specific to consult ative processe s, ESS and gender, and any updates to the Environmental Social 
Management Plan 
• The work plan for the upcoming year 
• Recommendations and any neces sary corrective measures 
 
The Annual performance reports will be published on the Accredi ted Entity website and the OECS Commission website 
(http://www.oecs.org/oecs-commiss ion), on a project page that w ill be established upon a pproval of the EDA.  
 Interim/mid-term evaluation 
 The EDA project will undergo an independent Mid-Term Evaluation  in year 2 of implementation in accordance with best 
international practice and the project’s procurement plan.  
 
The evaluation methodology will achieve the two-fold objectives  of 1) promoting learning for the GCF’s EDA modality, 
and 2) assessing adaptation and re silience benefits for benefic iaries through participatory processes.  
 For the first objective, the independent evaluators will use th e table in
 Annex 2. Alignment of th e Enhancing Direct Access 
proposal for the Eastern Caribbean agains t GCF EDA Request for Proposals criteria  to assess the performance of the 
project against the objectives stated in the EDA RFP. This will  include conducting systemic, institutional, and individual 
capacity assessments of the exec uting entities, the procedures and track record of the decision-making bodies, and the 
function of the oversight commi ttee. The assessments will inclu de semi-structured interviews with a variety of 
stakeholders both within and outsi de of the decision-making pro cess, as well as inspection of minutes, contracts, 
communications and other project records.  
 With respect to assessing adaptation and resilience benefits fo r beneficiaries, the project’ s M&E will use a spatial GIS 
M&E approach, which is the project’s proposed approach for movi ng from project-specific M&E to programmatic M&E 
that can benefit from and contribute to national development in dicators and the SDGs. The project will geo-reference 
watershed-scale interventions and the distribution of individua l and community beneficiaries, where possible and 
appropriate. This will facilitate correlation analysis of inter ventions and reduced exposure to  climate impacts. To establish 
causality, the project will use qualitative methods, including semi-structured interviews/focus groups and a household 
survey in target communities bef ore, during and after project i nterventions. The EDA project proponents are also 
interested in partnering with a reputable university to design and deliver data collection that will enable more robust 
statistical anal
ysis, such as randomized control trials, which have been applied  to micro-loan pro grammes in various parts


---
*Page 122*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 119 OF 148 
 
	
	H
of the world. Initial interest has  been expressed by some Unive rsity professors, and this will be pursued upon project 
approval.  
 
The M&E report will be published on the OECS Commission’s websi te (http://www.oecs.org/oecs-commission), on a 
project page that will be estab lished upon approval of the EDA.   
 Final evaluation 
 The EDA project will undergo an in dependent Final Evaluation in  year 4 of implementation. The evaluation will be 
conducted by the OECS Commissio n M&E Unit according to best int ernational practice and the project’s procurement 
plan. The final evaluation will us e a similar app roach as the M id-term evaluation, adjuste d based on lessons learned 
through monitoring and evaluat ion throughout the lift of the pr oject. See the RRACC Terminal Evaluation for an 
example of the terminal evaluation. 
 The report will be published on t he Accredited Entity’s website  and on the OECS Commission’s website 
(http://www.oecs.org/oecs-commiss ion), on a project page that w ill be established upon a pproval of the EDA.  
 
Upon approval of the EDA projec t by the GCF Board, the monitori ng and evaluation preparatory activities will be 
undertaken during the project inception phase, prior project im plementation of any adaptation projects. 
 
Table	14.	Work	plan	for	monitoring 	and	evaluation 	arrangements 	during	the	EDA	project	inception 	phase	(source:	OECS	M&E	Scoping	Study)	
 Activit y Requirement (s) Lead/Responsible
1 Budget approval for M&E support - OECS 
Commission technical assistance and in-country 
associates Agreement in principle DOE 
2 Development of MOU/SLA; negations; and sign off Agreement in principle DOE and OECS 
Commission
3 Development of M&E work plan for DOE’s approval Agreement in principle OECS PMU
4 Terms of Reference for in-cou ntry M&E Associates Agreement in  principle OECS PMU in consultation 
with DOE and NDAs
5 Recruitment of in-country M&E Associates M&E Associate Terms 
of ReferenceDOE 
6 Development of M&E framework to be approved by 
the DOE MOU/SLA PMU 
7 M&E inception activities including: 
orientation/training for M&E associates; orientation 
for stakeholders; initial stakeholder consultations 
(could be conducted by i n-country associates 
supported b y NDA representative (s).MOU/SLA 
M&E Framework PMU and/or M&E 
Associates with support 
from NDAs 
 
Roles and responsibilities for the sub-regional project are pro vided below; additional information on the M&E approach 
is elaborated in the OECS M&E Scoping Study.


---
*Page 123*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 120 OF 148 
 
	
	H
                                                 
116 GCF Board decision B.08/10 – A nnex XIV: Initial best-practice options for country coordinati on and multi-stakeholder engageme nt, 
page 91 http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/24946/GCF_B.08_45_ -_Decisions_of_the_Board_-
_Eighth_Meeting_of_the_Board__14-17_October_2014.pdf/1dd5389c-5 955-4243-90c9-7c63e810c86d    
Figure	26.	Institutional 	arrangements 	for	EDA	monitoring 	and	independent 	evaluation 	by	the	OECS	Commission 	
Country coordination mechanisms are important in supporting the  ongoing monitoring and ev aluation of the Fund’s 
projects and programmes, thus allowing for a process for evalua tion at various stages  of the project cycle116.


---
*Page 124*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 121 OF 148 
 
	
	H
 
Table	15.	GCF	Enhancing 	direct	access	project	tracking	tool,	disaggregated 	by	gender	and	vulnerability 	group	where	possible	
Project identification 
Project title: Integrated physical adaptation and community resilience through  an enhanced direct access pilot in the public, 
private, and civil society sectors of three Eastern Caribbean s mall island developing states
Country(ies): Antigua and Barbuda/Dominica/Grenada GCF project ID: 
GCF Accredited Entity: Department of Environment, Antigua and 
Barbuda Project 
approval date:   
Executing Partner(s): To be confirmed at project inception
Status of Tracking Tools: To be validated at project inception
Project baselines, targets and outcomes 
Indicator Unit of 
measurement Baseline  Target  Actual at 
mid-term Actual at 
completion Comments (e.g. specify 
unit of measurement) 
Project Goal: Enhanced financing channels that implement climat e change policies and programme s to support transformational ch ange
Project Outcome: Country ownership of climate adaptation throug h devolving decision-making in the Government, private and NGO s ectors 
Indicator 1: Number of 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender   number of direct 
beneficiaries 0 13,200
number of indirect 
beneficiaries 0 68,100
% female 05 0 %
Indicator 2: Number of 
beneficiaries relative to total 
population % of total 
population 0 5%
Objective 1: Country ownership of climate adaptation actions th rough devolved decision-making in the Government, private and N GO sectors 
Outcome 1.1: Enhanced capacity for climate adapt ation planning and implementation via direct access 
Indicator 3: Number of people 
trained to identify, prioritize, 
implement, monitor and evaluate adaptation strategies and 
measures number of people 0 100
% female 50%


---
*Page 125*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 122 OF 148 
 
	
	H
Outcome 1.2: Transparency and accountability of project activ ities through responsive and inclusive decision-making systems 
Indicator 4: Proportion of 
beneficiaries who believe project-
related decision making is inclusive and responsive, by sex, 
age, disability and population 
group   proportion of 
beneficiaries 
satisfie
d 0% 90%
% female 0% 90%
% with disabilities 0% 90%
% under 25 0% 90%
other 
Objective 2: Operational enha nced direct access modalities in t he Eastern Caribbean pilot countries 
Outcome 2.1: Increased awareness and use of direct access financing for climate adaptation 
Indicator 5: Public awareness 
activities carried out and 
population reached number of 
knowledge 
products 0 5
number of people 0 50,000 
% female 0% 50%
Indicator 6: Number of 
transparent sustainable financing mechanisms supporting 
adaptation in the OECS sub-
region number of 
financing mechanisms
0 3
score 
number of direct access accredited entities 0 3
Indicator 7: Number of vulnerable households and businesses that use Fund-
supported microfinancing to 
respond to climate change and variability  number of 
households 0 300
number of 
businesses 0 100
% female 05 0 %
Objective 3: Increased resilien ce to climate variability and en hanced livelihoods of vulne rable people and communities
Outcome 3.1: Physical assets of vulnerable populations are more resilient to climat e variability and change as a result of proj ect activities 
Indicator 8: Valu e of physical 
assets made more resilient to climate variability and change, ha of lan
d 0
km of draina ge0
km of coas t 0


---
*Page 126*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 123 OF 148 
 
	
	H
considering hum an benefits 
(reported where applicable) km of roads 0
number of 
buildin gs0
other US$ 25 M
Indicator 9: Number of males 
and females  benefiting from the 
adoption of climate resilient technologies and practices  number of males 0 15,650
number of 
females 0 15,650
Outcome 3.2: Ecosystem-based adaptation to c limate change is implemented where appropriate 
Indicator 10: Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems restored, protected or strengthened in response to 
climate variability and change ha of wetlands 0 TBD
km of waterwa ys0 T B D
ha of forests 0 TBD
other 
Reporting on gender indicators 
Q1: Has a gender anal ysis been conducted durin g project preparation? YES NA NA
Q2: Does the project results framework include gender-responsiv e 
indicators, and sex-disa ggregated data? YES
Q3: Does the activity evaluation criteria used by the decision- making 
bodies incorporate gender dimensions? YES
Q4: At mid-term/ completion, does the mid-term review/ terminal  
evaluation assess progress and re sults in terms of gender equal ity and 
empowerment? NA


---
*Page 127*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 124 OF 148 
 
	
	H


---
*Page 128*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 125 OF 148 
 
	
	I
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
  I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ Feasibility Study ( Pre-Feasibility St udies in Appendix ) 
☒ Integrated Financial Model that p rovides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing c ommitment ( not applicable ) 
☐ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budg et breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) –  see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact A ssessment (ESIA) or Environme ntal and Social Management Plan  
 (If applicable) 
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (not applicable ) 
☒ Evaluation Report of the baseline project ( Evaluation of the OECS RRACC project ) 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme ( Annex 3 ) 
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 129*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 126 OF 148 
 
	
	I
Annex 1. 2016 Request for Propo sals to pilot Enhancing Direct A ccess modality


---
*Page 130*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 127 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 131*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 128 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 132*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 129 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 133*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 130 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 134*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 131 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 135*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 132 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 136*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 133 OF 148 
 
	
	I
Annex 2. Alignment of the Enhancing Direct Access proposal for the Eastern Caribbean against GCF RfP 
criteria  
 
EDA RFP 
reference Requirements per the EDA RFP Elig ibility of the proposed EDA pi lot  
Para 8 Learning processes will be supported 
by a specific monitoring and evaluation plan for each pilot at the 
country level, where key performance 
indicators will be specifically designed for this purpose.  The OECS Commission during project preparation 
designed a M&E framework ( Section H.2.  
Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and 
Evaluation ) that will facilitat e country level 
monitoring, reporting and evaluation. Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada have committed 
USD 100k each (USD 3 00k total) of their 
Readiness support to the OECS Commission to inter alia  design and operationalize the project’s 
M&E framework.  
 Key performance indicators are provided in Section 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at 
Project/Programme leve
l
Para 8 A final evaluation at the country level 
and over all pilots will consolidate the 
lessons learned, allowing scalability 
and mainstreaming.  The proposed EDA project has a comprehensive 
M&E framework to maximize learning opportunities 
for the GCF on this n ew pilot modality. The 
Accredited Entity will oversee and be accountable 
for overall M&E. The project’s approach to 
promoting continuous M&E and learning is to sub-contract the OECS Commission, to build capacity 
for M&E at the national level in accordance with the 
OECS M&E Policy. See Section H.2.  
Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and 
Evaluation
Para 9 The pilot phase will be evaluated and 
lessons learned will lead to potential scaling up. The evaluation timing will 
be set for assessing mid-term 
outcomes (two to three years) and longer-term impacts and lessons to be 
learned 
(five years or more ).The EDA project will undergo an independent Mid-
Term Evaluation in year 2 of implementation, and an independent Final Evaluation in year 4 of 
implementation ( Section H.2.  Arrangements for 
Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation ) 
Para 12 The NDA or focal point will have a 
strong role in the pilot, in consultation with relevant national stakeholders.  Antigua and Barbuda has used part of its first and 
second Readiness gr ants to undertake 
consultations with NDAs and other stakeholders for 
the EDA project. 
 
NDAs will continue to have a strong role in the pilot 
EDA project, with NDAs s erving in the oversight 
function of the project. NDA s will be responsible for 
nominating and endorsi ng DA entities to be 
accredited under the projec t. The Accredited Entity 
will convene NDAs in per son annually via the 
OECS Council of Ministers for Environmental 
Sustainability, and opportunistically in other forums.


---
*Page 137*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 134 OF 148 
 
	
	I
EDA RFP 
reference Requirements per the EDA RFP Elig ibility of the proposed EDA pi lot  
For more information see Section E.5.3. 
Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders . 
Para 13 Countries participating in the 
Enhancing Direct Access pilot are 
required to exercise oversight on the activities to ensure transparency. For 
this purpose, it is recommended that 
countries identify an existing institution that will fulfil this role.  National multi-stakeholder Steering Committees 
have been identified in Fea sibility studies for each 
of the EDA pilot countries. These are: 
- Antigua and Barbuda’s Project 
Management Committee (this body will also serve as the sub-regional Steering Committee) 
- Dominica’s National Climate Change 
Steering Committee (NSC)  
- Grenada’s National Climate Change 
Committee (NCCC) 
 
In addition, the OECS Climate Finance Working 
Group will provide an added level of oversight, with 
a view to supporting sub-regional scaling up of the 
EDA pilot. These oversight  Committees will benefit 
from capacit
y buildin g in Output 1.  
Para 15 The oversight function should include 
the NDA or focal point and 
representatives of relevant 
stakeholders, such as government, 
the private sector, academia, civil 
society organizations, and women’s organizations. National multi-stakeholder Steering Committee, 
with the NDA represented, public, private, NGO 
and/or women’s organization will provide the 
oversight function, in acco rdance with the Fund’s 
initial best-practice optio ns, as set out in Annex XIV 
to decision B.08/10. (Section C.7.  Institutional / Implementation 
Arrangements
)
Para 18 Prior to their implementation, details of 
individual projects or programmes will be made accessible to the public via 
the websites of the NDA or focal point, 
and the accredited entity. Public position of the individual sub-projects prior to 
implementation will be via the OECS Commission and the accredited entity . These websites are: 
OECS Commission: www.oecs.org 
Accredited Entity: www.environmentdivision.info (Section F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, 
including Gender Considerations
) 
Para 21 In order to ensure the inclusion of a 
wide range of stakeholders, the selected entity will work with various 
types of local actors, especially those 
addressing the needs of vulnerable communities and gender aspects, 
which may include public institutions, 
local bodies, non-governmental 
organizations, community-based 
organizations, actors from the informal sector, and private enterprises, 
particularly small and medium-sized 
enterprises 
(SMEs ). The EDA proposal will work  with various types of 
local actors in the public, p rivate (vulnerable home 
and business owners) an d CSO sectors to 
demonstrated and integrated approach to climate 
resilience, designed to meet the needs of vulnerable communities and gender aspects. Refer 
to the Environmental Social Gender Management 
Plan.


---
*Page 138*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 135 OF 148 
 
	
	I
EDA RFP 
reference Requirements per the EDA RFP Elig ibility of the proposed EDA pi lot  
Para 23 Entities will have to be accredited 
before being able to fund activities with the Fund’s resources. The Department of Environment submitted its 
application for Accreditation in 2016 via the fast track modality, and was ac credited to the GCF in 
October 2017.
Para 25 Activities financed under the EDA pilot 
will initially be limited to environmental categories B and C. Per Section F.3. Environmental, Social 
Assessment, including Gender Considerations , the 
EDA pilot will primarily finance Category C sub-
projects, with Output 2 ( public sector) financing 
Cate
gory B sub-pro jects.
Para 28 The country pilots can include both 
adaptation and mitigation activities 
that will contribute to one or more of 
the Fund’s result areas. The EDA pilot will finance adaptation projects with 
mitigation co-benefits. This will be the first GCF-
financed adaptation project for the Caribbean; 
previous GCF funding proposals for the region have onl
y financed miti gation.  
Para 28 A gender-sensitive approach in 
developing the activities of the pilots is 
recommended in accordance to the Fund’s Gender Action Plan. The Environmental Social Gender Management 
Plan includes a standalone Gender Analysis and a 
Gender Action Plan in accordance with GCF 
guidance. 
Para 28 A significant share of small-scale 
activities should directly support 
communities or SMEs through, for 
example, small-scale grants or 
extended lines of credit.  USD 9 million or 45% of the total project budget will 
directly support community groups/CSOs and 
SMEs (home and small business owners) through 
small-scale grants and t he micro-Revolving Fund 
Loan Pro gramme for Adaptation. 
Para 29 The entities nominated by the NDA or 
focal point for accreditation will work 
through various types of local actors in 
the development of potential projects and programmes, particularly local 
intermediaries and those addressing 
the needs of vulnerable communities, which may include public institutions, 
non-governmental organizations and 
private enterprises, especially SMEs. The project will work throu gh the following types of 
local actors in the development of potential 
projects; these entities will be assessed during 
implementation and up to 3 will be nominated for accreditation in on-granting and on-lending:  
 
‐ National development banks 
‐ National funds 
‐ National trust funds 
‐ Sub-regional fund (OECS) 
 See Section C.4. Background Information on 
Project / Programme Sponsor 
(Executing Entit y)
Para 30 Depending on the type of accreditation 
of the selected entity and its capacity, Fund resources may be deployed in 
the form of the following financial 
instruments in the pilot: grants, loans, equity and guarantees. The DOE was accredited to the Green Climate 
Fund by its governing Board in October 2017, in the following fit-for-purpose categories:  
‐ Project management and on-granting: Small 
(up to USD 50 million) 
‐ On-lending: Micro (up  to USD 10 million) 
The project is requesting USD 20 million in grants 
from the GCF, of which USD 6 million will be used 
to pilot a highly concessional Revolving Fund Loan 
Programme for Adaptation.   
The rationale for the grant financial instrument is 
provided in Section E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and 
efficiency, based on a financial analysis of the 
Revolvin
g Fund Loan Pro gramme identif ying


---
*Page 139*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 136 OF 148 
 
	
	I
EDA RFP 
reference Requirements per the EDA RFP Elig ibility of the proposed EDA pi lot  
modelled net write-offs  of 2.5% of the gross 
portfolio annually due to the high-risk borrowers, highly concessional l ending of the programme. 
 
The Revolving Fund is considered to be an “innovative financial instrument” that can 
programme highly concessional funds directly to 
beneficiaries, thereby passing on the concessionality while  maximizing cost 
effectiveness and overa ll impact as funds are 
repaid and “revolved” through the mechanism to new borrowers.
Indicative content of proposals – checklist 
31 (b) A description of the consultation and 
selection process fa cilitated by the 
NDA or focal point of the nominated direct access accredited entity Section E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society 
organizations and other relevant stakeholders  (sub-
section: Selection of Accredited Entity; Country ownership) 
31 (c) A description of the proposed scope of 
activities, including objectives, type, 
sectors, size and geographic 
locations.  
The pilot’s specific objectives and 
goals should be aligned with the Fund’s results management 
framework Details on each of the EDA project Outputs in: 
Section C.3. Project / Programme Description   
 
The EDA project’s Logic Framework (Section H.1.) 
uses indicators adapted from the GCF’s results 
management framework. The project’s objectives 
and goals are directly aligned with achieving the project’s Logic Framewor k (Section C.3. Project / 
Pro
gramme Description –Theor y of Chan ge)
31 (d) A description of the approval process 
and selection criteria for the activities, which should be consistent with the 
Fund’s initial investment framework 
and proposal approval process Section C.7.  Institutional / Implementation 
Arrangements  (sub-section: Decision-
making/Approval process) 
 
Table 3. Criteria and guidelines for the selection of enhanced direct access activities by the decision-
making bodies
31 (e) A composition of the decision-making 
body that will be housed and managed by the entity. The decision-making 
body should include civil society, the 
private sector and other relevant stakeholders, and should be sensitive 
to gender considerations Section E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society 
organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
 
 
31 (f) A description of how the entity intends 
to meet the disclosure requirements in 
the implementation of the pilotSection F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, 
including Gender Considerations  
31 (g) A composition of the oversight 
function  Section E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society 
organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
31 (h) A description of the multi-stakeholder 
engagement process that the entity 
plans to setup Section E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society 
organizations and other relevant stakeholders


---
*Page 140*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 137 OF 148 
 
	
	I
EDA RFP 
reference Requirements per the EDA RFP Elig ibility of the proposed EDA pi lot  
31 (i) A timeframe of implementation, 
including start date and duration See section C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme 
Implementation   
 
Project Inception: March – September 2018 
Start: October 2018 End: November 2022
31 (j) The funding amount to be requested, 
including the financial instrument (e.g. 
grant, loan, equity, guarantee) USD 20 million in grants is being requested. It is 
expected that the EDA will secure USD 18.5 M in 
co-financing, leveraged financing, and in-kind support 
 
(see Table 7. Counterpart, leveraged financing and 
in-kind support to be realized during EDA 
implementation
)
31 (k) Risk assessment and management, 
including assumptions, factors, ratings, and mitigation measuresSection G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
31 (l) Monitoring and evaluation, including 
logical frameworks, methods, criteria, 
information to be reported, frequency, 
responsibilities, means of verification 
and evaluation plans Section H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and 
Inputs at Project/Programme level  M&E: 
‐ Logical frameworks 
‐ Criteria 
‐ Information to be reported 
‐ Means of verification 
 Section H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, 
Reporting and Evaluation:  
‐ Responsibilities 
‐ Frequency  
 
See Figure 25. Institutional arrangements for EDA 
monitoring and independent evaluation by the OECS Commission  
‐ Responsibilities 
Para 32 Entities are advised to include in their 
pilot proposals information on the pipeline of sub-projects they have 
identified and detailed description of a 
few examples of such sub-projects (objectives, financial structure, 
alignment with GCF investment 
criteria and results areas, implementation arrangement
).Case Study 1: Example of sub-project under 
Output 2 (per EDA RFP)  presents details of an 
indicative pilot project u nder Output 2 (public 
sector) in Antigua and Barbuda 
 Other pilots are listed in the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan 
 
Para 33 Accredited entities are encouraged in 
the development of their pilot 
proposals to adopt gender-sensitive and participatory approaches in 
planning, and monitoring and 
evaluation so as to assure that the needs of communities are 
appropriately addressed The Environmental Social Management Plan 
includes the following standalone sections: 
‐ Gender Analysis 
‐ Gender Action Plan 
 Monitoring and evaluati on is disaggregated by 
gender as evidenced in the following sections:  
‐E.1.2. Ke
y impact potential indicator


---
*Page 141*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 138 OF 148 
 
	
	I
EDA RFP 
reference Requirements per the EDA RFP Elig ibility of the proposed EDA pi lot  
‐ H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and 
Impacts at the Fund level 
‐ Table 10. GCF Enhancing direct access 
project tracking too l
Para 40 The pilot phase will initially aim to 
provide up to USD 200 million for at 
least ten pilots, including at least four 
pilots to be implemented in small island developing States, the least 
developed countries and African 
States. Since the issuance of the RFP in 2016, the GCF 
has approved EDA projects totaling USD 10 
million. 
 The presented proposal requests US D 20 million 
from the GCF and targets three small island 
developing States in the Eastern Caribbean 
(approximatel y USD 6.5 per countr y).


---
*Page 142*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 139 OF 148 
 
	
	I
Annex 3. Map of the Organizati on of Eastern Caribbean States (O ECS) and participating countries in the 
enhanced direct access pilot (underlined in red) 
 
 
  
  
OECS 
Commission 
Headquarters Caribbean  
Sea Atlantic  
Ocean


---
*Page 143*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 140 OF 148 
 
	
	I
 
Annex 4. Endorsement and No Objection Letters by the National D esignated Authorities of Antigua and 
Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada


---
*Page 144*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 141 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 145*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 142 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 146*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 143 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 148*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 146 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 149*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 147 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 150*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 148 OF 148 
 
	
	I


---
*Page 151*
---

 
 
Page 1 
 
 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Integrated physical adaptation and community resilience through an 
enhanced direct access pilot in the public, private, and civil society 
sectors of three Eastern Caribbean small island developing states  
Accredited entity  Department of Environment, Antigua and Barbuda  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)   
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  http://environment.gov.ag/projects -reports#/Enhancing -Direct -
Access -%28EDA%29 -in-the-Eastern -Caribbean  
A simplified ESIA consistent with t he requirements for a category B  project  is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  
Other link(s)  Grenada: http://www.finance.gd/index.php/projects/enhancing -
direct -access -eda-in-the-eastern -Caribbean  
OECS Commission: http://www.oecs.org/ccu -programmes   
Dominica: http://ecu.gov.dm/index.php/projects/21 -gcf-enhanced -
direct -access -eda-project  
Envi ronmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  http://environment.gov.ag/projects -reports#/Enhancing -Direct -
Access -%28EDA%29 -in-the-Eastern -Caribbean  
Other link(s)  Grenada: http://www.finance.gd/index.php/projects/enhancing -
direct -access -eda-in-the-eastern -Caribbean  
OECS Commission: http://www.oecs.org/ccu -programmes   
Dominica: http://ecu.gov.dm/index.php/projects/21 -gcf-enhanced -
direct -access -eda-project  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan (GAP)    
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2018 -01-17 
Language(s) of disclosure  English


---
*Page 152*
---

 
 
Page 2 
 
 
Link to disclosure  http://environment.gov.ag/projects -reports#/Enhancing -Direct -
Access -%28EDA%29 -in-the-Eastern -Caribbean  
Grenada: http://www.finance.gd/index.php/projects/enhancing -
direct -access -eda-in-the-eastern -Caribbean  
OECS Commission: http://www.oecs.org/ccu -programmes   
Dominica: http://ecu.gov.dm/index.php/projects/21 -gcf-enhanced -
direct -access -eda-project  
-----------------