=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Chananyou Muadmanee
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
/CreationDate: D:20170911150921+09'00'
/ModDate: D:20170911150921+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2016


---
*Page 1*
---

  
 
Meeting of the Board  
30 September – 2 October 2017  
Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt  
Provisional agenda item  14(g)  GCF/B.18/ 04/Add. 12 
11 September 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum XII 
Funding proposal package for FP057  
 
 
  
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Climate action for rural development: community - 
based adaptation and mitigation in  Argentina”;  
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) orfocal  
point(s); and  
c) Environmental  and social  report(s)  disclosure;


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Contents  
 
 
Section  A PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section  B FINANCING / COST  INFORMATION  
 
Section  C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME  DESCRIPTION  
 
Section  D RATIONALE FOR GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section  E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT  CRITERIA  
 
Section  F APPRAISAL  SUMMARY  
 
Section  G RISK ASSESSMENT AND  MANAGEMENT  
 
Section  H RESULTS MONITORING AND  REPORTING  
 
Section  I ANNEXES  
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
● Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other  sections,  including  the Appraisal  Summary  in section  F, accredited  entities  have  discretion  in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposa l with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal  document.  
● The total number  of pages  for the funding  proposal  (excluding  annexes)  is expected  not to exceed  50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information  
A.1.1.  Project / programme title  Climate Action for Rural Development: community - 
based adaptation and mitigation in Argentina  
A.1.2. Project or programme  programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region  Argentina  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  National Direction of Projects with International Credit 
Agencies (DNPOIC)  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  UCAR - Unit for Rural Change of Argentina  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☒ Direct  ☐ International  
 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity: UCAR  
Beneficiary: 5 micro regions in the North of Argentina (Yavi, 
West of Formosa, Oriental Chaco, Los Llanos, Valles 
Calchaquíes salteños)  
 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  □ Micro (≤10)  
□ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
□ Large (>250)  
 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  □ Mitigation  ☐ Adaptation  ☒ Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission   
 
 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Mario Nanclares  
Organization  UCAR - Unit for Rural Change of Argentina  
Email address  mnanclares@prosap.gov.ar  
Telephone number  (+5411) 4349 -1300 Int.: 1311  
Mailing address  Av. Belgrano 456 – PB (C1092AAR), Autonomous City of 
Buenos Aires, Argentina  
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
✓Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)    
✓Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
✓Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
Increased resilience of:


---
*Page 5*
---

 
 
 
✓Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply  sources and supply chain 
management, relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
✓Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
✓ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ✓
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
The objective of the Programme is to promote community -based adaptation and low -carbon development in micro - 
regions that are vulnerable to climate variability.  
This objective will be attained through: (i) awareness raising on  the impact of climate change, and the generation of 
capacity to design and implement local adaptive and mitigation strategies; (ii) the development of resilient  
infrastructure, the promotion of sustainable natural resource management, the adoption of low -carbon and climate - 
resilient  agriculture,  and the transformation  of the generation  and access  to energy  from renewable  sources.  
The EDA Programme is built on the generated capacities and lessons learned from the execution of rural development 
programmes executed by UCAR, and will contribute to incorporate climate change investment to increase the resilience 
of rural communities whilst reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
The Programme will be executed in a five -year period considering a direct target popul ation of 5,750 families (that is to 
say, 28,750 beneficiaries).  
 
The Programme will work in 5 vulnerable micro -regions to climate change:  
➢ Yavi Micro -region (Jujuy  Province)  
➢ West of Formosa Micro -region (Formosa  Province)  
➢ Oriental Chaco Micro -region (Chaco  Province)  
➢ Los Llanos Micro -region (La Rioja  Province)  
➢ Valles Calchaquíes Salteños Micro -region (Salta  Province)  
 
In order to promote sustainable, inclusive and resilient development of the micro -regions, the Programme plans to 
development Mitigation and Ad aptation Plans that integrate adaptation and mitigation measures in the form of projects. 
These projects will constitute cross -cutting investment priorities and may include several result areas of the GCF: 
resilient infrastructure, sustainable natural reso urce management, low -carbon and climate -resilient agriculture, and the 
transformation of the generation and access to energy to renewable sources.  
 
The Programme is instrumented through three principal components:  
 
Component 1 - Capacity building and community -based planning: The necessary capabilities will be developed for 
the planning of mitigation and adaptation strategies to climate change and for the developing of proposals to access the 
grant facility. Such com ponent is essential to create awareness on climate change impacts, generate capacity at local 
and sub -national levels, and foster the development of comprehensive ambitious plans on climate change at a local 
level.


---
*Page 6*
---

 
 
  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)   
07/26/2017  
Expected financial close (if applicable)   
 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/01/2018 
End: 31/12/2022  
Project/programme lifespan  5 years  
 
 Component 2 - Mitigat ion and adaptation actions: This component will provide the necessary financing to empower 
the micro -region in the execution of actions and projects that will allow them to reduce their vulnerability in the face of 
climate change and to develop strategies oriented to a low -carbon development.  
 
Component 3 - EDA Programme management and M&E: This component encompasses the activities of 
management and supervision of the Programme, both at a central level and in the territory.


---
*Page 7*
---

 
 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme  
 
How the choice of financial instruments will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, and  
leverage public and/or private  finance  
 
The financial tools proposed in the Programme will allow to promote the use of technologies and practices that  
have a positive impact on adaptation and mitigation and which are currently not implemented due to lack of 
knowledge of rural producers and local  institutions.  
 
In the same way, at present local institutions do not have the capacity to face threats arising from the intensification 
in climate variability without the help of external funds. That is why the grant facility wind ows will provide financial 
tools strategically designed to enhance adaptation and mitigation at various scales of beneficiaries.  
 
One of the major innovations of the Programme is to reduce the obstacles to investment in climate change actions: 
the project is to promote access to grants in order to install and spread the adaptation and mitigation technologies, 
and in parallel to establish revolving funds in order to ensure sustainability and overcome the barrier of the lack of 
access to credit.  
 
i. Window1 2.1 – Systemic projects of public investments: Non-reimbursable grant of up to 80% of the 
investment for public works will allow overcoming the limitations of the micro -regions regarding financial constraints 
and deficiencies in resilient infrastructure an d sustainable management of natural resources that contribute to both 
adaptation  and mitigation  of GHG.  In turn, said financial  tool will also allow  leveraging  additional  public  finance.  
The beneficiaries must co -finance at least 20% of the total cost of t he project, and the contribution may be in  
money or in -kind. A higher co -finance may be requested based on a case -by-case analysis, as appropriate, 
according to the sub -project in  question.  
 
ii. Window 2.2 - Adaptation and mitigation projects for organization s and associations of smallholders: 
Small producers are not capitalized and have no access to financing. They mostly carry out subsistence  farming 
and are extremely sensitive to climate change because their livelihoods depend on climate related activities  such  
as agriculture and livestock. These smallholders are very vulnerable to climate change and have very low adaptive 
capacities,  and they are unaware  of certain  tools  and practices  for adaptation  and mitigation  to climate  change.  
Non-reimbursable grants are intended for small rural producers (whether they are on -farm or associative 
investments). It is considered appropriate to have Non -reimbursable grants of up to 90% of the total investment and 
the beneficiaries must co -finance at least 10% of the  total cost of the project, and their contribution may be 
performed in cash, in kind or labour.  
Self-Managed Revolving Funds (SMRF) associated to the adaptation and mitigation projects financed by the 
previously mentioned Non -reimbursable grants. These fun ds made up of resources (in money or in kind), managed 
by an organization of rural producers with a degree of institutional maturity, previously evaluated and trained, with 
the objective of making small loans to its associates, which the Organization recov ers in order to lend them again.  
The use of successful revolving funds will contribute to the sustainability of the projects, helps the organization to 
strengthen its administrative capacities and therefore empowers the community.  
Funds from UCAR to the ru ral organizations that will manage them as self -managed revolving funds will be 
transferred as non -reimbursable grants. This means that the funds will be allocated to the organizations for the 
settlement of the revolving funds, and UCAR won’t receive any m oney back from the operation of this activity. On 
the other hand, funds from the organizations to the borrowers will be transferred as loans at low interest (in money 
or in kind). The members of the organization, the borrowers, will return the loan accordi ng to previously established  
1 The terms Outputs/Outcomes/Windows used along the Funding Proposal are interchangeable.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
 
guidelines, and according to the agreement signed between the borrower and the organization (please refer to 
Annex I for  models of agreements between UCAR and the organizations and between the latter and the  
borrowers). Once the loan is returned to the organization, the funds will be assigned to new members of the 
organization,  in order  to continue  with the functioning  of the revolving  fund.  
For further details on SMRF please refer to sections C.3 and C.7.  
 
Each one of the financial instruments included in the Programme foresee the signing of a contract between the 
grant provider (UCAR) and the beneficiary once the project is approved and before the grant is provided. These 
contracts (please refer to Annex I for model contracts for the different type of grants) establish the obligations of 
each one of the signatory parties, including the grantees co -financing obligation.  
Besides, for Window 2.1 the Programme will request for basic financial and physical indicators to be reported in a 
period to be determined, including the monitoring and report of the local co -finance. The Programme will conduct  
as well regular audits in o rder to monitor the  functioning.  
For non -reimbursable grants on Window 2.2 the Programme foresees partial dibursements, assuring that the 
amount disbursed and the contribution of co -finance corresponding to the stage of the project will be fully paid 
befor e a new disbursement is made.  
 
The expense report must be made according to procedures contained in a Manual that will be delivered to the 
beneficiaries at the time of signing the agreement.  
In addition, a technician in territory will accompany the benefic iary during the execution of the project and will 
provide assistance to make the acquisitions and draw up the accountability documents.  
The analysis of expense report will be carried out by the Technical Implementation Unit (please refer to section C.7 
Institutional Arrangements in the Funding Proposal for more details on the Technical Implementation Unit). They  
will issue an opinion regarding the verifiable products, the technical relevance of the expenses, as well as the 
validity of the vouchers  presente d. 
 
Finally, it is important to highlight that the feasibility of co -financing by ultimate beneficiaries has been assessed 
based on the broad experience that UCAR has working in territory with the profile of beneficiaries the Programme 
will work with and w ith the instruments the Programme aims to work with too.  
 
Please refer to Chapter 3 in the Feasibility Study for more details on the Programme’s Financial Elements.  
 
Breakdown of cost estimates  
 
A breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF  financing by Outcome in US Dollars is provided 
below. In the final version of the Funding proposal, definition of budget in local currency will be included.  
  
Component  Outcome (if 
applicable)  Amount 
(for entire 
project)2  
Currency  Amount 
(for entire 
project)  Local 
currency  GCF  
funding 
amount  Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient   
Component 
1 
Capacity 
building and 
community - 
based 
planning  Outcome 1.1  
Local capacity 
on climate 
change 
generated and 
awareness 
raised   
 
 
0.33  
 
million  
USD ($)   
 
 
 
 
 
………….    
 
 
0.33 million USD  
($) 
 
 
2 UCAR will provide with  a parallel co -financing of at least USD 500,000 from other Programmes that will be 
implemented in the selected micro -regions.


---
*Page 9*
---

 
 
  Outcome 1.2  
Micro -regions 
with enhanced 
capacity to 
lead 
community - 
based 
adaptation and 
mitigation 
actions   
 
 
 
1.57  
 
 
million  
USD ($)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
………….    
 
 
 
1.36 million USD  
($)  
Component 
2 
Adaptation 
and 
mitigation 
actions  Outcome 2.1  
Systemic 
projects of 
public 
investment 
implemented   
 
10.41   
 
million  
USD ($)   
 
 
 
 
………….    
 
8.05 million USD  
($) 
Outcome 2.2  
Adaptation and 
mitigation 
projects for 
organizations 
and 
associations of 
smallholders 
implemented   
 
 
 
10.50   
 
 
million  
USD ($)     
 
 
 
9.50 million USD  
($) 
Component 
3 
EDA 
Programme 
Managemen 
t and M&E  Outcome 3.1  
Programme 
Management   
2.81 million  
USD ($)    
2.14 million USD  
($) 
Outcome 3.2  
Monitoring and 
Evaluation   
0.71 million  
USD ($)     
0.68 million USD  
($) 
Total project financing  26.33  million  
USD ($)    22.06  million USD  
($) 
 
 
A breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type is provided below. Please refer to Timetable of programme 
implementation in ANNEX V and Budget in ANNEX VI.  
 Expenditure type  US Dollars   
 
Grantees cofinance   
1.000.000  
 
Grants   
9.000.000  
 
Local consultants   
3.622.500  
Professional/ Contractual 
Services   
934.375


---
*Page 10*
---

 
 
 Revolving Funds  500.000   
 
Services / works (infrastructure)   
10.000.000  
Training, workshops, and 
conference   
534.250  
 
Travel   
735.999  
Total  26.327.124  
 
 
Disbursement schedule  
 
For the Disbursement Schedule please refer to the Term Sheet in Annex XII.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing   
(a) = (b) + (c)   
26.33  Options  
million  
USD($)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient   
(i) Senior  Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants  * 
(vi) Grants  *  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
 
22.06  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million  
USD($)   
 
( ) years 
(  ) years   
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
* Please provide economic and financial justification in  section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/prog ramme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in  section E . 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  22.06  Options   
(c) Co - 
financing to  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority


---
*Page 11*
---

 
 
recipient   
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options   
1.00 
2.00 
1.27 
……………   
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  Grantees  
Local 
government  
UCAR  
………………   
(  ) 
years  
(  ) 
years   
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR   
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: Local governments  
The 1.0 million USD co -finance covered by grantees was calculated taking into account the co -finance  
requirements established for the financial element proposed for organizations and associations of small - 
scale agriculture family producers.(10% for subcomponent 2.2).  
The 2 million USD co -finance covered by local governments was calculated taking into ac count the 20% 
co-finance requirement established for sub -component 2.1: systemic projects of public investment.  
Co-finance provided by UCAR (1.27 million USD) will be principally destined to development outcomes 
of the micro -regions, thus allowing the destination of GCF funds to cover climate action to increase 
resilience and catalyze a low carbon development.  
Besides, UCAR will provide with a parallel co -financing of at least USD 500,000 from other 
Programmes that will be implemented in the selected mi cro-regions.  
Please find attached in Annex IX a letter of commitment issued by UCAR. The co -finance by the grantees is subject 
to the definition of the projects to be financed, therefore, once the projects are clearly defined, UCAR will be 
attaching the required co -finance letters from the grantee to the annual performance report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
 
 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please pr ovide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable.  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
Choose an item.  ………………….  Options  (  ) years  (   ) %


---
*Page 12*
---

 
 
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may 
vary depending on the nature of the project / programme.  
C.1. Strategic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.  
 
Argentina’s socio -economic context : Argentina is a federal country comprising 23 provinces and the 
Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, covering a total of 2,780,000 km², with an estimated total of 43,590,368 
inhabitants for year 2016 according to INDEC, of which 21,364,470 are men and 22,225,898 are women.  
Regarding World's Human Developm ent Index3, Argentina occupies position Nº 40 with a value of 0.836, life 
expectancy at birth is 76.3%, and the population inhabiting urban centers is 93%.  
 
Rural population reached a total of 3,599,764 in 2010. Over the last sixty years Argentina’s rural population has 
shown a decrease due to three factors: 1) the technological progress of the agricultural activity requires less 
labour force due to greater au tomation of chores; 2) transformations in the agricultural sector have caused an 
increase in the scale of agricultural production and a reduction of the number of agricultural producers; 3) an 
increase in migration to urban centres in search of basic servi ces, such as potable water, electricity, schools, 
housing,  etc. 
During 2010, indigenous population or descendants of indigenous people added up to a total of 955,032 people 
which represented 2.4% of the population.  
Great North of Argentina : The Great North  of Argentina is composed by the North West (NOA) and North East 
(NEA) regions4  of Argentina. This territory has been given priority on account of: i) the high levels of rural poverty,  
ii) a strong presence of small -scale producers and/or indigenous commu nities, iii) high vulnerability to climate 
change, and iv) presence of institutional commitment.  
 
The Gross Domestic Product per capita in the Great North barely exceeds half of the national average. This  
region accounts for 20% of the country’s population and accounts with 54% of the country’s households with 
Unsatisfied Basic Needs (NBI). Likewise, 57% of the country's illiterates are in this region, whose provinces show 
levels  of illiteracy  (2.5-5.5%)  higher  than the national  average  (2%).  
The region presents the highest national level regarding unemployment (NOA: 14.9%; NEA: 12.8%; national 
average: 9%, 2011), as well as very significant rates of precarious employment and unstable underemployment 
(NOA: 30.5% and 15.7%, respectively; NEA: 34.3 a nd 15.6%, respectively). For its part, the development of road 
infrastructure and communications is deficient relative to the rest of the country.  
The country has 251,000 smallholder family farmers, of which many are poor and most live in villages in the 
country's North region. In 2010, 18% of the rural population and 22% of scattered rural households lived with 
Unsatisfied Basic Needs.  
 
3The Human Development Index (HDI) is an indicator of human development per country, prepared by the United Nations 
Development Programme(UNDP). It is based on a statistical, social indicator composed of three parameters: long and healthy li fe, 
knowledge and a decent standard of living.  
4Traditionally, Argentina is divided into five economic regions: Great North (divide d in North East: Misiones, Corrientes, Formosa 
and Chaco; and North West: Jujuy, Salta,Tucumán, Catamarca, La Rioja and Santiago del Estero), Centre (Santa Fe, Córdoba and 
Entre Ríos), Cuyo (Mendoza, San Juan and San Luis), Patagonian (La Pampa, Neuquén, R io Negro, Chubut, Santa Cruz and  
Tierra  del Fuego,  Antártida  e Islas del Atlántico  Sur) and City of Buenos  Aires  and Province  of Buenos  Aires.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
 
Social context in the North of Argentina : In the Great North region of Argentina, 98,251 identified family 
producers have been categorized in categories defined by PROINDER5. In this region, 65% of the  family 
producers are considered type A, 20% are type B and 10% are type C. Type A producers (less capitalized) prevail 
all across the provinces of the Great North region.  
As inferred from the information provided by the 2010 Census, for this year, 1,110,852 households and 4,953,206 
individuals with NBI were found, representing 9.1% of the country's total households and 12.5% of the popul ation.  
. The sanitary needs (NBI 2) constitute the predominant typology in households of these regions, with Chaco, 
Catamarca, Formosa and Santiago del Estero featuring the highest values for this indicator (44.4%, 43%, 42.3%, 
and 53.2%, respectively).  
NOA  and NEA regions are the ones with the greatest share of rural population in the total structural poverty 
(please refer to Figure 1.5 in the Feasibility Study).  
Regarding indigenous communities, the NOA region presents 3.5% of its population that identifie s as  
descendants or pertaining to an indigenous people (CNPHyV 2010), being the national average 2.4%. The 
peoples with greatest representation in the region are the Kolla people, with 26.1% of NOA's indigenous total 
population; the Diaguita -Calchaquí peo ple, with 19.1%; the Wichí people, with 11.5% - mainly in the province of 
Salta -, and the Guaraní  people,  representing 10%,  mainly  in Salta  and Jujuy.  
In turn, in 2010, a 2.49% of NEA's total population identified themselves as descendants or pertaining to  an 
indigenous population. NEA is one of the regions with the greatest rate of indigenous population in rural areas 
(46.5%), reaching values of more than 50% in Misiones and Formosa. In the province of Chaco, there is the 
greatest percentage of the region' s indigenous population (45.1%). This is quite interesting, considering that only 
28.6% of the region's total population lives in that province. The province of Formosa is the one with the greatest 
rate of indigenous in relation with its total population ( 6.1%).  
Even though we have no official or final data, it is possible to estimate that, in the same way these regions have, 
according to the Census, 82% of the country's rural indigenous population, they also have it regarding number of 
indigenous communities, with Salta, Jujuy, Formosa and Chaco (in that order), being the most important.  
 
Selected Micro Regions in the Great North of Argentina : The following map shows the location of the micro - 
region in their Provinces in the Great North of Argenti na: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Type A family producers : These are small -scale family producers who do not have enough resources to live solely on the produce 
of their units. That is why they must resort to work outside their units. They sustain strong structural poverty conditions.  
Type B family producers : These are small -scale family producers who have patently little resources (land, capital, equipment), which  
makes it difficult for them to broaden their production system and grow. Simple reproduction is the for m activity is maintained. They 
have a highly sporadic relation with the produce market.  
Type C family producers : They are mostly producers in relation to markets and with some level of minimum capitalization and fairly 
consolidated associative forms. All t hese categories present NBI indicators that classify them as poor.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
 
 
 
Yavi Micro -region (Jujuy Province) : The micro -region of Yavi is located in the department of the same name, in 
the north Argentine Puna, in the extreme northeast of Jujuy. The Department of Yavi is composed of La Quiaca 
Municipality and five municipal commissions. It is a mainly rural depa rtment (23% of its total population lives in 
rural areas); the urban area is comprised of the city of La Quiaca. The region is located in the Puna Jujeña, a 
relatively flat area elevated more than 3,200 meters above sea level and crossed in the Northeast a nd Southeast, 
by mountainous ranges which have river basins and valleys relatively wide. The Puna plateau  has  difficult 
weather conditions, cold, dry and very windy. The rains are deficient in every season; it almost exclusively rains in 
summer. The dail y changes in temperature are substantial, and there is a sharp cooling at night, due to very dry 
conditions in the air, and there is diurnal warming up that reaches up to 25° Celsius degrees. In this micro region 
the frequency and length of heat waves is i ncreasing, extreme precipitations are also increasing in frequency, the 
winter dry period is intensifying and there is a pronunciation in the soil erosion due to wind and water erosion. 
Climate change is gravely affecting the micro region’s agriculture and  livestock production. The MR presents 4% 
of total province rural households with unsatisfied basic needs (INDEC 2010 Census), while 21% of the  
population in the MR has at least one unsatisfied basic need (the provincial average is 15%). Analphabetic rate  is 
6.57% (province’s rate is 3.3% and national rate is 1.9%). The main productive activities in the MR are livestock 
and agriculture. The whole of the family works on the land being the main destination of production the self - 
consumption. Only the remain ing production is sold or exchanged. As regards areas covered by trees, there are 
no forest  lands,  as trees  are significantly  scarce  in the communities.  
West of Formosa Micro -region (Formosa Province): The West Micro -region occupies the departments of 
Mata cos and Ramón Lista, bordering the province of Salta and the western part of the Department of Bermejo.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
 
This Micro -region is the furthest from the provincial capital where the producers are more disseminated. Their 
production is basically for subsistence. The Micro -region presents rainfalls ranging from 400 to 500 mm per year, 
with a high percentage of occurrence in the autumn season. The MR presents gallery forests along the banks of 
active and inactive rivers. The West Micro -region is cha racterized by a high level of population with Unsatisfied 
Basic Needs (35% of the total provincial rural households) and a high concentration of native communities. The 
population of the Micro -region represents 8% of the total provincial population (INDEC 2010 Census). The main 
productive activity in the MR is livestock, and beekeeping is especially important as well being carried out mainly 
by indigenous communities and “criollos”. Agricultural production is only for local family sustenance. Forestry 
activity is also of an extraction nature, and with no level of technology.  
Oriental Chaco Micro -region (Chaco Province): Oriental Chaco Micro -region is located to the South East of the 
province, in the Department of Bermejo. The climate in the region is subtrop ical maritime with dry seasons, with  
an average annual temperature of 27°C and a maximum higher than 40°C. The rainfall exceeds 1000 mm per 
year. The most important rivers of the area are: Bermejo, Paraná, Paraguay, used for navigation and Cangui 
Grande a nd Chico, Guaycurú, Rio de Oro and Arroyo, which constitute a substantial natural surface water 
reservoir. During December and March the water of the Paraná river floods the low banks and moves upwards the 
tributaries, hindering normal drainage and causing  floods. East of Chaco the eastern depression is found, with 
predominance of rivers, streams, estuaries, lagoons, and berms in between, and to the South, estuaries, small 
valleys, lagoons and low lying fields are found. Due to the abundance of rains and dr ainage problems, gleization 
occurs in that the soil material is gray, and most importantly, causes a toxic environment for the roots of plants  
due to lack of oxygen. The Wetlands region is covered by alternating forests with steppes, savannas and palm 
trees. The prevailing tree species in the MR are Quebracho Colorado, Urunday, Guayacán, Lapacho and Espina 
Corona. Small tree plantations are observed used as windbreaks to protect orchards and fruit trees. This is the 
result of forestry programs in place ove r the last years. The soil presents limitations related to water excesses, 
restricted drainage, acidity and  salinity.  
Oriental Chaco Micro -region is characterized by a high level of population with Unsatisfied Basic Needs (4% of 
total provincial rural hous eholds) and native communities, mainly the Qom people. The Department of Bermejo 
represents 2.4% of the total population of the province and rural population represents 45% of the total population 
of the department (INDEC 2010 Census). The main productive activities are livestock, agriculture, horticulture and 
forestry to some degree. In the area there are different family -type production activities, with low technology 
incorporation.  
Los Llanos Micro -region (La Rioja Province): This Micro -region is located  in the south of La Rioja Province and 
it is composed by the following departments: General Belgrano, General Ocampo, General Juan F. Quiroga, 
Rosario Vera Peñaloza and General San Martín. The MR is delimited to the North and North East by the 
mountains of  Ambato and Velazco, foothills of the Vilgo and Paganzo ranges and the southern ends of the 
Vinchina and Antinaco valleys, Los Colorados. Besides, it is delimited to the West with the province of San Juan, 
to the South with the province of San Luis and to the East with the Province of Córdoba, respectively. It is an 
extensive depression with sedimentary deposits that forms an arid plain with dunes in the North West and the limit 
with San Juan, bogs in the drainage of the Salado river and the drainage of Los  Colorados. There are salt plains  
in the North East and it is crossed from North to South by the Serrano -Pampean mountain range. The climate is 
subtropical and warm, without frost or with mild frost, with mild winters and high summer temperatures. Rain 
ranges between 400 mm annually in the East to 300 mm in the  West.  
The population of the Micro -region represents 11% of the province. Regarding the Unsatisfied Basic Needs (NBI) 
indicator, the province presents 45% of total provincial rural households with NBI (INDEC 2010 Census). The 
livestock activity of the province includes the extensive rearing of bovines and goats. Livestock represents 16.5% 
of the provincial agricultural Gross Regional Product and involves 12.300 people. The presence of small -scale 
producers devoted to livestock farming is noticeable. The vast majority of such small scale producers has no


---
*Page 16*
---

 
 
perfected titles over the land or no clear land bounds. That is why it is so difficult for them to apply improvements 
in the handling  and feeding of their cattle. Their low level of capital is another setback for the sector's 
development.  
Valles Calchaquíes Salteños Micro -region (Salta Province): Geographically, the “Valle Calchaquí” region is 
inside the great region of Argentine Northw est (NOA) and it is recognized for being a chaining of valleys and  
water reserves among the high mountain ranges (1000 to 3000 meters high) of North -South overall orientation 
crossed by rivers Calchaquí and Santa María, in the provinces of Salta, Tucumán and Catamarca. In the Province 
of Salta, the Valles Calchaquies micro -region of the Province of Salta is composed of the following departments: 
Cafayate, San Carlos, Molinos, Cachi and La  Poma.  
The MR features an arid climate, with concentrated rainfall mo nsoon -like (in summer), high thermal amplitude, 
strong sunshine, low atmospheric humidity and thus, evapotranspiration. The soils are not very much developed 
and feature very low organic matter. They have a good internal drainage, and they are usually very  stony. 
Furthermore, there are soils with substantial salt and sodium concentration. These soils are very fragile and 
susceptible to both wind and water erosion. Accordingly, erosion, desertification and pressure over forests are the 
main environmental iss ues of the region. Natural vegetation is xerophyte type, low and with bushes, woody and 
scarce foliage, with minor species usually with aromatic and medicinal properties. In areas with higher water 
availability there are lowland forests with greatest bio -diversity dominated by carob, although is currently 
diminished and impoverished by the indiscriminate logging suffered in the area in order to get firewood and soil for 
agricultural activities, as well as for grazing.  
The MR population represents 3% of total province’s population and it presents 49% of rural population within the 
MR (INDEC 2010 Census). Family Agriculture (FA) is a fundamental component in agri -food industry of Salta. In 
the province of Salta, the 78% of farms are run by families and it is estimated that they generate 16% gross value 
of the total farm production in Salta. Regarding Unsatisfied Basic Needs (NBI), the MR presents 19.4% of total 
households in the MR with NBI, and an 8% of total provincial rural households with NBI. The main productive 
activity in the MR is crop production. The agricultural structure is mostly small -holder type. The agricultural 
production is a significant resource in the life strategy of the family, which provides with the prevailing portion of 
the labor forc e used in the farming; and the food production is intended for self -consumption and market. The 
great aridity in the area makes water resource the biggest limitation for agricultural production. The surface water 
is very scarce and stationary. There is a s evere lack of water harvesting, pipes and distribution infrastructure, with 
low technology in the application of the water resource. The production plots have little or no level of incorporation 
of modern technology. Chemical fertilizers and plant protecti on products are rarely used. Farming is extensive 
type, based on scarce vegetation grazing typical of mountains, sometimes along with pastures (alfalfa). The cattle 
farming are carried out away from households, among the hills most of the year; and they co nstitute the greatest 
capital reserve for farming families.  
 
 
Climate Change in NOA and NEA Regions in Argentina : According to the information provided in the Third 
National Communication on Climate Change, the NOA and NEA regions are the regions in Argent ina with  
greatest climate change related  impact.  
The study identifies the following changes in climate tendencies regarding the changes in climatic variables from 
1960 to 2010:  
- Increase in mean annual precipitation in all of Argentina, being the NEA regio n the region with most 
increase  in annual  precipitation,  registering  an increase  of up to 200mm  in some  areas.  
- In NOA and NEA events of extreme precipitation are on the rise. Occurrence of heavier precipitation 
in fewer  events.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
 
- Especially in NOA, increase in the length of dry spells and little or no rain during winter, thus 
intensifying the aridness of the  region.  
- Increase in frequency and duration of floods in the NEA  region.  
- Significant increase in the number and duration  of heat waves.  
 
 
Climate projections indicate that annual mean temperature will rise more substantially and faster than observed 
between 1960 and 2010.  
For the NEA region, an increase of 1 to 2°C is expected in relation with the 1986 -2005 period in the scenario of 
fewer emissions (RCP 4.5) and a temperature increase of 3 to 6°C is expected by the end of the century 
considering the worst emission scenario (RCP 8.5)  
For the NOA region, an increase of 1 to 1.5°C is expected in relation with the 1986 -2005 period in the scenar io of 
fewer emissions (RCP 4.5) and a temperature increase of 3.5 to 7°C is expected by the end of the century 
considering the worst emission scenario (RCP 8.5). Based on the above, this region will have the country's 
greatest heating.  
In relation with tem perature extremes in both regions for the scenario of fewer emissions: i) frost would practically 
disappear; ii) tropical nights would increase; iii) there will be an increase in the number of days with heat waves of 
10 to 25 days for the NEA -E, and 15 to 90 days for the NOA -N (this being the region with greatest projected 
increase in the duration of heat waves for the country).  
According to the climate projections, in the near future the occurrence of extreme precipitation will be intensified in 
the NOA an d NEA region. An increase in the accumulated annual precipitation due to heavy precipitation events  
in both regions,  increasing  between  25 mm to  150 mm  in the NOA  and between  25 to 100 mm in  the NEA region.  
These new projected climate conditions for the North region of Argentina will bring about impacts on the 
environment and the livelihoods of vulnerable communities. One of the main environmental impacts is increase of 
arid conditions and related desertification processes which will affect productivity a nd extinction of species. 
Besides, changes in the hydrological cycle will also affect agricultural, hydroelectrical and potable water 
production, as well as access and use of food. Impacts will also be seen through the increase of forest fires and 
mass wea thering phenomena.  
This situation plus the social vulnerability in the region which has been discussed previously as well as existing 
environmental fragility and institutional weaknesses, aggravate the capacity of the communities to respond and 
adapt to cl imate change impacts.  
The following map shows the extreme climate events and related impacts affecting the micro -regions prioritized 
through the present Programme. The map was developed with the information obtained from the maps of the 
Third National Communication to Climate Change of Argentina, the map of the LADA Project and the map of the 
Ministry of Education presented in the previous  section.  
Please refer to Feasibility study for further information about the Strategic Context of this Proposal.


---
*Page 18*
---

 
 
 
 
 
The information provided gives account of the importance of the present Programme to promote community - 
based adaptation and low -carbon development in micro -regions which are vulnerable to climate change impacts.  
For further detailed information on climate change in Argentina and the Provinces and micro -regions prioritized by 
the Programme, as well as for the climate change risk assessment and vulnerability please refer to chapter 1  
point 1.4.1 in the Feasibility  Study.  
National Inven tory of Greenhouse Gases: The national inventory of GHG for the 2012 published in the Third 
National Communication of Climate Change, addresses for the main contribution that the agriculture and livestock 
and change of land use and forestry sectors have in  the total national emissions. Thus, the important role that  
both sectors play in mitigation strategies in order to contribute to Argentina’s goals established in its Nationally 
Determined Contribution  (NDC).


---
*Page 19*
---

 
 
It is important to highlight that the Energy, Agriculture and Livestock and Change of Land Use and Forestry 
sectors constitute more than 91% of total GHG emissions in the considered period.  
And, in particular, CO 2 emissions from the conversion of forests and other lands are the main category with 13% 
of total  emissions.  
The figure below shows Argentina’s National Inventory of Greenhouse Gases for the year 2012. 
For further information please refer to Chapter 1, Section 1.4.2 in the Feasibility Study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Argentina’s Greenhouse Gases Inventory (year 2012) – Third National Communication of Argentina (2015).  
Source: Secretary of Environment and Sustainable Development of Argentina.  
 
 
For more information on Argentina´s and Great North’s socio -economic context, please ref er to Chapter 1 in the 
Feasibility Study.  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
 
Chapter 2 of the Feasibility Study offers a detailed description of the baseline scenario: it provides the rationale for 
the intervention in the North of Argentina, and of the Micro regions, based in exposure, vulnerability and mitigation 
potential.  
 
Climate vulnerability baseline  
 
i) The Great North of Argentina  
The Great North of Argentina was selected for the implementation of the EDA Proposal on account  of: i) high 
exposure to extreme climatic events, ii) high vulnerability to climate change, iii) mitigation potential.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
 
 
The income of the majority of the population established in the Great North of Argentina is directly linked to  
natural resource utilization. The increase in the intensity and frequency of extreme climatic events in this region is 
having  a severe  impact  on the livelihoods  of rural communities.  
 
High rainfall variability, persistent droughts and floods, and extreme temperatures characterize the Great North of 
Argentina. The increase in the duration of drought periods and intense precipitations is aggravating soil 
degradation processes in the region due to the increase in wind and hydric erosive processes.  
 
ii) The se lected Micro regions  
 
The micro regions of the North of Argentina from the UCAR's IDEMI and PISEAR Programmes that have the most 
significant impact to climate change were identified and prioritized by considering the following information (please 
refer to Chapter 1 for further details):  
● Observed change in climate extreme events:  please refer to the maps presented in Chapter 1 of the present 
feasibility. These maps present the most significant differences in the extreme climate indexes observed 
during the 19 60-2010 period. The micro -regions that presented the most significant changes in extreme 
climate indexes were  prioritized.  
● Existence of degradation processes in drylands:  The semiarid regions of the North of Argentina that have 
degraded lands are significa ntly vulnerable to climate change impact. This is why micro -regions that present 
significant  land degradation  processes  were  prioritized.  
● Occurrence of floods : The Valles Calchaquíes Salteños, West Formosa and Oriental Chaco Micro -regions are 
particularly  vulnerable  to floods  and other  hydrometeorological  events.  
● Occurrence of forest fires : The reference in Chapter 1 to the risk of disasters in the planning of the territory 
illustrates the quantity of extreme events per department and includes the risk of f ires in the provinces with 
significant fire  exposure.  
 
Emissions baseline  
 
Although there is no information on GHG emissions at the level of the selected micro regions, GHG emissions 
profiles at the provincial level are available for approaching the potential trends in the micro regions, and/or how 
mitigation in the micro regions could contribute to the reduction in the provinces.  
 
The main emissions related to rural areas are related to Land use, Land Use Change and Forestry; followed by 
Livestock an d in a lesser extent, Agriculture. The province with higher emissions is Chaco, with a considerably 
significant part of emissions related to LULUCF; similar proportions although lower in net emissions can be 
observed in the Salta profile. La Rioja is the p rovince with fewer emissions related with the rural sector. Please 
refer to section 2.1.3 of Chapter 2 of the Feasibility Study for further characterization of baseline emissions.  
 
 
Outcomes and the impact that the Programme will aim to achieve in improvin g the baseline scenario  
 
The objective of the proposed Programme is to promote the low -carbon and resilient development of the North 
Region of Argentina by promoting the incorporation of adaptation and mitigation measures in territorial planning.  
In this sense, the Programme will finance comprehensive adaptation and mitigation projects that integrate a  
robust Mitigation and Adaptation Plan for the micro -regions. The aim is to empower rural communities in micro 
regions by making them the key actors  in the development of climate strategies and in the selection and definition 
of projects  to guarantee  sustainable  and resilient  natural  resource  management.  
The adaptation and mitigation measures that will be financed are aligned with the national priorit ies of Argentina 
that were described previously and with the Results Management Framework of GCF.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
 
 
➢ With regards to adaptation , the Programme will have an impact in increasing resilience of the micro 
regions by promoting investments related to Landscape/Resource Efficiency (e.g. flood risk management, 
reduction of landscape fragmentation, native tree planting, enhancement of degraded soils), Water (e.g. 
infrastructure improvements, reduce water loss, storage of rainwater), Forest Management a nd 
Agroforestry  (e.g. forest  management,  production  diversification,  wildfire  prevention).  
➢ Regarding mitigation , it can be affirmed that the micro -regions of the Programme have the potential to 
include mitigation measures that promote the reduction of deforestation and the improvements of land 
degradation, such as for example: measures to recover degraded lands, in particular pastures, to reduce 
the pressure on native vegetation areas, thereby helping to control deforestation. It also includes the 
promo tion of planted forests, recovery of degraded lands and establishment and improvement of plans for 
sustainable forest management, as well as integrated productive systems (crop, livestock, forest). With 
regards to Energy, the area that includes the five se lected micro regions has high levels of irradiation and 
excellent potential for employing solar energy generation technology. There is potential for transforming 
the solar resource into a catalyst of social and economic development for the region by stimul ating the  
use of solar energy in productive  activities.  
➢ Concerning key barriers , the Programme will  overcome:  
o Barriers related to lack of knowledge about mitigation and adaptation technologies, organizational 
capacities, and project formulation skills, by  providing intensive training on these matters under 
Component 1  activities.  
o Barriers related to access to finance, as described in Section B.1, by providing non -reimbursable 
grants  and establishing  revolving  funds  under  Component  2 activities.  
 
Barriers r elated to women accessing funds, by implementing dedicated budget, activities and minimum access 
(quotas). Please refer to ANNEX III Gender Evaluation and Action Plan.  
The expected total number of subprojects is 68, if the establishment of 1 self -managed r evolving fund is counted 
as 1 subproject. This proposal considers, at least: 8 grants awarded for systemic projects of public investment 
(4,000 families), 50 subprojects for organizations of smallholders (1,750 families), and 10 self -managed revolving 
funds established (415 families during the lifetime of the project). In total, sub -output 2.1 and 2.2will account 
respectively for 8 and 60 sub -projects, reaching 4,000 and 1,750 families (since the families accessing to the 
revolving funds will be the same fa milies that will access to the subprojects of non -reimbursable grants).  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
 
Description of Components  
Component 1: Capacity building and community -based planning  
This component will finance the execution of activities for the strengthening of the local actors' capacity to 
formulate and implement ambitious adaptation and mitigation plans against climate change, in order to enhance 
the impact of low -carbon, climate -resilient development actions in focused rural groups.  
The Component has the following outputs:  
Output 1.1 Local capacity on climate change generated and awareness raised  
In order to raise awareness on climate change action needs and opportunities at least 130 public staff and 
governmental officials from nationa l, provincial and local governments, and at least 250 small -scale 
producers will be trained on adaptation to climate change, including use of climate information, and 
appropriate mitigation technologies and gender perspectives  
Output   1.2  Micro -regions  with   enhanced   capacity  to   lead  community -based  adaptation and


---
*Page 22*
---

 
 
mitigation actions  
The development of a participatory process to establish a climate strategy for the micro -region based on 
the local adaptation needs and mitigation potential will result in the elaboration of 5 Mitigation and 
Adaptation Plans (MAPs).  
 
 
Component 2: Adaptation and mitigation actions  
This component comprises a grant facility for adaptation and mitigation investments that have been defined 
through a comm unity-based planning in vulnerable micro -regions, intended to improve the living conditions of the 
vulnerable rural communities whilst creating synergies with greenhouse gases emission reduction measures. The 
grant facility will be fully aligned with GCF i nvestment criteria and national climate priorities.  
The grant facility will target public institutions and smallholders through two grant investment windows.  
Output 2.1:  Systemic projects of public investment implemented  
At least 8 grants for public investments in public services or works of collective benefit that will help  
reduce the vulnerability of the micro -region in the face of extreme events, and that will contribute to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. At least 4.000 families (20.000beneficiar ies) living in rural areas will 
benefit from systemic projects of public Works or services regarding the following results areas: energy 
access and power generation, forestry and land use, health and well being food and water security, 
resilient infrastruc ture, ecosystems and ecosystem  services.  
Output 2.2: Adaptation and mitigation projects for organizations and associations of smallholders 
implemented  
At least 50 grants for integral projects and at least 10 self -managed revolving funds for producers' 
organizations/associations and cooperatives addressing adaptation and mitigation measures associated  
to the following results areas: energy access and power generation, forestry and land use, health and well 
being food and water security, and resilient infras tructure. At least 1.750 families (8.750 beneficiaries) of 
small -scale  family  producers  and rural workers  will benefit  from this grant  investment  window.  
 
 
Component 3: EDA Programme management and M&E  
This component contains the activities related to the execution and implementation of the Programme. The 
objectives and functions regarding such spheres of action have been described in Section C.7 Implementation 
Arrangements. The specific outcomes of this component are described next.  
Output 3.1: Programme m anagement  
The execution activities are intended to ensure that the objectives and targets of the Programme are 
fulfilled at each stage. To such end, a day -to-day planning and articulation work with the different actors is 
required, as well as a diligent and transparent fund administration tasks. The latter will be guaranteed by 
UCAR's administrative support areas: Human Resource Management Area for the hiring of consultants; 
Procurement Area for the procurement of goods and services; Accounting areas, Bud get area, Payment 
area, Agreement and Disbursement area, these are a few of the areas which will ensure the transparency 
of the circuits and the appropriate accounting to the financing entity on a daily basis.  
Output 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation  
Programm e monitoring and evaluation activities will be carried out under this outcome. This will be done 
under the responsibility of the Programme's Coordination and UCAR's Management Control Area.  
Beyond  the  self -managed  revolving  funds,  which  will  continu e  working  even  after  the Programme’s  
lifetime, the objective  is  to  ensure that the subprojects  are completed at the  end of  the implementation


---
*Page 23*
---

 
 
period. In case there are ongoing subprojects whose total amount have been disbursed before the end of 
the implementation period, UCAR undertakes to guarantee their completion in the terms established by 
this financing proposal.  
Regarding the self -managed revolving funds, they will be monitored during the implementation of the 
Programme an d monitoring could continue after the Programme’s lifetime in the case UCAR considers it 
necessary. UCAR’s Rural Finance area counts with specialists to carry out these activities if necessary.  
 
 
Description of activities  
 
Component 1: Capacity building an d community -based planning  
Output 1.1 Local capacity on climate change generated and awareness raised  
Activity 1.1.1 Training workshops on climate change adaptation, mitigation, gender perspective and organizational 
strengthening  
The objective of this activity is to raise awareness on mitigation opportunities and adaptation needs at a national, 
sub-national and local level. In this sense, the activity aims to target a diverse variety of stakeholders, including 
technicians of national institutes that sup port local communities, local governmental authorities that are involved in 
municipal planning and small -scale producers that are vulnerable to climate change impacts.  
This activity is fundamental to build and strengthen the institutional and local capacit ies as well as to generate a 
common understanding on climate change in the micro -regions on which to build effective and sustainable 
community -based climate planning.  
This activity includes training and workshops by specialized technicians with the objecti ve of building the capacity 
of multiple stakeholders of the micro -regions on climate change related issues, as well as gender aspects applied 
to climate change planning and action, and empowering organizations/associations of producers.  
The activities to b e carried out include:  
● Workshops on adaptation to climate change, including use of climate information, and appropriate mitigation 
technologies (10 workshops). These include 2 trainings per micro -region: one to target technical staff and 
local authorities,  and one for organizations/associations  of smallholders.  
● Trainings on gender perspective (6 trainings) before the participatory process begins, that include 1 training 
per micro region for 30 stakeholders and 1 training for the technical staff that conform  the Technical 
Implementation  Unit).  
● Trainings on gender perspective (5 trainings, one per micro -region) for technical staff and stakeholders (20 
people)  during  the participative  processes  of climate  planning  and MAP  development.  
● Workshops (3 in total, 1 per year from year 3 to 5 of Programme implementation) targeting all the technical 
staff that is involved in the micro -regions to analyze and discuss the participation of women in the ongoing 
processes  and evaluate  activities  to improve  gender  equity  throu ghout  the Programme  implementation.  
● Trainings on organizational strengthening (5 in total, 1 per micro region) for technical staff and stakeholders, 
during the participative processes of climate planning and MAP development. These trainings will  include 
land tenure  approach.  
 
 
Activity 1.1.2 Learning exchanges on adaptation and mitigation experiences  
The objective of this activity is to disseminate successful mitigation and adaptation initiatives, in order to generate 
capacities, share lessons learned and promote the replication of climate action that is taking place in other areas 
of the country with a proven positive impact. For example, representatives of the micro -regions could be invited to 
visit the Adaptation Fund Project taking place in the North Ea stern provinces of Argentina to learn about self - 
constructed rainwater reservoirs.  
This  activity is  extremely relevant since  it has  been  proved that visiting successful case studies  allow for  very


---
*Page 24*
---

 
 
fruitful exchange between the participants, giving place to valuable discussions and raising awareness and 
enthusiasm on innovative projects. The peer -to-peer exchange on diverse adaptation and mitigation measures will 
allow local stakeholders of the micro -regions to learn about altern atives that they could incorporate to their local 
activities to increase their resilience and promote low -carbon development.  
This activity includes two learning exchange experiences one for each target of beneficiary of the grant facility, 
that is to say:  one experience exchange for smallholders, and one for local authorities. For each experience 
exchange  three  representatives  of each  micro -region  will be invited.  
 
 
Activity 1.1.3 Develop and disseminate training and dissemination materials on climate chan ge and grant facility  
This activity entails the elaboration and dissemination of materials to raise climate change awareness, describe 
the impact of climate change and present descriptions of adaptation and mitigation alternatives. This activity will 
also include the development of supporting materials for call for proposals of projects for the grant facility, and the 
dissemination of the materials through different channels. These materials will include for example information 
regarding grant facility wind ows, grant application process, roles and responsibilities in grant project development, 
among others.  
The activity includes at least 3 minor publications (flyers, radio, TV spots, others) for building capacity and 
supporting calls for proposals, and 3 hig h quality videos for the dissemination of implemented project activities will 
be developed.  
 
 
Output 1.2 Micro -regions with enhanced capacity to lead community -based adaptation and mitigation 
actions  
Activity 1.2.1 Micro -regional meetings for establishing institutional agreements on the participative processes and 
sharing information on grant facility  
In each micro -region, an ad -hoc association will be constituted as the institutional framework of the micro -region. 
This ad -hoc association will house multipl e-stakeholders representing all the members representing the public 
sector, the scientific -technological and private sectors that are related to the micro -region. Such institution will be 
responsible for developing the processes of local climate change imp act and mitigation potential diagnosis, the 
decision -making regarding the climate planning, and for overseeing the implementation of the MAP.  
The establishment of the micro -regional ad -hoc association is of key importance to strengthen and empower the 
local actors, and establish the building blocks that will guarantee the sustainability of the climate actions to be 
implemented throughout the Programme.  
This activity also includes the development of the necessary institutional arrangements and political agreements 
with the relevant stakeholders of the micro -region.  
It also includes meetings to disseminate information regarding the grant facility, the types of adaptation and 
mitigation projects that can be financed, the mechanisms and requirements of the p roject proposals, the criteria  
for proposal  evaluation,  the call for proposals,  among  others.  All stakeholders  of the micro -region  will be targeted.  
This activity includes 10 meetings (2 per micro -region) for the arrangements of the required institutional  
agreements between stakeholders.  
 
 
Activity 1.2.2 Participative workshops and technical support to micro -regions on access to grants  
This activity entails the development of workshops and meetings that target potential beneficiaries of the grant 
facility (public institutions and small -scale farmers) as well as technicians from local institutions that provide 
support to rural communities.  
The objective of this activity is to carry out the participatory process of elaboration of the MAPs and provide 
support to the stakeholders of  the micro -region to  develop the local adaptation  and mitigation  assessment  and


---
*Page 25*
---

 
 
climate planning.  
This activity includes technical support to institutions, communities and organizations of small -scale producers, 
indigenous communities, and rural workers, intended to improve their understanding on the potential adaptation 
measures that may reduce their vulnerability as well as identifying mitigation activities that could contribute to their 
low-carbon development.  
An interdisciplinary team of professionals will be hired to provide support to the stakeholders of the micro -region in 
preparing the MAPs. The conformation of the technical team is detailed in section C.7 of Implementation 
Arrangements.  
Each micro region w ill count with the participation of multi -stakeholders during the development of their Mitigation 
and Adaptation Plans. These multi -stakeholders will represent the public, scientific -technological and private 
sectors related to the micro -regions. These cou ld be, among others: associations of producers, individual 
producers, smallholders, local authorities, technical institutions.  
The local referents in each micro region together with the formulators and with support of the Technical Experts 
Team (TET) will lead the participatory process for the development of the MAPs (please refer to section C.7 
Implementation Arrangements for more details on the conformation of the technical team). Besides, there will be 
environmental, social, gender, organizational skills  and finance specialists that will also give support and 
strengthen local capacities for the MAPs and projects formulation.  
The Mitigation and Adaptation Plan (MAP) is meant to include all documents comprising the results of the process 
conducted by the ac tors of the micro -region together with the Territorial Formulation Team. The MAP summarizes 
the jointly formulated diagnosis and strategy to increase resilience and low -carbon development in the territory.  
The MAP must be formulated locally with a bottom -up approach with the active participation of the actors from the 
micro -region, who will prepare a document containing:  
1. An assessment of the climate change vulnerability and mitigation potential of the micro -region, which 
allows to identify opportunities and  structural limitations for the sustainable and resilient development of 
the territory. The conclusions from such analysis will be the springboard to outline a strategy that 
articulates  several  lines of action,  which  will be translated  then into projects.  
2. The resulting community -based mitigation and adaptation strategy of the micro -region, including the 
Vision,  Mission,  Strategic  Objectives  and Lines  of Action  to attain  the desired  scenario.  
3. The distribution of the assigned funds to each micro -region (4 mil lion per micro -region) amongst the two 
grant facility windows described in Component 2. The MAP must justify how the micro -region prefers to 
distribute the funds according to local  context.  
4. The prioritized public investment for the micro -region (concept note level). The project to be financed by 
output 2.1 needs to be defined in an early stage in order to be technically evaluated, fully developed and 
executed. Projects to be financed by grant facility window 2.2 will be presented according to the call for  
proposals  during  the following  4 years  after MAP  design  and do not need  to be included  in the MAP.  
This activity entitles the development of 20 forums (4 per micro region) during the first year and 45 inter -forum 
meetings (9 per micro region) during the f irst year. It also includes 2 workshops per micro region to bring technical 
support specifically for women on adaptation and mitigation technologies and to strengthen their capacities to 
access the grant facility (these activities are fully described in th e Gender Action Plan found in Annex III).  
The inter -forum meetings will be the participatory space for the representatives of the different actors from the 
micro -region for the development of the different contents of the MAP previously presented.  
The forums will be the space to communicate and share the results of the inter -forums with all the actors of the 
micro -region. This space will allow the legitimation of the strategic decisions in each instance of the development 
of the MAP.  
The documents formu lated as a result of these participative meetings will constitute the Mitigation and Adaptation


---
*Page 26*
---

 
 
Plan. The figure below outlines the methodology for the development of the MAPs.  
Regarding the private sector, during the training workshops (described within Activity 1.1.1) on technologies for 
adaptation and mitigation to climate change, the participation of technology providers will be promoted in order to 
expand knowledge and tools within the micro regions so as to enrich the investment pro posals that will be 
prioritized in the MAPs.  
The evaluation committee must approve the MAP and the included public investment project concept note, thus 
ensuring: i) that the MAP appropriately addresses the micro -region’s adaptation needs and mitigation po tential; 
and ii) the pertinence of the defined fund allocation to each one of the financing windows.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
 
 
 
STAGE  1 
 
Inter -forums  
Assessment of the climate change vulnerability and  
mitigation potential of  the micro -region.  Forum  I 
Identification of opportunities and structural limitations 
for the sustainable and resilient development of the 
territory.  
 
 
 
 
 
STAGE  2 
Inter -forums  
Community -based mitigation and  adaptation  strategy  Forum  II 
of the micro -region.  
Vision, Mission, Strategic Objectives and Lines of Action  
to attain the  desired  scenario.  M 
A 
P 
STAGE  3 
Inter -forums  
Distribution of the assigned funds to each micro - 
region (4 million per micro -region) amongst  the two Forum  III 
grant facility windows described in Component 2. 
Justification of the distribution of funds according to 
local context.  
 
 
 
 
 
STAGE 4  
 
Inter -forums  
Prioritized public investment  for the Forum  IV 
micro -region (concept note level).  
 
 
 
Methodology for the development of Mitigation and Adaptation Plans


---
*Page 28*
---

 
 
 
Activity 1.2.3 Technical support for proposal development and submission  
This activity entitles the technical support to strengthen the micro -regions capacity to develop and submit 
proposals to the grant facility. The activity targets proposal formulators who can be national institutions such as 
(INTA, INTI, SAF, provincial ministries, local authorities), NGOs that support rural communities and 
organizations/associations of producers.  
This act ivity will provide the necessary technical support to develop grant proposals that are aligned with the 
strategic lines of action defined in each MAP and with the grant facility requirements.  
This includes the development of studies to formulate projects, including detailed engineering design, pre - 
feasibility studies, environmental and gender studies, and definition of risk mitigation measures. The proposals 
must be approved by the Evaluation Committee in order to ensure the alignment of the projects with the GCF 
investment criteria and the strategy defined in the MAP.  
This activity includes defining monitoring mechanisms, systems and indicators: to control, evaluate and follow the 
initiatives in the MAP on adaptation, emission reduction, contribution to bi odiversity preservation, soil quality and 
other pertinent factors.  
In particular, this activity will finance:  
- The development of 5 studies (1 per micro region) for the formulation of systemic public projects and  
5 Environmental Impact Assessments, assumin g that 1 public work per micro region will be performed 
within  the type of projects  that exceed  UCAR's  capacities  (e.g. renewable  energy).  
- The development of 5 studies (1 per micro region) and 5 Environmental Impact Assessments, 
assuming that 1 public work  per micro region will be performed in the categories of water 
management, irrigation, drainage, or infrastructure that can be assessed by UCAR's existing 
formulation  teams  
- The hiring of 5 thematic experts to support local technical staff to build their capacity on formulating 
adaptation and mitigation projects. Only for the first year when the MAP will be elaborated,  5 
additional experts will be hired to attending all the capacity building processes that will take place in 
the 5  micro -regions.  
- The hirin g of 1 gender expert for proposal formulation and to provide support to women on the field. 
Only for the first year when the MAP will be elaborated, 1 additional gender expert will be required for 
supporting  all of the capacity  building  processes  that will take place  in the 5 micro -regions.  
 
 
Component 2: Adaptation and mitigation actions  
Output 2.1:  Systemic projects of public investment implemented  
Activity 2.1.1: Awarding and implementation of grants for systemic projects of public investment  
This activ ity is intended to contribute to the development and quality of infrastructure and services for the rural 
population through investments in public services or works of collective benefit. This grant facility window will 
finance projects related to rural re newable energy and energy efficiency, with public infrastructure that helps 
reduce vulnerability of the micro -region in the face of extreme events, and that will improve access to safe water.  
Public investment projects, due to their nature, shall meet technical, economic, and socio -environmental 
requirements pursuant to the size of such initiatives. Projects included in the Negative List of the ESMF will not be 
eligible, please refer to Annex IV for more information.  
The Programme will assure that projects include a climate change vulnerability analysis based in an assessment 
methodology that will be defined through the participatory process described previously in Component 1, and that 
the proposed investments are the most appropriate according to the diagnosis of  vulnerability. This approach will  
be achieved through the training of territory technicians and beneficiaries in climate change (through the activities


---
*Page 29*
---

 
 
planned in Component 1). In this way the Programme will ensure that GC F proceeds will cover incremental costs 
and co -financing of beneficiaries non -climate related costs.  
 Systemic projects of public investment   
Beneficiaries: ecosystems and communities of rural areas  
Scope  GCF Results areas of intervention:  
- Energy access and power generation (in particular renewable 
energy)  
- Buildings, cities and industries and appliances (in particular energy 
efficiency)  
- Forestry and land  use 
- Most vulnerable people and  communities  
- Health and well being, and food and water  security  
- Infrastructure works and climate -resilient building (in particular 
climate resilient  infrastructure)  
- Ecosystem and ecosystem services (in particular land planning  
and ecosystem  conservation)  
 
Project examples:  Generation of and access to renewable energy and 
energy efficiency in public buildings such as municipal buildings and public 
schools; works to prevent landslides due to heavy rains; infrastructure to 
prevent flooding, access to and storage of surface wat er and/or 
groundwater in public spaces such as parks or public schools; early 
warning systems and the respective contingency plans for the micro region 
or the municipality; community feeding systems for livestock in case 
extreme climatic events of drought or floods, reforestation and forest 
regeneration in fiscal lands for mitigation purposes and to reduce flooding, 
landslides and reduce erosion; recovery or restoration of vulnerable or 
degraded ecosystems; infrastructure to control of forest fires in the m icro- 
region; construction of new bridges that contemplate the increase in water 
level of the rivers caused by torrential rains; improvements in rural road 
infrastructure to increase its resilience to extreme rain events; recovery of 
areas affected by natu ral disasters; among others.  
 
For climate change analysis of investments please refer to Chapter 3, 
section 3.4 of the Feasibility Study.  
Maximum  sum  per  MAP :  2,000,000  USD  
Financial instrument:  non-reimbursable contribution  
Co-finance by public institution:  20% of the total amount of the project.  
A higher co -finance may be requested based on a case -by-case analysis, 
as appropriate, according to the sub -project in question.  
Co-finance:  monetary or in -kind


---
*Page 30*
---

 
 
 Eligible expenditure  Infrastructure and equipment  
Services for procurement and installation 
Non-consulting services  
Technical assistance services 
Trainings  
 
UCAR will have sole authority for the procurement of goods  and services 
for the Programme.   
Beneficiary  eligibility 
criteria  Grantee should be a public institution (of any level of government)  
Projects shall comply with technical, economic and socio -environmental 
requirements commensurate with the dimensions of the investments.  
Projects included in the Negative List of the ESMF will not be eligible. 
Investments must be aligned with the territorial diagnosis.  
 
Proposal development, evaluation, implementation and monitoring Process  
 
The systemic projects of public investment will be identified during the participatory processes in Component 1.  
1. A first draft of the idea/project will be prepared by the corresponding formulation team (UCAR or external) and 
submitted to the Technical Implementation Unit  (TIU).  
The draft shall include a description of the public institution that will be benefited by the public investment, as 
well as information on its capacity to operate and maintain the investment proposed.  
2. The TIU, with the support of the Technical Experts team and the UCAR’s Environmental and Social 
Management Unit and oth er UCAR’s technical and financial areas, will assess the conditions of the proposal 
through a diagnosis, as well as the pertinence, and environmental, social and economic viability of the 
proposed  project.  
The evaluation will also assess on the public inst itution’s capacity to operate and maintain the  project 
proposed and on the climate rationale of the project in order to assure that GCF proceeds cover the 
incremental costs in order to achieve adaptation and mitigation results.  
3. If the idea is approved, th e formulation is continued, defining the detail designed and the Operation and 
Maintenance  Plan.  
4. Once the Project is formulated, it is submitted to the TIU that performs the Completeness Check, then it goes 
to the Technical areas in UCAR that have the technical and financial capacities for evaluating the project, 
including the Environmental and Social Management  Unit. 
The evaluation by the Technical areas in UCAR will assure that the GCF proceeds cover the incremental 
costs in order to achieve adaptation and mitigation results, while the co -financing component will cover non - 
climate related costs and baseline  investment.  
5. The opinion of the Independent Technical Experts Committee will be searched and recommendation will be 
provided to the Evalua tion Committee.  
6. If the proposal is accepted, a bidding process is opened by the UCAR’s Procurement Area, following the 
standard procedures. UCAR will have the sole authority for the procurement of goods and services for the 
Programme.  
7. Contracts will be sig ned with the grantees (please refer to ANNEX I for model contracts for the different types 
of grants) and will contain all the necessary information for the execution of the Project directly in the text of 
the agreement or as an annex to it. The contract w ill also contemplate each partie’s obligations, including  the 
grantees  responsibilities  and plan for  operation and  maintenance of  the project. Please refer to section C.7


---
*Page 31*
---

 
 
Implementation Arrangements for details on flow of funds.  
8. Basic financial and physical indicators will be reported to the Programme in a period to be determined 
depending  on the type of project  and its  conditions.  This includes  the monitoring  of the local co-finance.  
9. The Programme  will conduct  regular  audits  in order  to monitor  the functioning.  
 
Output 2.2: Adaptation and mitigation projects for organizations and associations of smallholders 
implemented  
 
Activity 2.2.1: Awarding and implementation of grants for adaptation and mitigation projects for organizations and 
associations of smallholders  
 
This activity is intended to finance comprehensive and innovative climate adaptation and mitigation projects for 
organizations/associations and cooperatives of small -scale producers. Rural development programmes in the 
micro -regions will finance productive investments. These grants will finance climate related investments to 
increase the resilience of small -scale producers in the face of climate variability and extreme events that are 
intensified as a result of global wa rming. These grants will also finance mitigation measures associated to 
improvements in soil management, access to renewable energy, low -carbon agriculture and forest management.  
 
Comprehensive projects are those addressing the climate issue with a systemi c approach by aiming to solve  
more than one problem at the time instead of focusing on only one aspect. Such projects need to cover the social, 
environmental and economic dimensions, and introduce high -impact practices and technologies, and appreciation 
for ancestors' knowledge, seeking to enhance resilience of small -scale producers in the face of climate change 
whilst contributing to  mitigation.  
 
Beneficiary profile: Small -scale family agriculture producers6 (A, B, C) who produce for their self -consumptio n 
with a surplus production for the market. They can be conformed in organizations, groups, associations and 
cooperatives.  
 
Type of support: These producers are very vulnerable to extreme climate events and require a Non - 
Reimbursable Contribution “in adva nce” in order to improve their adaptation capacity to climate variability. In case 
of an extreme climate event the cost of assistance is high and the risk of recovery is also high; consequently, the 
support by means of a Non -Reimbursable Contribution that covers 90% of the investment is convenient. The co - 
finance is usually comprised by labour force of the producers themselves.  
 
This type of producer, due to its small -scale production, usually group or associate with others in order to carry  
out several  activities,  such  as productive,  commercial,  or social  activities.  
 
In this respect, “off -farm” investments (of collective use) are highly important to strengthen these associative 
processes, which will allow the continuity of this small -scale producer and increase its resilience to climate 
change.  
 
6 
Type A family producers : These are small -scale family producers who do not have enough resources to live solely on the produce of 
their units. That is why they must resort to work outside their units. They su stain strong structural poverty conditions.  
Type B family producers : These are small -scale family producers who have patently little resources (land, capital, equipment), which 
makes it difficult for them to broaden their production system and grow. Simple  reproduction is the form activity is maintained. They 
have a highly sporadic relation with the produce market.  
Type C family producers : They are mostly producers in relation to markets and with some level of minimum capitalization and fairly 
consolidated associative forms. All these categories present NBI indicators that classify them as poor.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
 
Therefore, the projects can include two type of investments: investments off -farm (of collective use) and 
investments on -farm (individual investments) . This means that, for example, an association of producers that 
produce fruit jam can incorporate solar panels to the shared building where they process the fruit and can also 
invest in on -farm rainwater reservoirs to overcome the increasingly long dry se ason.  
 Adaptation and mitigation projects for organizations and associations of smallholders   
Beneficiaries: organizations, groups, associations and cooperatives of family agriculture producers  
Scope  GCF Results areas of intervention:  
- Energy  access  and power  generation  (in particular  renewable  energy)  
- Forestry and land  use 
- Most vulnerable people and  communities  
- Health and well being, and food and water security (in particular low -carbon 
and climate -resilient agricultural production, sustainable and integrated 
management of natural resources, water  management)  
- Ecosystem and ecosystem services (in particular land planning and 
ecosystem  conservation)  
 
Project examples : conservation and management of ecosystems; ecological 
management of pests, weeds and diseases; regeneration of degraded soils through 
the use of organic fertilizers or green fertilizers; diversification of productive 
systems; local water management, systems to improve water quality; erosion 
control; treatment of wastewater; eco -tourism; pr eservation and sustainable 
management of forests, agro -forestry systems with native  species;  efficient 
irrigation,  use of effluents  for aquaculture,  bioclimatic  building,  others.  
 
For climate change analysis of investments please refer to Chapter 3, section 3.4 of 
the Feasibility Study.  
 
Financial instruments:  Non-reimbursable contributions  
Maximum sum per MAP assigned:  2,000,000 USD  
Maximum sum per project:  200,000 USD (may include a combination of collective 
and on -farm investments)  
Maximum sum for collective investments per family:  10,000 USD 
Maximum sum for on -farm investments per family:  5,000 USD  
Co-finance by small -scale producers:  10% of the total amount of the project 
(maximum 20,000 USD per project)  
Co-finance:  in money or in -kind 
Eligible 
expenditure  Infrastructure and equipment  
Services for procurement and installation 
Non-consulting services  
Technical assistance services 
Trainings


---
*Page 33*
---

 
 
 Eligibility 
criteria  Organizations, groups, associations and cooperatives of family agriculture 
producers, typology A, B and C7: at least 80% of the members must be clearly 
qualified within these categories.  
 
Annual net family income must be less than the equivalent of twice the Monthly 
salary corresponding to a rural pawn for the term of one year according to the CNTA 
(National Commission of Agricultural Work).*  
 
Investments must be aligned with the territorial diagnosis.  
 
Vulnerability of beneficiaries to climate change according to the assessment 
methodology to be defined in the participatory process.   
* The rural pawn salary is currently 10.368 Argentinean pesos, which is equivalent to USD 589 per 
month –data of the Wage Scale of Agricultural Workers 2016 -2017. The annual average income of 
the rural pawn is 7.657 USD. However, most of the beneficiaries are rural smallholder or subsistence 
farmers, who are not employed full time as rural pawns. They mostly make money from odd jobs, 
have some livestock or agriculture production and receive government contributions to subsist.  
 
According to the National Statistics Institute (INDEC), the basic food basket per household  
comprised by 2 adults and 2 children is estimated to be USD 842 per month (year 2017). The 
average monthly salary in the country for the private sector is USD 1.344 p er month -data of the 
National Ministry of Labor (2017). Thus, the annual average income for the private sector is USD 
17.472.  
 
It is observed that the annual average income of the rural pawn is under the 50% of the annual 
average income for the private sector.  
 
To determine the eligibility, the rural smallholder sums up the entire income received by the whole 
family in a month, including government pensions and contributions, and then it is multiplied by 13. 
This yearly income is compared to the paramete r of twice the rural pawn salary also annualized, 
which is USD 15.314. In order to be eligible as grantee, the annual income household of the rural 
smallholder cannot exceed this amount.  
 
Proposal development, evaluation, implementation and monitoring Process  
 
The formulation of the adaptation and mitigation projects for smallholders will not involve costs for the 
beneficiaries and will be done by the Technical Experts Team with support of technical staff from other institutions 
(Formulators, for more i nformation please refer to section on Implementation Arrangements on the Funding 
Proposal)  and together  with the applicant  smallholder  association/organization.  
 
7 Type A family producers : These are small -scale family producers who do not have enough resources to live solely 
on the produce of their units. That is why they must resort to work outside their units. They sustain strong structural 
poverty  conditions.  
Type B family producers : These are small -scale family producers who have patently little re sources (land, capital, 
equipment), which makes it difficult for them to broaden their production system and grow. Simple reproduction is the 
form activity is maintained. They have a highly sporadic relation with the produce market.  
Type C family producers : They are mostly producers in relation to markets and with some level of minimum 
capitalization and fairly consolidated associative forms. All these categories present NBI indicators that classify them 
as poor.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
 
 
The Programme will assure th at projects include a climate change vulnerability analysis based in an assessment 
methodology that will be defined through the participatory process described previously in Component 1, and that 
the proposed investments are the most appropriate according to the diagnosis of vulnerability. This approach will 
be achieved through the training of territory technicians and beneficiaries in climate change (through the activities 
planned in Component 1). In this way the Programme will ensure that GCF proceeds wil l cover incremental costs 
and co -financing of beneficiaries non -climate related costs.  
 
There will be a call for proposals, and the presented projects will be present through the Local Referents. The 
Technical Implementation Unit will carry out a completeness check to determine if the project meets the 
requirements indicated.  
 
The Technical Implementation Unit will assess on the grantee’s vulnerability to climate change and that the  
project proposed responds to a climate related necessity. Therefo re, the evaluation team will assure that the GCF 
proceeds cover the incremental costs for adaptation and mitigation, while co -financing by the grantee will cover 
non-climate related costs and baseline  investments.  
The proposal then goes to the consideratio n of the UCAR’s Environmental and Social Unit that will assess the 
environmental and social impacts and mitigation actions (for more details please refer to ESMF in ANNEX IV).  
If these assessments are positive, the proposal is sent to the Independent Techn ical Experts Committee that will 
issue  an opinion  and a recommendation  for the evaluation  of the Approval  Committee.  If appropriate,  the technical 
and economic viability of the proposals will be  evaluated.  
 
The Proposals that meet all the requirements detailed in the following paragraph will have an opinion 
recommending their approval. This opinion will be reliably communicated to the beneficiaries.  
 
The main aspects that the Committee shall consider in the evaluation and decision of approval or denial of 
proposals are:  
o That the beneficiary belongs to the target  population,  
o That the beneficiary is vulnerable to climate  change  
o That the proposal  is technically  viable  and economically  profitable  
o That the investment involves adaptation or  mitigation,  
o That the presentation fulfills all formal  aspects.  
o The contribution of the proposal to the achievement of the Programme's objectives and to the objectives 
of the Green Climate Fund, consistency with GCF’s investment  criteria.  
o The consistency among the proposal's objectives, the Programme's strategic guidelines, and the Fund's 
result management  framework.  
o That GCF proceeds cover the incremental costs for adaptation and mitigation, while co -financing by the 
beneficiary  covers  non-climate  related  costs  and baseline  investments.  
o The consistency between the investment, technical support and/or training proposals with the diagnosis 
posed, as well as the consistency between the diagnosis and the comprehensive approach to the issues 
posed  
o The level of impact  expected  and the degree  of ownership  of the benefits  on the part of the communities  
o Grantees’ implementing capacity, the duration of sub -projects to align with the projects’ implementing 
period.  
o Empowerment and autonomy of men and women in relation to partici pation, decision making, access and 
control of resources, technological tools and  training.  
o Project’s viability and sustainability over  time.  
o Its contribution  to the inclusion  of women,  young  population  and indigenous  peoples.  
 
The Eligibility opinion recommending approval will be raised with a note that will contain a determined 
disbursement scheme based on the purchases planned in the Project and the counterpart contributions, which  
may be in kind.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
 
 
Every grant will have a contract signed and the scheme of disbursements will be agreed in each subproject in a 
case by case modality: they will be defined at the stage of the subproject proposal that will be reviewed by the 
Committees and definitively agreed upon contract signing. For agr eements / contracts with these and other 
parties, please refer to Annex I, Contract models.  
 
The disbursement schedule shall imply two or more disbursements. It may consider that a first advance of funds 
lower than 30% of the Non -reimbursable grant will be  made (% will be defined in the proposal and upon 
agreement signature). This amount and the contribution of co -finance corresponding to the stage of the project  
will be fully paid before a new disbursement exceeding 40% of the approved Non -reimbursable gr ant is made (% 
will be defined in the proposal and upon agreement signature). Finally, once this second disbursement and the 
corresponding counterpart contribution are paid, the final amount of the approved Non -reimbursable grant will be 
transferred. The B eneficiary will undertake to pay the last disbursement and the corresponding co -finance 
contribution.  
 
Besides, subprojects that foresee the purchase of equipment may choose to make the payment directly to the 
supplier. In these cases, UCAR will pay the corresponding amount to the supplier upon accountability report of 
beneficiary’s payment to the supplier.  
 
For details on Flow of Funds, please refer to section C.7 Implementation Arrangements.  
 
The beneficiaries will be reliably informed of the provision approved by the Non -reimbursable grant, granting a 
term of up to 45 (forty -five) calendar days from the notification for the signing of agreement.  
 
The regulatory agreement will be signed by and between UCAR and the Beneficiary and will contain all the 
information necessary for the execution of the Project directly in the text of the agreement or as an annex to it.  
 
Among other points, the agreement to subscribe must include the following:  
• Approved Non -reimbursable grant total  amount  
• Duration  
• Disbursements  programme;  
• Data of the account to which the funds will be  transferred.  
 
The agreement will indicate the penalty in case of breach of any of the requirements established therein.  
 
The expense report must be made according to procedures contained in a Manual , which will be delivered to the 
beneficiaries at the time of signing the agreement. A technician in territory will accompany the beneficiary during 
the execution of the project and will provide assistance to make the acquisitions and draw up the accountab ility 
documents.  
 
Documentation related to incurred expenses effectively paid, will be presented along with a copy of the invoices 
together with official receipts / bank transfer vouchers / copies of checks and bank statements.  
 
The beneficiary must accompany each accountability with an explanatory note of the expenses incurred, detailing 
also Name and Last Name, Name of Bank, Branch, Account Number and CBU [Bank Account Identification 
Number], where the non -refundable grant must be deposited.  
 
The an alysis of expense report will be carried out by the Technical Implementation Unit. They will issue an opinion 
regarding the verifiable products, the technical relevance of the expenses, as well as the validity of the vouchers 
presented.  
 
In case the approv al is for a lower amount, the next disbursement will deduct the amount not approved and it will 
not be  validated until the  objection is  amended. If  this  is  not  possible,  the  beneficiary must bear  this  cost to


---
*Page 36*
---

 
 
prevent the project from failing. If the presentation is rejected, the following disbursements cannot be continued 
until an approved accountability is submitted.  
 
The projects will be audited before the last disbursement of the total amount of Non -reimbursable grant approved 
is performed.  
 
 
Procedure for the monitoring of the co -finance in the projects destined to smallholders  
 
In order to carry out the survey of the contribution made by small producers to the development of projects under 
Output 2.2, a survey form will be des igned to be applied every six months. This instrument will compile the 
declarations of the members of the organizations or associative groups in terms of the contributions either in 
money or species made available in order to execute the investments.  
 
Outp ut 2.2 activities consider a co -finance of 10% to be assumed by the Organization. In this sense, the object of 
the survey is not only the verification of this contribution, but also the detection of participation and/or articulation 
with other agencies or institutions that could result in leveraged investments from the execution of the project.  
 
The surveyed categories are:  
1. Supplies: e.g. seeds.  
2. Transportation  and mobility:  freight  - fuel costs  for attending  meetings  or carrying  out project  tasks  
3. Labor: for project constructions - installation of  investments  
4. Machinery - work tools: refers to any equipment that has been acquired after the project was carried out 
and in relation to it with own  contributions.  
5. Expenditure for construction or service facilities: investment in complementary constructions for the 
execution of the project financed by the organization or contributions from other institutions. Facilities of 
services, such as light, gas,  etc. 
6. Recruitment of professionals: technicians / staff hired and p aid by the organization to support the 
Project  
7. Taxes  or services:  paid for the operation  of the project  facilities  or by the project  itself.  
8. Investments  for productive  purposes:  for example  animals  - pastures  for the realization  of the project.  
9. Acquisition of land: purchase of land for project  facilities  
10. Operating expenses of  notary  
11. Other contributions: that have been made in the framework of the project by the organization or other 
organizations: municipalities, NGOs,  etc. 
 
The declared activities are monetized according to the value referred to in the local market.  
 
Activity 2.2.2: Awarding and implementation of self -managed revolving funds for adaptation and  mitigation 
projects for organizations and associations of smallholders  
This activity will provide finance through Self -Managed Revolving Funds; these are funds made up of resources  
(in money or in kind), managed by an organization of rural producers with a degree of institutional maturity, 
previously evaluated and trained, with t he objective of making small loans to its associates, which the 
Organization recovers in order to lend them  again.  
 
The operation is established through a Regulation (or set of rules), prepared and agreed by the members of the 
Organization with the assista nce of the Programme and capacity building trainings. Loan repayment plans and 
guarantee mechanisms must be adapted to the characteristics of the producer, his income, his conditions and 
economic activity. Besides, RFs are managed directly by the members o f the Rural Organization, seeking to 
improve social control, reduce transaction costs and empower the organization through a participative process. 
Please  refer  to  the  Chapter  3,  Section  3.6.4  of  the  Feasibility  Study  for  more  detailed  infor mation  on the  
characteristics and implementation of Self -Managed Revolving Funds for smallholders. Please refer to Chapter 1, 
Section 1.3.2.2 of the Feasibility Study for more information on UCAR’s background experience in implementing


---
*Page 37*
---

 
 
Self-Managed Revolving Funds.  
 
The grant is awarded to a formal organization of producers that develop (or are developing) an associative 
productive project. It is not meant for persons or producers that meet for the purpose of obtaining a credit fund or 
accessing a financing source, but for producers sharing an economic activity. The Credit Fund’s purpose is not to 
make a financial profit, but rather to foster an associative project which must be profitable.  
Funds from UCAR to the organizations that will use them as self -managed revolving funds will be transferred as 
non-reimbursable grants. This means that the funds will be allocated to the organizations for the settlement of the 
revolving funds, and UCAR won’t receive any money back from the operation of  this activity. On the other hand, 
funds from the organizations to the borrowers will be transferred as loans at low interest (in money or in kind). The 
members of the organization, the borrowers, will return the  loan according to previously established g uidelines, 
and according to the agreement signed between the borrower and the organization (please refer to Annex I for 
models of agreements between UCAR and the organizations and between the latter and the borrowers). Once the 
loan is returned to the orga nization, the funds will be assigned to new members of the organization, in order to 
continue with the functioning of the revolving fund.  
It is important to highlight that:  
- The functioning of the self -managed revolving fund must be established by a written  set of rules which must 
be agreed between the Programme and the Rural Organization. Beneficiaries may participate in the 
amendment of agreements and rules in order for them to be better adapted to changes. The rules establish 
dispute  resolution  mechanisms , which  are adapted  to local conditions.  
- Loan repayment plans and guarantee mechanisms must be adapted to the characteristics of the producer, his 
income, his conditions and economic activity. Formal guarantees are not required, though they could be 
applie d depending on the  project.  
- Management seeks to be participatory. The fund is administered directly by the producers: they are involved 
in setting up its  regulation.  
And, besides, that the interest rate that may be applied does not look forward to generate  an income to the 
organization but rather avoid the loss of value of the fund due to inflation.  
Please refer to section C.7 for further details on Flow of funds.  
Contracts will be signed with the grantees (please refer to ANNEX I for model contracts for th e different types of 
grants) and will contain all the necessary information for the execution of the Project directly in the text of the 
agreement or as an annex to it. The contract will also contemplate each partie’s obligations, including the  
grantees r esponsibilities and plan for operation and maintenance of the project. Please refer to section C.7 
Implementation Arrangements for details on flow of  funds.  
The provision of the revolving funds from UCAR to the rural organizations and from these to the ult imate 
beneficiaries is not a regulated activity. In the first case it implies the provision of a non -reimbursable grant. In the 
second case, it is a private agreement between private parties and besides the activity does not imply a financial 
profit to the  organization since it receives and manages a grant from UCAR.  
 
Rationale for supporting Self -Managed Revolving Funds for smallholders  
 
Although projects might require important investments in infrastructure and equipment, there are also significant 
expend itures that projects require in order to be successfully implemented. These expenditures (working capital) 
are recovered as long as the project develops (mostly within one -year period). Loans should not exceed the 
necessary amount in order to obtain benefi ts and they should be repaid in a short term.  
For example, small -scale producers in the northern provinces are exposed to droughts in increased frequency  
and  intensity.  The fact  that  they are  subsistence  farmers makes  them  extremely vulnerable  to   these climate  
events because they do not count with the necessary resources to buy animal feed during these critical periods of 
drought. Additionally, animal feed is scarce and its price increases. Moreover, family agriculture producers do not


---
*Page 38*
---

 
 
have access to credit or other financial alternatives. Consequently, the Programme’s proposed Self -Managed 
Revolving Fund gives the vulnerable producers the possibility to access finance to buy and stock animal feed at a 
good price before t he drought period and in this way become more resilient to climate change.  
 
Some other examples would be:  
- supplies to support resilient low -carbon agriculture such as animal feed (to stock for drought or flood periods), 
seeds of more resistant crop varieties, organic fertilizers, improvements in irrigation systems and water, 
improvements  in livestock  management  by building  corrals,  among  others.  
- supplies for equipment maintenance and sustainability, such as replacement of batteries for renewable ener gy 
systems,  or renewal  of energy  efficient  appliances,  among  others.  
- supplies to increase the resilience of infrastructure to climate events, such isolation of constructions, maintaining 
the water drainage systems in the land, among  others.  
 
Normally, small rural organizations, and their members (small farmers), don´t have access to formal credit. The 
credit they may get is generally informal and expensive and mainly provided by suppliers or oligopsonic buyers.  
Regarding market rates, those available fo r bank loans, are around 20%. However, as mall rural organizations  
and their members don’t have access to formal credit, these rates do not apply for them. An alternative for them 
would be to access microcredits that not only greatly exceed the bank loans  rate, but also do not serve to acquire 
many of the investments that are proposed within the Programme. Therefore, the revolving fund beneficiaries do 
not have access to other types of  financing.  
 
Financial constraints might jeopardize the success of the p rojects. That is why funds used for giving credit within 
members of a rural organization help them to access fairer credit conditions as well as to enhance its role as a 
service providing organization.  
Although, these revolving funds will be used exclusively to promote projects for mitigation and adaptation, this  
fund management helps the organization to strengthen its administrative capacities. Besides, the rate applied 
within the revolving fund will be determined according to the necessities so that the fund does not decapitalize 
and taking  into account  the possibilities  of the producers  as well. 
 
Finally, the use of successful revolving funds will contribute to the sustainability of the projects and the 
implementation of credit tools within a co mmunity therefore empowering the community.  
 
The idea is that the revolving funds do not end but continue to provide funding within the organization even 
beyond the Programme’s lifetime. However, as the programme has a term, monitoring will be carried out during its 
implementation, and could continue after the Programme’s lifetime in the case UCAR considers it necessary.  
 
Since the revolving fund complements an associative project financed through Activity 2.2.1 there is a security for 
adequate management t hat is related to the need of financing in order to keep carrying out the associative 
productive project. This allows to solve other conflicts, unlike traditional micro -credits:  
1. Belonging to the  group  
2. Concrete possibility of income improvement due to the  credit.  
3. Adequacy of the credit to the concrete need of the  taker.  
4. Reduction of operations’  costs.  
 
The Programme will assure that projects include a climate change vulnerability analysis based in an assessment 
methodology that will be defined through the participatory process described previously in Component 1, and that 
the proposed investments are the most appropriate according to the diagnosis of vulnerability. This approach will 
be achieved through the training of territory technicians and beneficiarie s in climate change (through the activities 
planned in Component 1). In this way the Programme will ensure that GCF proceeds will cover incremental costs.


---
*Page 39*
---

 
 
 Adaptation and mitigation projects for organizations and associations of smallholders   
Beneficiaries: Formal organizations of family agriculture producers that are implementing a project from 
output 2.2.1  
Scope  GCF Results areas of intervention:  
- Energy  access  and power  generation  (in particular  renewable  energy)  
- Forestry and land  use 
- Most vulnerable people and  communities  
- Health and well being, and food and water security (in particular low -carbon 
and climate -resilient agricultural production, sustainable and integrated 
management of natural resources, water  management)  
- Ecosystem and ecosystem services (in particular land planning and 
ecosystem  conservation)  
 
Investment examples:  organic fertilizers for resilient low -carbon agriculture  
production; animal feed to stock in case of drought or floods; replacement or 
maintena nce of batteries of renewable energy systems; supplies to improve the 
resilience of infrastructure to extreme climate events; supplies to improve the 
efficiency  and maintenance  of water  irrigation  systems  or access  to safe water.  
 
For climate change analys is of investments please refer to Chapter 3, section 3.4 of 
the Feasibility Study.  
 
Financial instruments:  Self-Managed Revolving Funds  
 
Maximum sum per MAP assigned:  100,000 USD 
Maximum sum per project:  50,000 USD 
Maximum sum per family:  3,000 USD  
Eligible 
expenditure  Working capital linked to investments in projects from activity 2.2.1.  
Eligibility criteria  Formal Rural Organizations of family agriculture producers, typology A, B and C8: at 
least 80% of the members must be clearly qualified within these categories.  
 
Annual net family income must be less than the equivalent of twice the Monthly salary  
 
 
8 Type A family producers : These are small -scale family producers who do not have enough resources to live solely 
on the produce of their units. That is why they must resort to work outside their units. They sustain strong structural 
poverty  conditions.  
Type B family producers : These are small -scale family producers who have patently little resources (land, capital, 
equipment), which makes i t difficult for them to broaden their production system and grow. Simple reproduction is the 
form activity is maintained. They have a highly sporadic relation with the produce market.  
Type C family producers : They are mostly producers in relation to market s and with some level of minimum 
capitalization and fairly consolidated associative forms. All these categories present NBI indicators that classify them 
as poor.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
 
  corresponding to a rural pawn for the term of one year according to the CNTA.* 
Investments must be aligned with the territorial diagnosis.  
Vulnerability of beneficiaries to climate change according to the assessment 
methodology to be defined in the participatory process.  
 
The Rural Organizations must comply with the following:  
 
● They must possess legal personality and be formally registered with the 
government body that regulates its  type.  
● Their authorities must be in  office.  
● Their  Bylaws  shall allow  them  to carry  out the Project´s  activities.  
● They shall not owe unpaid debts from judicial collection process to official 
National or Provincial Programs or  Projects.  
● They shall hold a bank  account.  
● The Rural Organizations should not necessarily have experience in managing 
revolving  credit  funds  since  they can be trained  during  the Programme.   
* The rural pawn salary is currently 10.368 Argentinean pesos, which is equivalent to USD 589 per 
month –data of the Wage Scale of Agricultural Workers 2016 -2017. The annual average income of the 
rural pawn is 7.657 USD. However, most of the  beneficiaries are rural smallholder or subsistence 
farmers, who are not employed full time as rural pawns. They mostly make money from odd jobs, have 
some livestock or agriculture production and receive government contributions to subsist.  
 
According to t he National Statistics Institute (INDEC), the basic food basket per household comprised by 
2 adults and 2 children is estimated to be USD 842 per month (year 2017). The average monthly salary 
in the country for the private sector is USD 1.344 per month -data of the National Ministry of Labor 
(2017). Thus, the annual average income for the private sector is USD 17.472.  
 
It is observed that the annual average income of the rural pawn is under the 50% of the annual average 
income for the private sector.  
To determine the eligibility, the rural smallholder sums up the entire income received by the whole family 
in a month, including government pensions and contributions, and then it is multiplied by 13. This yearly 
income is compared to the parameter of twice t he rural pawn salary also annualized, which is USD  
15.314. In order to be eligible as grantee, the annual income household of the rural smallholder cannot 
exceed this amount.  
 
How the Self -Managed Revolving Fund works  
 
- The SMRF  is created  from a non-reimbursable  grant  from the Programme,  conditional  to its proper  use. 
- This grant  is received  after the Rural  Organization  signs  a formal  agreement  with the Programme.  
- The functioning of the self -managed revolving fund must be established by a written set of rules which must 
be agreed between the Programme and the Rural Organization. Beneficiaries may participate in the 
amendment of agreements and rules in order for them to be better adapted to changes. The rules establish 
dispute  resolution  mechanisms,  which  are adapted  to local conditions.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
 
- Loan repayment plans and guarantee mechanisms must be adapted to the characteristics of the producer, his 
income, his conditions and economic activity. Formal guarantees are not required, though they could be 
applied depending on the  project.  
- Management seeks to be participatory. The fund is administered directly by the producers: they are involved  
in setting up its  regulation.  
- There  is control  on the compliance  of the rules  as well as penalty  possibilities.  
In order to avoid capital loss due to non -repaid grants, the Programme will accompany the Rural Organization’s 
process to define the revolving funds from the beginning, working strongly with producers on the idea that non - 
compliance with the re -fund harms the financing capacity affecting other members of the organization that will be 
unable to access credit. One of the alternatives that will be recommended in order to avoid this risk is that the  
fund allocates an amount to cover these cas es. For this, a percentage can be included in each credit, as a 
forecast of bad  debts.  
Project Formulation, Assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
1. The Programme will make a call for the presentations of SMRF projects, announcing the selection criteria for 
eligible Rural Organizations and  Projects.  
2. Rural  Organizations  will apply  through  an application  form,  presenting  a first draft of the idea/project.  
3. The Programme will assess the conditions of the Rural Organizations through a diagnosis, as well as the 
pertinence and economic viability of the proposed project. The Programme will assess as well that GCF 
proceeds cover the incremental costs for adaptation and  mitigation.  
4. If the project idea is approved the Rural Organization, with support of  the Territori al Formulation Team  and 
the Technical Implementation Unit, formulates the project. This includes defining the required amount of the 
grant, targets and payments plan, and preparing the regulation for the SMRF. The disposal of a common  
good (in this case,  the fund) is adjusted to local conditions through the Rules drafted by the Organization 
itself.  
5. Once the Project is formulated as well as the Regulation, the Programme will make an initial payment. 
Conditional  disbursements  will be made  subject  to the Project  goals’  achievement.  
6. The Rural Organization shall be provided with proper training for it to make a good use of the Fund and 
systematically register the operations conducted. Moreover, it shall submit a report with basic financial 
indicators to the Programme every six  months.  
7. The Programme will conduct regular audits in order to monitor the functioning. The Programme will carry out 
backing  and monitoring  activities  for the Organizations  that benefit  from these  Projects.  
Backing and monitoring activities by UCAR’s Rural Finance area (which depends on the area of 
competitiveness within UCAR) will be carried out during the Programme’s implementation and beyond the 
Programme’s lifespan for organizations that do require it. For more details on UCAR’ s organization chart and 
main areas involved in the Programme’s implementation please refer to section C.7 in the Funding Proposal.  
8. The Programme may require a return of the  funds.  
Implementation and monitoring methodology  
 
Within the Competitiveness and Non-reimbursable Grants Unit of the Area of Programmes and Projects 
Management of UCAR, the Rural Finance Sector was created with the aim of facilitating access to rural financial 
services for small producers.  
In this sense, the Rural Finance Sector counts  with a trained team that works in the constitution of Revolving 
Funds in the different rural development programmes carried out by UCAR, giving support and training the rural 
organizations to help them generate their financial management capacity.  
This se ctor will work closely with the Technical Implementation Unit and the Territorial Formulation Team all along 
the Project Formulation, Assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation that has been described before.  
The Programme, through the Rural Finance Sector (thr ough the financial specialist foreseen in the budget) will


---
*Page 42*
---

 
 
train the Rural Organizations directly, and the territory technicians as well in order to  generate responsiveness 
and assistance in the territory too. Based on UCAR’s experience, an implementation and monitoring methodology 
has been drawn up, which consists of four steps that we define as key stages in the implementation process of a 
SMRF. For each of these steps, the respective backup material has been developed . 
The four key steps are the following:  
 
Management of  
Diagnosis  of the Drafting  of the  the Self- Performance 
Organization   Rules  Managed   Assesment  
Revolvinf Fund  
 
Figure 2. Four keys steps for implementation and monitoring methodology  
 
Source : Prepared by the authors.  
 
 
For these steps to be put into practice, meetings with members of the organization implementing the SMRF will 
take place with the support of UCAR’s financial specialists that count with an understanding of the methodology.  
 
The material d esigned for the application of the methodology consists of:  
1. Diagnosis  of Organizations  for the Development  of Self-Managed  Revolving  Funds  
2. Practical  Guide  for the Drafting  of the Self-Managed  Revolving  Funds’  rules.  
3. Instructions  for Management  and Registration  of Self-Managed  Revolving  Funds  
4. Instructions for Assessment of Self -Managed Revolving  Funds  
Regarding the registration specifically, alternatives have been sought in order to adapt it to each organization’s 
reality and the needs expressed by u sers. By way of example, the forms designed as backup documentation for 
the register may be used in digital format (spreadsheets) and/or in printed format (register notebook), in such a 
way that either the organizations that can operate computers or the on es that keep their records in printed format 
may complete them, always with the purpose of improving the management skills of the organizations and 
producers using the tool.  
 
In order to foster those most advances organizations with more complex operations , UCAR has developed 
straightforward management programme software, which allows systematizing registrations.  
 
As it has already been addressed, the Rural Organizations shall submit a report with basic financial indicators to 
the Programme every six months . These reports must be made according to procedures contained in a Manual 
that will be delivered to the RO at the time of signing the agreement.  
The analysis of the report will be carried out by the Technical Implementation Unit (with the support of UCAR’ s 
financial specialist from the Rural Finance Sector). They will issue an opinion regarding the use of the funds. On - 
site visits will be carried out as well for territory verification.  
Self-managed revolving funds will be monitored during the implementation of the Programme and monitoring 
could  continue  after the Programme’s  lifetime  in the case  UCAR  considers  it necessary.  
The idea is that the revolving funds do not end but continue to provide funding within the organization even 
beyond  the Programme’s  lifetime.  However,  as the programme  has a term,  monitoring  will be carried  out during  its 
implementation,  and could  continue  after the Programme’s  lifetime  in the case  UCAR  considers  it necessary.  
 
Programme activities related to Self -Managed Revolving Funds  
 
Component 1 includes the development of training activities and workshops related to supporting organizations  
for the implementation of Self -Managed Revolving Funds, preparing the set of rules for the functioning of the 
Credit  Fund.  The  Programme  will  also  carry  out  capacity  building  activities  regarding  administration  and


---
*Page 43*
---

 
 
accountability and monitoring.  
 
Additionally, costs of evaluating the organizations that present themselves to the call for proposals for Self- 
Managed Revolving Funds is included in the Budget.  
 
 
Rationale for budget allocation and outputs delivered  
17 million USD from the GCF will be made available for investments in:  
- Systemic projects of public investment: in the Programme’s budget, 8 million USD, co -finance by local 
governments of 20%, equaling to 2 million USD). This is equivalent to 2 million USD per micro region to be 
assigned to this type of investment. 8 systemic projects of public investment are expected to be implemented 
within the 5  micro -regions.  
For detail on this estimation please refer to Annex VII and VIII where assumptions on the resource allocation and 
average cost of projects are included.  
- Adaptation and mitigation projects for smallholders: 9 million USD in grants and 5 00,000 USD in revolving funds. 
In the case of grants, the co -financing of the beneficiaries would equal 1 million USD; and UCAR would assign a 
co-financing of around 500,000 USD in rural development projects that will be related to the climate change 
initiatives funded by the GCF. All in all, grants would allow performing adaptation and mitigation projects for 1,750 
families,  and revolving  funds  would  allow  financing  for 415families.  
As many activities can be combined in the sub projects formulated by rural  smallholders associations, or 
associative groups, an average of 5,714 USD per beneficiary is assumed. This average amount is estimated 
based on the historical average investment per family in rural development programs implemented by UCAR.  
According to th is assumption, the total beneficiaries for the sub -component are estimated to be 1,750 (USD 
10,000,000/USD 5,714=1,750).  
Adding the 16 million USD from the GCF and the 3 million USD of the beneficiaries co -finance, 19 million USD will 
be directed to investments in climate change related projects, that is to say 3.8 million per micro region. During  
the participative projects of the first year, each micro region will decide the type and scale of projects that will be 
financed, and will be allowed to re assign 10% of the 3.8 million USD from one window to the other (from 2.1 to 2.2 
or vice  versa).  
 
 
Component 3: EDA Programme management and M&E 
Output 3.1: Programme management  
Activity 3.1.1: Programme management  
The execution activities are intended to e nsure that the objectives and targets of the Programme are fulfilled at 
each stage. To such end, a day -to-day planning and articulation work with the different actors is required, as well 
as a diligent and transparent fund administration tasks. The latter will be guaranteed by UCAR's administrative 
support areas: Human Resource Management Area for the hiring of consultants; Procurement Area for the 
procurement of goods and services; Accounting areas, Budget area, Payment area, Agreement and 
Disbursement are a, these are a few of the areas which will ensure the transparency of the circuits and the 
appropriate  accounting  to the financing  entity  on a daily basis.  
 
The Technical Implementation Unit will be composed of the following units:  
● Technical Implementation Unit (TIU): housed at UCAR’s central offices, this team will hold 
interdisciplinary  capacities  for the day-to-day supervision  of the project.  This team  will be responsible  of


---
*Page 44*
---

 
 
ensuring that the project produces the results specified in the Project Document to the required standard 
of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost. This team will bring support to the 
Technical Experts Team and the Local referents in order to maximize their reach and impact as well as 
for the delivery of quality products. The TIU will have the support of the UCAR's administrative and 
accountability areas for the transparent and effective execution of the project.  
The TIU will have a Programme coordinator and 3 micro region coordinators based in UCAR’s offices; 5 
local micro region facilitators based in the micro regions (1 in each micro region); an environmental 
specialist and a social specialist that will supervise all the environmen tal and social issues (the social 
specialist will have specific knowledge on Gender and Indigenous Peoples Issues). These staff will be 
contracted with GCF funds specifically for the project; besides, UCAR will assign an organizational 
empowerment speciali st, a communication specialist, a financial specialist, and 3 more consultants for 
general support for implementation. No civil servants’ salaries will be covered by GCF proceeds.  
On the side of monitoring and evaluation activities, a monitoring specialist  will be hired by the project, 
whilst 1 evaluation specialist from UCAR will be assigned to the programme. All these staff have been 
included in the Budget (please refer to Annex VI).  
● Technical Experts  Team  
● Formulators  
● Local  Referents  
● Micro -region Ad -hoc Associations  
For further details on the functions of the TIU’s units and implementation arrangements please refer to the section  
C.7 below and Chapter 3, section 3.9 in the Feasibility Study.  
The Technical Implementation Unit will have to lead the followin g tasks:  
 
Coordination: professionals to integrate the Technical Implementation Unit, Local Referents, and Technical 
Experts Team will be hired. Their functions have been described in detail in Section C.7 Implementation 
Arrangements, as well as in Chapter  3, Section 3.9 of the Feasibility Study.  
 
Determination of methodologies and processes: activity taking place at the beginning of the Programme.  
 
Determination of procurement processes: this activity is meant to provide manuals and instructions necessary 
for the appropriate fund administration and information flows and approvals . 
 
Determination of Methodology to address the micro -regions: A Methodological Guide for the development of 
a Climate Change Strategy at the scale of micro -regions will be developed  based on the experience of the IDeMi 
Programme conducted by UCAR and the Pilot Methodology for Adaptation Planning carried out in the Yavi Micro - 
region.  
 
Such guide will include precisions on the participatory processes to be carried out for the determin ation of the 
MAPs, project prioritization, configuration of ad -hoc associations, and institutional arrangements, which shall be 
guaranteed at the local level. This guide will incorporate the guidelines of UCAR's Gender Strategy and the 
Programme’s Gender A ction Plan with the purpose of ensuring gender equality throughout the  Programme's 
cycle, from preparation of the MAPs, to the calls for training, to the design of execution and monitoring of the 
activities. The guide will also give precisions to ensure U CAR and GCF environmental and social principles are 
met. 
 
Establish grant  assessment  and  approval processes:  Grant  assessment and approval  will  be established


---
*Page 45*
---

 
 
based on UCAR’s non -reimbursable grants methodology for GCF projects. To be analysed and adapted to the 
needs and realities of the territory at a micro -region scale.  
 
Output 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation  
Activity 3.2.1: Monitoring and Evaluation  
Monitoring and evaluation activities will be done under the responsibility of the Technical Implementation Unit and 
UCAR's Management Control Area.  
 
The monitoring and evaluation tasks include the following:  
- Inception  workshop:  
An initial workshop will be organized during the first month of the implementation of the Programme to be  
attended by the executing parties, the Technical Implementation Unit, the Steering Committee,  responsible 
agents, and UCAR. The workshop will establish the execution and implementation mechanisms, as well as the 
finalization of the necessary agreements be tween the different parties to ensure transparency and efficacy in 
carrying out the Programme. In the inception workshop, the guidelines for the monitoring and evaluation of the 
Programme will be provided to all relevant stakeholders and the indicators wil l also be analyzed and discussed 
with them to ensure appropriation of the M&E System, and the importance to comply with the guidelines provided 
to learn and ensure the correct follow -up of the Programme. Also, the Gender Action Plan will be presented with 
its indicators, to guarantee that all the parties involved in the execution of the Programme knows the gender 
objectives and do an adequate gender monitoring and evaluation. It is expected that at the end of the project,  
each participant will be able to i dentify the M&E system requirements, the different indicators, the responsibility of 
each person in the process of reporting, collecting data, registering the information, elaborating different reports 
and communicating  the progress  of the Programme  to the different  publics.  
Models of agreements between the relevant parties can be found in Annex I – Model Contracts. Specifically, 
during the inception workshops the agreements to be signed are the agreements between UCAR and the ad -hoc 
associations. The relev ant parties that need to be in place will be defined during the participatory processes that 
have been described in Component 1. However, as the institutional framework of the micro -region, it will be 
assured that the ad -hoc associations are composed of ac tors from public, private and scientific -technological 
sectors that are related to the micro -regions. Besides, agreements will be signed with other public institutions 
which are present in the micro -regions, e.g. National Institution of Agriculture Technol ogy or the Under -secretary 
of Family Agriculture, in order to obtain support for the formulation and implementation of the projects. These 
agreements are exclusively focused on technical cooperation, and thus these institutions will not manage or 
transfer funds: only expenses derived from their technical work such as travel expenses, materials for training 
sessions and similar will be covered by the  project.  
It is important to highlight that the extension teams of the National Institution of Agriculture Tec hnology and the 
Under -secretary of Family Agriculture cover the entire national territory and have strong territory presence.  
 
- Registration  of information,  informatics  arrangements  and monitoring  support  
The M&E sector within UCAR will be responsible for  the development of the different registration tools and its 
dissemination among beneficiaries. Each micro -region will have to comply with a semester report with information 
about the evolution of the expected outputs and results included in the logical fr amework, along with a description 
of the different activities done, difficulties experienced within the period and the evolution of the projects.  
Each project financed by the micro -regions will be registered in the Informatics System of UCAR (SIIG Spanish 
acronym) to allow for a better information, monitoring and evaluation scheme. As mentioned in other sections, 
specific  indicators  will also be included  to measure  each  project  of the different  beneficiaries.  In this regard,  UCAR 
will also provide  additiona l support  for the correct  measurement  of each  of the indicators  included  in the projects.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
 
For the monitoring of the counterpart of smallholders, there will be a specific questionnaire, which will register in - 
kind and cash counterparts made. The in -kind counterpart is usually estimated, according to the market value of 
the contribution. Therefore, if they work to install the different on -farm investments instead of paying someone 
professional service to do it, they register the counterpa rt as the work -hours and the salary it would have cost.  
- Six-monthly  Reports  from the micro -region  beneficiaries  and on-site monitoring  visits  
The Programme will be monitored by means of six -month evaluations to supervise the progress made from the 
beginning of its implementation. These evaluations will help identify the lessons learned jointly with the players 
concerned and the beneficiaries of the Programme. UCAR’s authorities and members of the Programme will 
perform regular visits to the Programm e areas based on a schedule agreed in the Annual Work Plan, including  
the financial monitoring of the  implementation.  
Each report will include a Gender Section, with special attention to the progress and results of Gender Action Plan 
implementation and of  the indicators refer to women participation included in the logical framework.  
- Annual Reports to be submitted to the Green Climate  Fund:  
Annual Reports of the Programme with relevant information about the evolution of the project, progress made 
towards th e achievement of goals, lessons learned, risk assessment, project outputs delivered by the Programme, 
progress made towards outcome’s achievement, expenditure and acquisition reports along with any other relevant 
information included in the template of the  Green Climate Fund. The AE -UCAR -will be responsible for collecting 
and submitting the annual report to the Fund, according to the template and regulations provided.  
- Annual Gender Reports to be submitted to the Green Climate  Fund:  
Each year, the social sp ecialist based in UCAR and the gender expert will register all the information for 
monitoring the process of participation of women and men. These will include the results of basic indicators and 
the new ones, provided by the baseline study and the househo ld survey during the first year. The reports will 
include relevant information about gender issues and lessons learn about women involvement and their 
participation in climate change activities.  
- Mid-term  evaluation  
The Programme will be submitted to an external and independent evaluation in the middle of its term of 
completion, or once half of the funds are allocated. This evaluation will determine the pertinence of the 
Programme after some time of its implementation, the efficacy of the actions, the eff iciency of the activities 
implemented; and the progress made towards the achievement of the results. It will also identify any required 
corrective actions that will help the coordination of the Programme to better achieve programmes goals and an 
efficient allocation of resources. The external review will focus on the progress made to reach the expected 
results,  the status  of the institutional  arrangements  for implementation,  and the examination  of the action  plans.  
The mid -term evaluation will include an as sessment of the implementation of the Gender Action Plan and, if it is 
the case, recommendations of the course of action. It is expected to have a mid -term evaluation of Programme’s 
gender strategy.  
It is envisaged that there may be a re -definition of prio ritized micro regions in the event of delays or issues in the 
execution of funds in any of the micro -regions prioritized by the Programme.  
- Results Evaluation and Final Report after termination of the  project:  
Once the Programme is completed, and within the  following six months, an external final evaluation will be 
conducted to verify the achievement of the expected results and its impact as initially planned or modified by the 
mid-term evaluation and recommendations. It will also analyze the sustainability of the actions, the effectiveness  
of the strategies implemented and potentiality to replicate them. The efficacy and pertinence will also be included 
along with transversal topics such as the impact on women, indigenous families and young people in the ar ea. A 
special analysis will be fostered in analyzing the contribution of the Programme to the GCF core results identified 
in the logical  framework,  specifically  those  selected  after the first year of the implementation  of the Programme.


---
*Page 47*
---

 
 
The Final Report will include the data of the results evaluation, which will be done through a household survey  
and will allow the evaluator to estimate the outcomes achieved, the adaptation and mitigation capacity generated 
in the community -level and govern ment officials along with the broader impact in the micro -region sustainable 
development.  
The results and final report will include a Gender Section, with the impact results of Gender Action Plan, a 
thorough analysis on the main gender issues related to cl imate change and the effectiveness of Programme’s 
gender strategy. Also it will be verify if all the gender indicators and targets were achieved and / or exceeded.  
- Case -studies and qualitative  assessments  
It will be promoted within the micro -regions to ide ntify good practices in the management of natural resources, 
adaptive and mitigation strategies and to document them with participatory systematizations and specific case 
studies.  
Among the case studies, one of them will be on women empowerment and climate  change, as a good practice 
related to Programme’s gender strategy.  
- Knowledge management and  learning  
The M&E system will ensure the dissemination of information, lessons learned, good practices and all relevant 
data from the project. A participatory appro ach will also be promoted, to ensure the ownership of the Programme 
by all the stakeholders and to promote evidence -based informed policy to government officials.  
 
 
Project management costs  
 
The project management costs of 8% are in line with the managemen t costs of UCAR’s projects and programmes 
implementation.  
 
Besides, the requested fee of 9% will cover the overhead costs related to the implementation of the Programme: 
permanent staff costs (administration and finance, Human Resources, Environmental and Social Unit, 
Communication), oversight functions (Senior Management); bank costs; administration fees; equipment and 
materials; financial audits; and others. These costs have been clearly separated from the project management 
costs and there is no overlap.  Please see Annex XI -Fee breakdown, for further details.  
 
Programme target population  
 
The Programme is intended to generate a transformation across the entire micro -regions so as to generate a 
locally transcending impact towards a low -carbon, climate -resilient development.  
In this regard, the population benefiting from the Programme will be the entire rural population of the micro - 
regions, including small -scale producers with high poverty levels and population from rural towns within the micro - 
region.  
The main beneficiary group of the Programme encompasses groups of rural population with high poverty levels 
and vulnerability to climate change, including small -scale family producers, indigenous communities and rural 
workers.  
In general, these groups have a high sensitivity to climate variability and they have a low adaptive capacity due to 
the following factors: deficient assets, limited resources, isolation, limited access to services and markets, food 
insecurity, land tenancy insecurity, low levels of ed ucation and organization, lack of climate change awareness, 
and lack of technological capacity.  
Additionally these groups lack of access to technology and financing that would allow them to become more


---
*Page 48*
---

 
 
adapted to climate change.  
The Programme is expected to benefit about 5,750 families (that is to say, 28,750 beneficiaries), distributed as 
follows:  
➢ 4,000  families  (20,000  beneficiaries)  living  in rural areas  who benefit  from systemic  public  projects;  
➢ 1,750  families  (8,750  beneficiaries ) of small -scale  family  producers  and rural workers.  
 
 
In order to reach the target population, the calling and communications will be inclusive and promote the equal 
participation of men and women.  
The Programme will identify and address barriers or obstacles faced by men and women, depending on their age 
and socio -economic condition, to access the Programme’s financial windows and other benefits, and 
consequently  the Programme  will instrument  the necessary  measures  to reduce  such  limitations.  
The diversity of current family structures will be considered, especially those where women are the head of the 
household, households with single mothers or fathers with children or youngsters in their care. Even though the 
proposed financial instruments are a ddressed to the entire family group, we recognize that whoever takes on 
ownership of the grant will be more participative in the project. That is why the Programme will aim to ensure that 
the decision -making process of ownership of the grants will be equal  for both men and women.  
 
 
Regarding land tenure, the Programme will define within the Programme’s Operations Manual (please refer to 
section C.7 Implementation Arrangement for more details on programme’s implementation mechanisms) the 
different informatio n/documents that will be considered from the beneficiaries in order to demonstrate their linkage 
with the land that is object of investment. The definition will be based on UCAR’s vast experience and trajectory 
executing rural development projects and prog rammes within the target population that will benefit from the 
Programme. In cases where the beneficiary does not count with the information/documentation required by the 
Programme, UCAR can provide with the guidance and training so that the beneficiary ca n initiate official 
formalities in order to process the requested information/documentation.Finally, the trainings on organizational 
strengthening  proposed  in Component  1 will include  land tenure  approach.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
Describe  the quality  of the management  team,  overall  strategy  and financial  profile  of the Sponsor  (Executing 
Entity)  and how it will support  the project/programme  in terms  of equity  investment,  management,  operations,  
production and  marketing.  
 
UCAR (Unit for Rural Change) falls under the Ministry of Agroindustry to which it reports and has recently been 
accredited as Accredited Entity before the Green Climate Fund.  
In the present EDA Proposal UCAR will work as Executing Entity as well, ensuring that the objectives and targets 
of the Programme are fulfilled at each stage.  
UCAR has a vast experience in activities associated with the planning, negotiation, formulation, administration, 
monitoring and evaluation of p rogrammes and projects financed totally or  partially by external resources, under 
the jurisdiction of the Argentine Ministry of Agroindustry. The objectives of these Programmes and Projects cover 
broad profiles of agricultural exploitation, whereby invest ments are made so that the standard of living of rural 
producers and their families may overcome vulnerability conditions by raising the quality and competitive capacity 
of agricultural produce.  
The largest projects in UCAR are related to management of water resources, basic infrastructure, promotion of 
investments in productive chains and competitive improvement initiatives. In this sense, UCAR can strongly


---
*Page 49*
---

 
 
contribute to the result areas of Infrastructure, and Food and Water Security.  
Sustainable land use and forest management and Ecosystems are other GCF results areas in which the UCAR 
can achieve significant contributions on the basis of the experiences with three programmes related to this area: 
Forest Sustainability and Competitiven ess (IDB), Sustainable Management of Natural Resources (IBRD) and 
Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forest Landscapes (GEF). Moreover, sustainability issues  are 
increasingly becoming core aspects in the whole intervention of UCAR in the Argentine te rritory.  
On the other hand, UCAR’s experience in Increasing Resilience and Enhancing Livelihoods of the most  
vulnerable people, communities and regions, has been proved by the execution of a significant number of rural 
development programmes such as PRODE RI, PRODEAR, PRODERNEA and PRODERNOA (IFAD). The climate 
perspective was explicitly included in PRODERI and fully developed through the expertise gained with the on - 
going Adaptation Fund project in the Northeast of the  country.  
Finally, the contribution t o increased low -emission energy access and power generation will be promoted by 
UCAR in an innovative way, as demonstrated by the on -going Innovation Initiative of wind tunnels, as well as 
various renewable energy implementations.  
Summing up the above ment ioned programmes, we can state that UCAR’s financial volume of explicitly designed 
climate -change activities9 represents a portfolio of more than 467.5 USD million, from which 350.2 USD million 
have already been executed; however, considering the nature of  UCAR’s programmes, we can state that, to a 
greater or lesser extent, the whole of its financial volume is related to increasing adaptive capacities, representing,  
to date, a portfolio of over 1,300 million USD of on -going programmes and 1,276 million USD of completed 
programmes.  
UCAR has significant experience and capacity to articulate different interventions, thus creating coordination and 
synergies between different projects and even different supporting entities. The ability to articulate interventions  in 
the territory is UCAR’s strength in a federal scenario under which the Argentine Constitution grants the ownership 
of natural resources to the Provinces.  
UCAR, in line with the commitments undertaken by the Argentine State of doing away with gender gaps existing  
in society, will make sure that every programme and project executed by UCAR contemplates as part of their 
strategic focuses the gender approach i n a cross -cutting manner during the projects' entire life cycle. Women and 
men participation in rural production on an equal footing is a principle that must be guaranteed at each one of the 
interventions. In this context, UCAR prioritizes the improvement of the livelihoods of both men and women  across  
all its activities acknowledging as fundamental values environment preservation, social justice, gender equality, 
and respect for cultural diversity under an approach of human rights10. 
 
9 Considering  the Adaptation  Fund  Project,  PRODERI’s  adaptation  projects  and PROSAP’s  irrigation  projects.  
10 Publications  made  by UCAR  in gender  and aboriginal  peoples  available  in digital  format:  
Practical Guide for Rural men and women Technician. Rural development based on a gender approach. 
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/Gu%C3%ADa%20Pr%C3%A1ctica%20para%20t%C3%A9cnicos%20y%20t%C  
3%A9cnicas%20rurales.%20El%20desarrollo%20rural%20desde%20el%20enfoque%20de%20G%C3%A9nero.pdf  
The new generations of change -promoting rur al women . A quantitative/qualitative study of the situation of young rural 
women, of their opportunities and their needs. 
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/Las%20nuevas%20generaciones%20de%20mujeres%20rurales%20como%20promot  
oras%20del%20cambio.pdf  
Gender and Rural Property. Catamarca, Santiago del Estero and Tucumán  
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/index.php/biblioteca -multimedia/buscar -publicaciones/23 -libros/291 -genero -y-propiedad -rural-catamarca - 
santiago -del-estero -y-tucuman  
Gender and Rural Property - 2nd issue 
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/G%C 3%A9nero%20y%20Propiedad%20Rural%20 -%202da%20Edici%C3%B3n.pdf  
Study on Intervention Precedents with Indigenous Peoples. 
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/Estudio%20sobre%20experiencias%20de%20intervenci%C3%B3n%20con%2 0pueblo  
s%20indigenas.pdf


---
*Page 50*
---

 
 
UCAR will provide support to the Programme through all its admin istrative, accounting and financial, human 
resources, monitoring and evaluation areas. In particular with regard to communication, it is important to highlight 
the proven competencies of UCAR through its Communication and Dissemination area, which is orien ted to 
coordinate the communication strategy of UCAR and establish its main guidelines, through the generation and 
strengthening of communication and dissemination tools.  
For further details on UCAR’s competencies and responsibilities for the execution of this Programme and as 
Accredited Entity, please refer to Component 3 description in Chapter 3 in the Feasibility Study or section C.3. in 
the Funding Proposal and section C.7 Institutional Arrangements in the Funding Proposal.  
Besides, for further details on UCAR’s proved experience in the execution of initiatives in the NOA and NEA 
regions and with the implementation of Revolving Funds please refer to Chapter 1 point 1.3 in the Feasibility 
Study.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the 
project/programme, the issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue.  
Describe applicabl e taxes and foreign exchange regulations. 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  
 
All project activities must be compliant with local, national and international legislation. Government licences or 
permits required for implementing and operating the Programme will be identified by the Formulation team in 
order  to prepare  and support  projects  for ensuring  compliance.  
 
Regarding Environmental and Social issues, activities must be compliant with GCF E&S safeguards and UCAR’ s 
E&S Policy and Manual. Each activity will be analysed specifically with the Formulation team, who is to verify 
whether it is necessary to meet any specific regulation, permitting, special licenses, and who is to ensure that the 
rights of any person or co mmunity are not infringed.  
 
However, in order to ensure compliance with the environmental and social principles of the GCF and with national 
legislation, UCAR shall apply the institutional processes and track records it has in place, for the identification , 
assessment and mitigation of Environmental and Social risks. UCAR will establish an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) for the project during the stage of Funding Proposal development.  
 
Report on Gender Gaps for Andean Chains. 
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/Informe%20Brechas%20de%20g%C3%A9nero%20en%20las%20cadenas%20andina  
s.pdf  
UCAR's Environmental and Social Policy 
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/Politica%20Ambiental%20y%20Social%20de%20la%20UCAR.pdf  
Systematization of Cross -Cutting Indicators regarding Gender, Young people and Indigenous Peoples.  
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/index.php/biblioteca -multimedia/evaluaciones/1839 -sistematizacion -de-indicadores -transversales -referentes - 
a-genero-jovenes -y-pueblos -indigenas  
Project of Socio -Economic Inclusion in Rural Areas: Environmental and Social Management framework. 
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/index.php/institucional/manuales -reglamentos -y-salvaguardas/876 -proyecto -de-inclusion -socio -economica - 
en-areas -rurales  
With our voices, with our hands. A youth political agenda for the transformation of rural ter ritories.  
http://www.ucar.gob.ar/images/publicaciones/Con%20nuestras%20voces,%20con%20nuestras%20manos.pdf


---
*Page 51*
---

 
 
 
Additionally, a s some Environmental Impact Assessments are likely to be prepared during the project 
implementation, due to the nature of activities, UCAR confirms that this  ESMP  will be commensurate with the 
risks identified and in accordance with the project ESMP cate gorization. This ESMP will be designed at the full 
proposal stage.  
 
Concerning restrictions in the import of foreign currency into Argentina, there are no such restrictions. There is no 
restriction either for the potential extraction of proceeds outside the country.  
 
Regarding applicable taxation for GCF proceeds, below a consideration is made for potential applicable taxes:  
National Taxes:  
- Income tax: UCAR, as a public body, is exempt to pay this  tax. 
- Value Added Tax (IVA): UCAR qualifies as exempt. UCAR  pays for this tax as it is included in the price of the 
goods and services contracted by  UCAR.  
- Taxes  on bank  debts  and credits:  UCAR  is exempt  from paying  this tax. 
Provincial Taxes:  
- Gross  income:  UCAR  is exempt  from paying  Gross  Income  to the Government  of Buenos  Aires  Autonomous 
City where UCAR’s headquarters is  found.  
 
GCF funds will benefit from all tax exemptions granted to UCAR. These tax exemptions apply to both 
external/international and domestic source funds.  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the 
organization structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, 
executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure. Also describe which of these structures are 
already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish 
them.  
 
The agreement between UCAR and the GCF is  a Grant, for which UCAR will hold functions as Implementing and 
Accredited Entity. A description of the oversight and execution functions is provided in this section.  
The proposed arrangements comply with the requirements set by the EDA pilot phase ToR si nce: 
- UCAR is a National Accredited Entity for the  GCF.  
- UCAR is a public institution that works with various types of local actors, especially those addressing the 
needs of vulnerable communities and gender  aspects.  
- UCAR  is able to provide  grants,  according  to its type of accreditation.  
- The EDA is to enhance country ownership of projects and programmes by devolving decision making at 
country  level,  thereby  allowing  greater  involvement  and input  from impacted  stakeholders.  
- EDA is designed to provide an opportunity for accredited entities and countries to move beyond the 
financing of individual, bankable projects towards a more comprehensive, stakeholder driven programmatic 
approach: based on this argument, this Programme was designed with a programmatic scheme and has based 
the decision  of climate  change -related  territorial  actions  to local stakeholders  in participative  processes.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
 
- Based on transparent criteria that are aligned with the Fund’s investment criteria and results management 
framework: UCAR will execute and supervise the project with the highest management standards as  
demonstrated in its accreditation; furthermore, investment criteria have been successfully assessed; and a results 
management framework has been designed speci fically following the GCF guidelines in this regard and taking  
into account the spirit of the EDA  pilot.  
- This Programme responds to the aim of this pilot phase to draw lessons learned with regard to promoting 
the paradigm shift towards low -emission and cl imate -resilient development pathways: this Programme proposes 
activities related both to adaptation and mitigation, with stakeholders that have not had this approach before, and 
in articulation with rural development programmes that had not included this a pproach in their design. Activities 
focused on monitoring, evaluation and lessons learned from this process have been included in this Programme 
(please refer to Section C3, description of Component 3 and Section H for M&E activities and Logical Framework 
that includes performance  indicators).  
- This Programme has performed a multi -stakeholder engagement during its formulation: smallholders, 
national and subnational authorities, representatives of Indigenous Peoples, and SMEs among others, have been 
consulted  during  the design  phase.  Please  see Annex  II Stakeholder  Engagement.  
- This Programme ensures replication and sustainability, since the technologies to be promoted will be the 
most appropriate for each type of beneficiary – this will be guaranteed based on the work with national and local 
experts and on the assessment of the Committees -. Apart from the appropriation condition of the technologies, 
the establishing of mechanisms of self -managed revolving funds and the micro regions ad -hoc associations will  
be key to sustainability over  time.  
- The role of the NDA signaled in the EDA ToRs has been taken into account by proposing its participation 
with Oversight  functions.  
- Oversight and steering activities have included a provision of regular strategic guidance; review of 
reporting by the accredited entity; and regular communication with relevant stakeholders and the Fund. Field visits 
can also be  organized.  
- A gender -sensitive approach in developing the activities of the pilots has been applied. Please refer to 
Annex III – Gender Assessment and Gender Action  Plan.  
 
 
Institutional arrangements  
 
✓ UCAR as Accredited  Entity  
UCAR will be responsible for ensuring that the objectives and components of the Programme are delivered, and 
that resources are allocated and disbur sed in an efficient and effective manner. It will have the technical and 
administrative responsibility for applying GCF inputs in order to reach the expected Outcomes/Outputs as defined 
in this document. The UCAR will be responsible for the timely delivery  of Programme inputs and outputs, and for 
the coordination of all other responsible parties, including other government agencies, regional and local 
government authorities. UCAR will carry out the monitoring and evaluation activities as well as the supervi sion of 
the territorial actions coordinating, supervising, and supporting the activities of the Technical Implementation Unit 
(see below). The UCAR will be responsible for ensuring that the Programme produces the results that will be 
specified in the Fundi ng Proposal to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time 
and cost. It will ensure:  
● GCF proceeds cover incremental costs of adaptation and  mitigation  
● Appropriate allocation of  resources  
● Transparency  
● Consistency between program’s actions and  objectives


---
*Page 53*
---

 
 
● Dissemination of the  outcomes.  
UCAR will be responsible for the administration of the Grant and will carry out such administration with the same 
degree of care used in the administration of its own funds.The  programme funds will be held separately from 
UCAR funds, establishing an exclusive bank account and managing its accountability in a separate accountability 
database module. The procurement of goods and services (including consultants’ services) for activ ities financed 
by the Fund will be carried out in accordance with UCAR’s standard practices and procedures, including its 
procurement and consultants’ guidelines.  
UCAR will be fully accountable for the effective implementation of this program, holding, apa rt from the above - 
mentioned obligations, the operative responsibility of the execution of the programme. An operations manual of 
the Programme will be elaborated as the first step after approval of the EDA Programme, and will include the 
guidelines for al l the oversight, execution and evaluation functions of the Programme.  
As Accredited Entity, UCAR will elaborate the reporting related to implementation, such as the Annual 
Performance report, and will comply with the standard obligations as agreed in the A MA. 
The duties and responsibilities as Accredited Entity are:  
❖ Being  the spearhead  in the relations  with the national  authorities;  
❖ Ensuring that the  Programme’s  components  at each  execution stage comply with its  objectives  
and goals;  
❖ Articulation with other Programmes and projects in  the territories;  
❖ Assistance  and support  for planning  and developing  execution  at the local level;  
❖ Monitoring  and evaluation  of the Programme’s  performance  in the provinces/regions  involved;  
❖ The administration  and financial  control  of the Programme’s  funds  at each  execution  stage;  
❖ The signing of agreements for execution and  procurement;  
❖ Compliance  with GCF  directives  for procurement  and hiring  of works  and services.  
The chart below shows a simplified UCAR’s organization chart  in which only the main areas that will be involved  
in the implementation are  displayed.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
 
In green: UCAR as Executing Entity: Technical Implementation Unit (please see scheme of the Executing Unit in 
section below)  
In blue: UCAR as  Accredited Entity. All the areas in blue will ensure that the GCF funds are managed 
transparently, that activities are monitored, results are disseminated, environmental and social safeguards are 
respected. The Focal Point for the GCF is the Head of the I nstitutional Management Area and will have the 
oversight function of the Accredited Entity.  
In orange: areas that will articulate with the TIU for the execution of the project (Infrastructure Unit will collaborate 
with the management of Systemic public wor ks; the Rural Development Unit and the Competitiveness Unit will 
ensure: 1) articulation with the rural development projects that are / will be under execution in the selected micro 
regions during the lifetime of the EDA project (PISEAR and PROSAP IDB); an d 2) support for the participative 
processes, and for the management of non -reimbursable grants and revolving funds.  
 
 
The Oversight, Execution and Evaluation functions are summarized in the Chart below and described hereafter.  
 
 
Organization chart  
 
 
UCAR as 
AE


---
*Page 55*
---

 
 
 
✓ Oversight function: Steering  Committee  
There will be a Steering Committee to provide general guidance to the Programme. This Committee will hold 
meetings with an annual frequency, and will be composed of designated senior -level representatives from:  
- UCAR: Focal point for the GCF on behalf of UCAR as Accredited Entity, and one member from 
the Environmental and Social Unit who will ensure the respect of the Environmental and Social safeguards,  
as well as the gender  perspective.  
- National Designated Authority (Ministry of  Finance)  
- INTA (Ministry of  Agroindustry)  
- Climate  Change  Office  (Ministry  of Environment  and Sustainable  Development)  
- 1 representative of each micro  region  
- 1 representative of the Evaluation  Committee  
- 1 representative of the  universities  
- 2 representatives  of civil society  organizations  (1 man,  1 woman)  
- 1 representative of women´s  organizations  
- 2 representatives of Indigenous Peoples communities (1 man, 1  woman)  
Gender balance consideration and inclusivity  will be especially considered for the formation of this Committee.  
This committee would not be involved in the decision -making process at the sub -project level, but in the strategic 
decision -making. The main functions of the Steering Committee will be: a)  to provide political strategic leadership 
to the Programme, creating effective coordination among the highest level authorities involved at the national and 
provincial levels, b) review of reporting by the UCAR, c) perform periodic field visits; and perfo rm regular 
communication with relevant stakeholders and the GCF.  
This will ensure the alignment of the Programme with the government strategies and Programmes underway in  
the territory ensuring the consistency of the interventions at both jurisdictional l evels. In addition, this Committee 
will ensure transparency with regard to the Programme’s intervention processes. Members of the Steering 
Committee  will be designated  during  the first quarter  of the Programme.  
According to the EDA Pilot Terms of reference, the NDA is to have a strong role, both in the stage of identification 
and nomination of an entity to develop the proposal, and in the monitoring and evaluation of the programme in the 
Fund’s relevant guidelines. This is why the NDA is included i n the Steering Committee, since it is the most 
strategic role. The NDA will guarantee that the GCF objectives and proceeds are understood and implemented. 
According to the ToRs, the NDA is expected to report to the Secretariat on the relevant aspects from their 
oversight function.  
The participation of 1 representative of the Evaluation Committee (see description in subsection “Executing 
functions” below) in the Steering Committee has been proposed. This would allow bringing the direct opinion of  
the Evalua tion Committee to the Steering Committee meetings; and it would reinforce as well the vision of the 
Steering Committee to be present in the Evaluation Committee in the day -to-day evaluation of subprojects 
proposals.  
 
✓ Execution functions: the Execution  Unit 
The Execution Unit will be in charge of the Programme’s technical implementation. 
The Execution Unit will be composed of the following units:  
● Technical Implementation Unit (TIU): housed at UCAR’s central offices, this team will hold 
interdisciplinary capa cities for the day -to-day supervision of the project. This team will be responsible of ensuring 
that the project produces the results specified in the Project Document to the required standard of quality and 
within the specified constraints of time and cos t. This team will bring support to the Technical Experts Team  and


---
*Page 56*
---

 
 
the Local referents in order to maximize their reach and impact as well as for the delivery of quality products.  
The TIU will have the support of the UCAR's administrative and accountability areas for the transparent and 
effective execution of the  project.  
The duties and res ponsibilities of the TIU include:  
❖ The strategic steering of the  Programme;  
❖ The planning and programming of Programme  actions;  
❖ The administration and financial control of the Programme’s  funds;  
❖ The coordination and supervision of the physical and financial execution of Programme’s 
components;  
❖ The representation as counterpart of the Programme in liaison with other national agencies  and 
with the GCF;  
❖ Compliance with GCF regulations and its  recommendations.  
❖ The supervision,  monitoring  and follow  up of the ad-hoc association’s  responsibilities.  
The TIU will have a Programme coordinator and 3 micro region coordinators based in UCAR’s offices; 5 local 
micro region facilitators based in the micro regions (1 in each micro region); an environmental specialist and  a 
social specialist that will supervise all the environmental and social issues (the social specialist will have specific 
knowledge on Gender and Indigenous Peoples Issues). These staff will be contracted with GCF funds specifically 
for the project; besid es, UCAR will assign an organizational empowerment specialist, a communication specialist, 
a financial specialist, and 3 more consultants for general support for implementation. No civil servants’ salaries  
will be covered by GCF  proceeds.  
On the side of m onitoring and evaluation activities, a monitoring specialist will be hired by the project, whilst 1 
evaluation specialist from UCAR will be assigned to the programme. All these staff have been included in the 
Budget (please refer to Annex VI).  
● Technical Experts Team (TET): The Programme will hire an interdisciplinary team composed of  5 
climate change experts in fields such as adaptation to climate change in agriculture, mitigation measures related 
to best agricultural practices, decentralized r enewable energy generation, waste water treatment, bioclimatic 
construction, and/or the expertise fields that will be required for the design of the projects deriving from the MAPs; 
plus an expert in the social fields, including Gender and Indigenous Peopl es. They will support the processes in 
the micro regions from a technical point of view, leading the capacity building activities, and accompanying the 
Local referents and the potential grantees in the subprojects formulation stages. They will advise on th e 
preparation of the necessary studies, strategies and planning instruments along with the Technical Coordination 
Unit. Besides, the Programme will hire 5 additional climate change experts to provide support in the participatory 
processes for the MAPs form ulation during the first year. They will be focused on climate change training, and will 
support  the orientation  of mitigation  and adaptation  proposals  to respond  to climate  change  threats.  
These climate change specialists will not be settled in the micro -regions but will work  for  the five micro -regions 
and will be available for the micro -regions according to the specific demands and needs that may arise in each 
case.  
The experts will support the processes in the micro regions from a technical point of vi ew, leading the capacity 
building activities and accompanying the Local referents and the potential grantees in the subprojects formulation 
stages. They will advise on the preparation of the necessary studies, strategies and planning instruments along 
with the Technical Coordination Unit.  
This TET must ensure that the capacities in terms of Adaptation and Mitigation to climate change are installed in 
the territory facilitators and the different actors of the Programme. They will also interact with the evalu ation 
committees for effective feedback on climate change impacts and solutions, and will guide and support the  
formulators on the different projects formulation.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
 
● Formulators: agreements will be signed with other public institutions which are present in the micro 
regions, e.g. National Institution of Agriculture Technology or the Under -secretary of Family Agriculture11, in order 
to obtain support for the formulation and implementation of the projects. These agreements are exclusively 
focuse d on technical  cooperation,  and thus these  institutions  will not manage  or transfer  funds:  only expenses  
derived from their technical work such as travel expenses, materials for training sessions and similar will be 
covered by the project. These technical staff will participate from the beginning from the capacity building activities 
that will be carried out during the course of Component 1, in order to be prepared to support the smallholders. The 
formulators will work with the smallholders and organization s of smallholders in the formulation and 
implementation of the projects to be financed by the Programme. The number of formulators available to the 
Programme will depend on the number of projects to be formulated. On the side of the systemic public works, 
some projects are expected to fall under the capacities of UCAR’s Formulation Area which will be appointed to the 
task; some other projects that are not within the expertise of this UCAR’s Area will be in charge of an external 
formulation service.  
● Local re ferents: One referent per micro -region will be appointed. These 5 local referents will lead the 
Programme´s interventions in the field and will report to the TIU. For this function, the Programme will hire 
professionals who are strongly linked to the terri tory, allowing organizing actions by engaging the key 
stakeholders, maintaining a fluid communication with municipal authorities and agencies, as well as with public 
and civil society organizations, and finally with the Micro -region Ad -hoc Associations tha t will be  established 
during the progress of Component 1 and that will be the player that will promote the sustainability of the results of 
the programme. They will constitute essential stakeholders for managing perceptions of the outcomes at the local 
level and ensuring  local cooperation.  They  will be the focal  points  for the organization  of project  activities.  
● Micro -region local part -time consultants for technical and administrative support: One consultant 
per micro -region will be appointed. These 5 loca l part -time consultants will provide technical and administrative 
support to local referents and formulators. They will report to the TIU. For this function, the Programme will hire 
local professionals who will be in charge of supporting beneficiaries in t he fiduciary accountability and physical 
monitoring and evaluation reports. They will maintain fluid communication with key stakeholders, municipal 
authorities  and agencies,  ad-hoc associations  and local referents  and TIU. 
● Micro -region part -time environmental and social specialists: One consultant per micro -region will be 
appointed. These 5 local part -time consultants will give support in the formulation of the MAPs in relation to 
environmental and social safeguards and will  give support in project’s formulation in this field as  well. They will 
also supervise and monitor the correct implementation of social and environmental safeguards. They will report to 
the TIU, specifically to the environmental specialist based in UCAR, and will keep fluid communication with the 
local referent and  beneficiaries.  
● Micro -region Ad -hoc Associations: the institutionalization of the micro regions is required in order to 
optimize the implementation of the projects, by the appropriation of the ac tions of the projects by the local 
stakeholders, which will promote sustainability of the results and the transfer of knowledge on adaptation and 
mitigation actions. To this end, two possible organizational schemes are envisaged according to the institutio nal 
features of the territory: a) the creation of an institutional space within the framework of an existing entity that has 
actively participated in the MAP development process; or b) the creation of a new institutional framework, 
constituted in the form of an "Ad Hoc Association" that will work in articulation with the corresponding Local 
referent.  
In both cases, the ad -hoc association should house members representing the public, scientific -technological and 
private sectors, linked to the micro -region. This institution will be responsible for ensuring the implementation of 
the MAP and for keeping the processes of analysis and decision -making alive during the Programme timeline and 
extend the sustainability of the results once it is ended.  
The micro - region Representative Body is responsible for the link with UCAR and, within such framework, it leads 
the MAP strategy’s implementation. It has a strategic definition tier (Board) and a management tier (Technical and  
 
11 As it has already been addressed, the  extension teams of the National Institution of Agriculture Technology and the 
Under -secretary of Family Agriculture cover the entire national territory and have strong territory presence.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
 
Coordinator Team).  
An agreement will be signed between UCAR and the Ad -hoc association. In such contract, it is established that in 
a maximum term of one year the Association must be an independent legal entity. For details on the agreement 
please refer to Aneex I – Model Contracts.  
The tasks developed  by the Ad -Hoc Association may include, but are not limited to, the following:  
- Political -institutional representation of the micro -region, supported by three pillars: private productive 
sector (producer’s organizations and associations, etc.), the scientif ic-technological and  educational 
sector (National Institute of Agricultural Technology, INTA; National Secretariat of Family Farming; 
National Institute of Industrial Technology; Universities and Schools, among other entities at a national, 
regional and p rovincial level), and governmental -public sector (municipalities and provincial offices 
associated with agricultural  activity).  
- Participation  in the MAP  definition  and leading  of MAP’s  implementation.  
- Compliance  with statutes,  rules  and provisions  related  to UCAR’s  regulations  and their own.  
- Ratification  of the reports  on achieved  results  within  the micro -region  and the MAP’s  implementation.  
- Control of the technical quality of developed activities and results obtained within the micro -region through 
the MAP  implementation.  
- Ensure a proper use of resources for the management and implementation of actions within the MAP in 
the micro -region.  
- Monitor  the performance  of the annual  planning  established  for the MAP  implementation.  
- Formalize the association with other organizations for the purpose of the implementation of expected 
actions within the  MAP.  
- Replace  its members  in the event  of a resignation,  cease  or death  by their legal  substitutes.  
- Regularly hold and participate in the public dissemination meetings of developed actions planned within 
Component  1. 
- Implement the Grievance Redress Mechanism, and appoint a referent and set the space for receiving 
complaints, concerns and queries made by the population in relation to the execution of the projects. For 
further details on the GRM please refer to section F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including 
Gender  Considerations.  
The Programme will strengthen the inter -institutional environment of strategic definition, represented by the Board 
of the Ad -Hoc Associ ation. The ad -hoc association will provide an arena of analysis and joint decision -making, 
with high levels of participation and consensus among local stakeholders, fostering process of adaptive and 
mitigation actions from a territorial approach, thus achi eving a greatest efficiency in the use of public and private 
resources. This institution will be responsible for keeping the sustainability of the results once the Programme is 
ended.  
It is important to highlight that the ad -hoc associations does not necessarily imply financial needs for their 
functioning, since they will be constituted by members of the public, scientific -technological and private sectors 
who will participate on a voluntary basis. The ad -hoc association will constitute the opportunity  to congregate 
these multiple -stakeholders representing the micro -region in order to define the best adjusted micro -regions’ 
climate change strategy and lines of action in a participatory manner. Within the Programme, these stakeholders 
will be trained and  their capacities will be strengthened, and if they decide to, they will be settled as a key 
representation space for the micro -region. The ad -hoc association, if constituted as a legal entity once the 
Programme comes to an end, will be able to access new sources of financing, and,  within UCAR  they will be 
taken  into account  as local key actors  for the implementation  of new Programmes.  
✓ Evaluation functions: Evaluation  Committees  
Two Evaluation Committees will be formed for analyzing and approving the inve stment proposals deriving 
from the MAPs and projects, during the course of Component 1 and Component 2 activities. They will be 
involved in the last steps of the subprojects approval as described in the figure below. The selection of  
members to these commi ttees will be subject to UCAR’s approval as the AE; the guidelines of their work


---
*Page 59*
---

 
 
will be described in the Programme’s Operations Manual.  
● Independent Technical Experts Committee: This team will be composed of 6 Experts: 5 that will be 
identified within the sphere of the Ministry of Agroindustry and related organisms that hold significant expertise in 
relevant fields such as water, agriculture/forestry, energy, waste management and climate change as well; and 1 
Social Expert that will ho ld significant expertise in Gender and Indigenous Peoples issues. These experts will not 
be related to the formulation stage, in order to guarantee an independent opinion on the subprojects. This 
committee will review the subprojects proposals and will iss ue a technical recommendation to be considered by 
the Evaluation  Committee.  
● Evaluation Committee: This Committee will be composed of 5 members, that will include: i) 
representatives of national institutions; ii) representatives of the Programme; iii) repre sentatives of the Accredited 
Entity that will ensure that decisions will be compliant and consistent with the Programme’s and GCF 
requirements; and iv) representatives of the organized civil society (private sector, NGOs, universities, women's 
associations ) from the micro regions in order to guarantee a participatory decision -making process. A sit will be 
reserved for one or more Technical Experts depending on the nature of the proposals received with proven 
experience in climate change. These Committees wi ll hold meetings with a frequency that will vary depending on 
the path related to each stage: evaluation of projects will depend on the duration of i.e. the feasibility studies; time 
of formulation of investment proposals under Component 2 will likely be m ore predictable and thus a monthly 
frequency meeting will be  established.  
The main role of this Committee will be to approve or deny and make recommendations to the initiatives 
submitted to be financed and technically assisted by the Programme.  
Upon evalua tion by the Committee of projects involving Indigenous Peoples, a representative of the 
Indigenous Participation Council of the National Institute of Indigenous Matters will be invited, or in their 
stead, a representative of provincial authority will atten d. 
The figure below aims to represent the basic steps that every proposal shall follow.  
A scheme of submission and approval of subprojects for component 2 is presented below.  
 
 
Submission and approval scheme of  Sub-projects  
 
 
The general scheme for the approval of proposals starts with a Call for proposals. The proposals are developed  
by the Formulators supported by the Technical Experts team, and once they are ready, they submit them to the 
TIU through  the Local  referents.  There  will be a voluntary  instance  of submitting  a project  idea in order  to have  a 
first orientation from the TIU. The TIU will perform a first completeness check in order to ensure that all the formal


---
*Page 60*
---

 
 
and legal documents are compliant; the proposal goes then to the consideration of the UCAR’s Environmental  
and Social Unit that will assess the environmental and social impacts and mitigation actions (for more details 
please refer to ESMF in ANNEX IV). If these assessments are positive, the proposal is sent to the Inde pendent 
Technical Experts Committee that will issue an opinion and a recommendation for the evaluation of the Approval 
Committee. Upon the positive opinion, contracts will be signed with the grantees (please refer to ANNEX I for 
model contracts for the dif ferent types of  grants).  
The Committee will consider the Programme's strategic guidelines, building on the analysis of the proposals 
submitted and the relevant technical opinion.  
The main aspects that the Committee shall consider in the evaluation and deci sion of approval or denial of 
proposals are:  
❖ The contribution of the proposal to the achievement of the Programme's objectives and to the objectives 
of the Green Climate Fund, consistency with GCF’s investment  criteria.  
❖ The consistency  of the proposal  with regards  to GCF  proceeds  to cover  incremental  costs  of adaptation  
and mitigation, ensuring that if there are non -climate related investments, they will be covered exclusively by the 
co-financing part.  
❖ The consistency  among  the proposal's  objectives,  the Programme's  strategic  guidelines,  and the Fund's  
result management framework.  
❖ The consistency between the investment, technical support and/or training proposals with the diagnosis 
posed,  as well as the consistency  between  the diagnosis  and the comprehensi ve approach  to the issues  posed  
❖ The level of impact  expected  and the degree  of ownership  of the benefits  on the part of the communities  
❖ Grantees’ implementing capacity, the duration of sub -projects to align with the projects’ implementing 
period.  
❖ Empowerment and autonomy of men and women in relation to participation, decision making, access  and 
control of resources, technological tools and training.  
❖ Project’s viability and sustainability over  time.  
❖ Its contribution  to the inclusion  of women,  young  population  and indigenous  peoples.  
 
 
Flow of funds12 
 
With regards to the flow of the funds flow charts showing how funds will flow for the activities where grants will be 
given to end beneficiaries and for the revolving funds are presented below.  
 
It is important to highlight that the contracting party (grant provider) for all types of grants will be UCAR. Every 
grant will have a contract signed and the scheme of disbursements is agreed in each subproject in a case by case 
modality: they are defined at th e stage of the subproject proposal that will be reviewed by the Committees. For 
agreements / contracts with these and other parties, please refer to Annex I, Contract models.  
 
12 The term “Subproject” in the diagrams has the same meaning as “Sub -projects”.


---
*Page 61*
---

 
 
1. Output 2.1: Funds flow chart of grants to end beneficiaries (Local  Governments)  
 
 
 
2. Output 2.2: Funds flow chart of grants to end beneficiaries  (Grantees)  
 
 
 
The previous flow chart shows a possible disbursement scheme. However, it is important to highlight that the 
scheme of disbursements will be agreed in each subproject in a case by case modality. So, a subproject can 
imply  two or more  disbursements,  dependi ng on the specific  project  proposal.  
Besides, subprojects that foresee the purchase of equipment may choose to make the payment directly to the 
supplier. In these cases, UCAR will pay the corresponding amount to the supplier upon accountability report of 
beneficiary’s payment to the supplier.


---
*Page 62*
---

 
 
 
 
 
3.   Output 2.2: Funds flow chart of revolving funds  
 
For further details on Procurement procedures, please refer to Annex X – Procurement Plan.


---
*Page 63*
---

 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes) . The table below is 
for illustrative purposes. If the table format below is used, please refer to the activities as numbered in 
Section H. In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be completed.  
 
 
Please refer to Annex V for the timetable.


---
*Page 64*
---

 
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement  
Please specify why the GCF involvement is  critical for the project/programme, in consideration of other alternatives.  
 
Climate change is gravely affecting rural areas and agriculture -based livelihoods. Building resilient livelihoods based 
on low carbon agro -productive activities will aid protect valuable ecosystems as well as provide sustainable jobs.  
In this scenario, the objective of the proposed Programme is to promote the low -carbon and resilient development of 
the North Region of Argentina by promoting the incorporation of adaptation and miti gation measures in territorial 
planning. The present proposal aims to empower rural communities in micro -regions by making them the key actors in 
the development of Mitigation and Adaptation Plans and in the selection and definition of projects to guarante e 
sustainable and resilient natural resource management.  
The Programme will address climate change impacts on the most vulnerable communities of Argentina, which are 
exposed to the most severe climate extreme events of the country. These rural communities are significantly sensitive 
to these events for a variety of reasons: their livelihoods depend on climate dependant activities such as agriculture 
and livestock; they have limited resources since the north of the country has the highest rural poverty; the impacts of 
climate change are aggravating existing land degradation processes and deforestation; there is little knowledge 
regarding climate change impacts and solutions; the institutions are very weak; there are serious deficits in energy 
infrastructure a nd access, both electrical energy and gas provision. Communities have weak property rights and find it 
difficult to assert dominion over their territories and face climate -change impacts.  
Additionally, local stakeholders as well as local institutions that support rural communities, have deficient climate 
change awareness regarding mitigation and adaptation opportunities. This is a barrier to climate action that the 
Programme will tackle throughout its implementation by generating capacities and raising awar eness on these issues.  
Rural communities and local governments have limited resources and capacities to implement climate action. The 
Programme will allow generating capacities on the benefits associated to climate planning and investment.  
The proposed Pro gramme is built on the structure of UCAR’s rural development programmes and projects and aims to 
incorporate adaptation and mitigation initiatives in the development of integral territorial strategies. This approach is 
innovative and will give place to set ting an example that can be replicated in other strategic plans. GCF’s support will 
maximize the potential of rural development initiatives executed by the Ministry of Agroindustry, and will provide a 
platform for local -level climate change action.  
The Programme will enable to generate capacities regarding climate finance at all levels: national government, 
provincial government, local authorities, national and local institutions that support rural communities, and local 
producers (family agriculture sma llholders with no access to credit). This will allow to replicate the successful 
experiences.  
The Programme will address a current funding gap in the country that needs to be addressed to preserve our natural 
resources, promote a transformation in the deve lopment of the region and improve the livelihood of vulnerable rural 
communities.  
GCF’s support is essential to transform micro regions by enhancing the climate resilience of the population in the area 
of intervention and promoting low -carbon development.  
The low adaptive capacity of rural communities in Northern Argentina has been deeply described in this Chapter 1 and 
2 of the Feasibility study. Without this Programme, loss of food production derived from the lack of support for the 
strengthening of ecosy stems and production systems' resilience would be significantly greater than the cost of the 
funding requested. Without Programme intervention, losses due to climate impacts are likely to keep on being 
dependent on weak governmental emergency responses. Th ese potential losses and increased costs of inaction 
associated with climate change indicate the need for immediate action.  
The aim of the Programme is to subsequently up -scale adaptation measures and mitigation solutions to the rest of the 
region. In the long term, enhanced micro -region capacities will enable them to effectively respond to climate change 
impacts and show example of the success of having adopted these practices.


---
*Page 65*
---

 
 
Additionally, Argentina´s NDC is composed of conditional and unc onditional measures. Conditional measures would 
generate an emission reduction of 114 Mt CO 2eq. 
The conditionality of these measures depends on the following principal factors: a) international financing; b) support 
on innovation, development and transfer of technologies; c) support to the capacity building to disseminate good 
practices and effectively implement the proposed measures.  
In this regard, the present funding request to the GCF would contribute significantly to support and potentiate 
Argentina’s  efforts  to implement  conditional  measures.  Furthermore,  the present  proposal  would  contribute  to reinforce 
UCAR’s role, generate local experience, and strengthen Argentina’s only national accredited entity for future direct 
access to  GCF.  
D.2. Exit Strategy  
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme 
is implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long -term financial viability 
demonstra ted in E.6.3 . This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable).  
 
Strengthening the sustainability is a goal sought from the project formulation process, but especia lly during the 
implementation.  
The sustainability possibilities of the projects will depend on a framework that considers (i) the structural constraints 
and the physical, institutional, human - pre - existing assets in the territories; (ii) the willingness  and practices of 
subjects and their organizations to overcome identified constraints, and (iii) the opportunities that the public policy 
framework generates or potentiates.  
The proposed Programme expects to ensure the sustainability of its actions in (ii)  and (iii) by:  
● Strengthening of Local Ownership: in line with the objectives of the GCF EDA modality, rural communities 
will be enabled through this Programme to directly access climate finance. The proposed approach of self- 
determined local adaptation and mitigation strategies and actions to be financed by grants will respond directly 
to local needs, vulnerabilities and  opportunities.  
 
● Empowerment of local actors: participation processes will ensure the effective ownership of projects and  
the empowerme nt of the community. Mitigation and Adaptation Plans (Component 1) will be carried out with a 
participatory methodology for collective diagnosis and participatory project selection through which 
stakeholders in the micro -region will make investment decisio ns. The territorial planning process that defines 
the MAPs aims to empower the private sector to exercise social control over the works (speed of 
implementation, maintenance needs) and to participate in the definition of future interventions in the mid / l ong 
term.  
● Promotion of associativism : the programme will promote associative work in order to mitigate 
environmental, social and economic risks and to allow projects to prevail over time, through training for 
organizations, public works investments that st rengthen the entire community and non -refundable grants for 
organizations and groups of  producers.  
● Generation of specialized technical capacities: local and national technical capacities will be strengthened 
on Climate Change issues, so that the participat ing institutions reinforce their existing activities and develop 
new ones. Technical assistance is essential to develop local understanding of the relationship between  
climate change and rural areas and to create greater local awareness of climate change and the appropriation 
of the response to climate  change.  
● Permanent territorial presence of partners: The Programme will work and strengthen capacities of national 
and local institutions with permanent territorial presence in the selected micro -regions. This  will contribute to 
sustain the actions promoted by the  Programme.


---
*Page 66*
---

 
 
● Commitment to continue: the Programme will establish agreements with the participating institutions and 
beneficiaries to ensure they provide the necessary maintenance of the  investments executed during the life 
cycle of the programme so that the projects are sustainable beyond the period of direct financial support. 
Likewise, regulations will be established for the use of community investments, which may stipulate their 
opera tion and the necessary contributions to maintain the  works.  
● Operation and Maintenance Plans: Projects will be requested to contain an Operation and Maintenance 
Plan in order to ensure the sustainability of investments made. The Programme will strongly work  on 
strengthening and training beneficiaries through Component 1 in relation to the possible adaptive and 
mitigation actions, and technical assistance will be provided during the implementation of the Programme in 
order to train beneficiaries in the correc t uses and maintenance of the different investments made. The 
Programme will monitor the projects execution and implementation during Programme’s lifespan. Once the 
Programme is completed, it is expected to count with strengthened institutional mechanisms,  both from ad - 
hoc association and from local territory institutions such as INTA (National institute of agricultural technology) 
and Under -secretary  of Family  Agriculture,  in order  to maintain  assistance  to beneficiaries  over time.  
● Self-managed Revolving Funds for organizations and associations of smallholders: The use of 
successful revolving funds will contribute to the sustainability of the projects, will help the organization to 
strengthen  their administrative  capacities  and there fore will empower  the community.  
● Knowledge management : the Programme constitutes a pilot of local direct access to climate finance, and will 
generate useful lessons to share with other individuals, projects and institutions, at sub -national, national and 
international  levels.  
● Replication potential: UCAR’s institutional capacity to implement this new kind of climate finance will be 
installed and will allow UCAR to replicate this  experience.  
● Avoiding rural -urban migration: the adaptive actions of male and fe male agricultural producers in their 
production systems guarantee the permanence of families in the rural environment and avoid their migration  
to the poverty belts of urban  centers.  
● Financial Sustainability: Will be guaranteed  through:  
- The operation  and maintenance  plans  which  will be required  for all investments  made.  
- Direct articulation with rural development programs in UCAR which will incorporate the climate change 
approach in addition to the knowledge of technologies, infrastructure and practices for  mitigation and 
adaptation. In this basis, it is expected that those rural development programs continue implementing climate 
change  approach.  
- The revolving funds which will be installed within the Programme will contribute to the sustainability of the 
projects.  
- It is expected that new Programme’s in UCAR continue to consider climate change mitigation and adaptation 
actions.  
Please refer to Chapter 3, Section 3.10 of the feasibility study for more information on the Sustainability Strategy, 
This strategy pursues the following objectives:  
● To ensure  the appropriate  engagement  of the key institutional  actors  at each  stage  of the programme  
● To ensure the alignment of the Programme with the national  strategies  
● To keep government authorities aware of the Programm e activities, through the systematization, analysis and 
logging  of results  and impacts  of the Programme  to promote  the adoption  of evidence -based  policies.  
To promote the institutionalization of certain practices at a government level and generation of agreements that would 
allow actions to become sustainable.  
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment fac tors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed 
where relevant and applicable. This section should tie into an y request for concessionality made in section B.2 .


---
*Page 67*
---

 
 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub -criteria 
and assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework . 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock -in of long -lived, high 
emission or climate -vulnerable infrastructure.  
 
The Programme is expected to benefit about 5,750 families (that is to say 28,750 beneficiaries), distributed  
as follows:  
a. 4,000 families (20,000 beneficiaries) living in rural areas who benefit from public works systemic 
projects;  
b. 1,750 families (8,750 beneficiaries) of small -scale family producers and rural workers participating in 
individual or associative  projects.  
 
Considering that the area prioritized by the Programme is seriously affected by insufficient access to water, it 
can be assumed that most of the micro -regions will prioritize projects of a ccess to safe water. At least 2,375 
families are expected to improve their access to water, with special impact on women. In isolated areas of 
Argentina's North, many women spend 4 -5 hours a day in carrying and handling water, which equals to 2 
months a ye ar devoted to such chores.  
As to access to water, the Great North region prioritized by the Programme is significantly affected by 
insufficient access to water. The provinces of the NOA and NEA regions add up a total of 142,038 and 
219,821households withou t water supply network, respectively, which represent 10.5% and 22% of all 
households of NOA and NEA regions, respectively (INDEC 2010 National Census). These numbers rise up to 
291,783 and 289,869 households, respectively, if we consider the number of hou seholds that have no water 
supply inside the household, representing 23.4% and 29% of total households in NOA and NEA regions, 
respectively.  
 
Therefore, the related activities will help substantially improve the life quality of the families, improve their 
schooling levels and health, improve their food security at a household level, and to extend the  self - 
sufficiency period of the resource in dry spells. An interesting precedent is the case of the project under the 
Adaptation Fund implemented by UCAR in N EA13, where the construction of water storage tanks has  proven  
that families could gain 5 months of water reservoir during the dry season.  
 
Regarding emission reduction, based on the assumption that the MAPs should set aside 25% for  the 
financing of initiatives for greenhouse gas mitigation, mainly by means of access to and generation of 
renewable energy and forestation measures, it is possible to estimate that 27,106 t CO 2e/year could be 
spared. This estimation arises from the assumption that the mic ro-regions will devote approximately 25% of 
their funds to mitigation measures related to the generation of renewable energy (78%) and forestation with 
native species (22%), considering rather conservatively the prices of solar energy, the most expensive o f 
renewable  energies  currently  in  Argentina.  Based  on  such  assumption,  the  Programme  would provide  
renewable energy to about 2,740 families (13,700 individuals) and to plant approximately 1,222 hectares with 
native species. However, further redu ctions  are expected to be attained, since other  initiatives that have not  
 
13 Enhancing the Adaptive Capacity and Increasing Resilience of Small -size Agricultural Producers of the Northeast  
of Argentina: https:// www.adaptation -fund.org/project/enhancing -the-adaptive -capacity -and-increasing -resilience -of- 
small -scale -agriculture -producers -of-the-northeast -of-argentina/


---
*Page 68*
---

 
 
been taken into account in this estimation, such as bioclimatic construction or agroecology practices can 
significantly contribute to climate change mitigation.  
Given the fact that the activities to be financed will be defined during the implementation of the Programme 
(according to the EDA’s terms of reference the sub -projects are not meant to be established in the design of 
the present proposal), the Programme’s mitigation impact will be updated and informed to the GCF 
Secretariat in the APRs (Annual Prog ramme's Reports).  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF  
core 
indicator 
s Expected tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO 2 
eq) to be reduced or 
avoided (Mitigation 
only)   
 
 
Annual  End Year 3: 27.106 t CO2  eq/year 
 
(First 2 years for setting up and emission reductions only at 
the end of year 3).  
  
 
 
Lifetime  End Year 5: 27.106 t CO2   eq X 3 = 81.317 t CO2   eq 
End Year 30: 27.106 t CO2   eq   X 27 = 731.851t CO2   eq 
(It is assumed that a Photovoltaic Solar Station has a 
useful life of 30 years).  
● Expected 
total 
number of 
direct and 
indirect 
beneficiarie 
s, 
disaggregat 
ed by 
gender 
(reduced 
vulnerability 
or 
increased 
resilience);  
● Number of 
beneficiarie 
s relative to 
total 
population, 
disaggregat 
ed by 
gender   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total  Adaptation Only:  
 
Indirect beneficiaries:  17.575  
Female: 8.875 beneficiaries  
Male: 8.875 beneficiaries 
(Adaptation only)  
According to population distribution of 2010 census in each 
micro -region, 50% are female and 50 % are male.  
 
Direct  beneficiaries: 3.515  
Female -headed families: 1.055 beneficiaries 
Male: 2.460 beneficiaries  
(Adaptation only)  
According to historical UCAR rural development projects aimed 
at small holders, 30% are female -headed families and 70% 
male.  
 
Methodology/explanation  on the calculation  used  for 
estimating adaptation  beneficiaries:  
Component 2.1: it is assumed a distribution of funds with 3 
systemic public works (prioritized for adaptation purposes  
on access to safe water) and 2 systemic public works on 
infrastructure  for natural  disaster  prevention.  According  to


---
*Page 69*
---

 
 
 (adaptation 
only)   UCAR implementation of minor public works, each project 
benefits in average 500 direct beneficiaries, resulting in a 
total of 2.500 direct beneficiaries (12.500 indirect 
beneficiaries) for Component 2.1  
 
Component 2.2: To determine the overall quantity o f 
beneficiaries we used the average investment per family of 
rural development projects implemented historically by 
UCAR (this is approximately of 10.000 USD) and the total 
investment allocated to access to safe water (5.000.000 
USD) and agroecology practi ces projects (1.000.000 
USD).It is assumed a distribution of funds as follows: 25 
associative projects (20 families per associative project) of 
access to safe water and 5 associative projects of 
agroecology practices. As a result, component 2.2 will  have  
2.500 indirect beneficiaries and 500 indirect beneficiaries’ 
respectively.  
Regarding Revolving Funds, it is estimated that half of the 
funding  will  be  disbursed  in  year  3.  With  a  maximum of  
3.000 USD per family, it is estimated that 83 beneficiari es 
will be benefited. In year 4 the remaining 50% of the fund is 
disbursed, so other 83 beneficiaries along with another 
round of the first 83 already receiving credits will receive the 
funding. In year 5 it is expected another round of the 
revolving fund,  which will benefit 166 additional families. 
These sums up to 415 direct beneficiaries (2.075 indirect 
beneficiaries).  
Therefore, 5.075 total indirect beneficiaries (1.015 direct 
beneficiaries) for component 2.2.  
 
 
Total Direct Beneficiaries Component 2.1 + Component  2.2  
= 2.500 direct beneficiaries + 1.015 direct beneficiaries =  
3.515 direct beneficiaries.  
 
Total  Indirect  Beneficiaries  Component  2.1  + Component  
2.2 = 3.515 direct beneficiaries * 5 members = 17.575 
indirect beneficiaries.  
 
For the est imation of indirect beneficiaries, it is  assumed 
that in average, there are 5 members per household, which 
is the mean for rural households in the NOA region.  
 
For more detail information, see the updated version of 
Annex VII – (“Benef_Costs_ER_v.3.xls” ). 
  
 
Percentag 
e (%)  Total Micro -Region population according to the 2010 
Census : 
 Micro -Region  Micro - Region 
Population 
(inhab)  Female  Male


---
*Page 70*
---

 
 
         
Yavi 20.806  53% 47% 
West of  
Formosa  42.175  48% 52% 
Oriental Chaco  25.052  50% 50% 
Los Llanos  37.621  51% 49% 
Valles  
Calchaquies 
Salteños   
36.565   
50%  
50% 
Total  162.219  50% 50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The total indirect beneficiaries: 17.575 represent 11%of the 
total population of the Micro -Region. According to the data 
of 2010 census, 50% of the population is in average female 
and 50 % male. Regarding the total population of the 
country, the indirect beneficiaries represent  0.04%.


---
*Page 71*
---

 
 
    
 
 
(*) Estimations for 2016 based in the average persons per 
household  of INDEC Census 2010  
 
Methodology/explanation on the calculation used:  
 
According to the tables above 0,02% of Argentina´s 
population are direct beneficiaries of adaptation measures 
from the proposed program.  
 
Concerning the total households in the selected Micro 
Regions, the direct beneficiaries represent 8, 43%. For 
gender distribution in direct beneficiaries (families), 30% are 
females headed families and 70% male headed families. 
This percentage corresponds to the historic al distribution of 
male and female -headed households in the implementation 
of UCAR rural development programs.  
  
 
Other 
relevant 
indicator 
s  
Examples include:  
● Expected  increase  in the number  of households  with access  to low-emission  energy  
● Expected  increase  in the number  of small,  medium  and large  low-emission  power 
suppliers, and installed effective  capacity  
● Expected  increase  in generation  and use of climate  information  in decision -making  
● Expected  strengthening  of adaptive  capacity  and reduced  exposure  to climate  risks 
● Others  
 Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the 
indicator values for a similar project/programme in a comparable context).  
 
Considering the spirit of the EDA Programme, that establishes a grant facility for adaptation and mitigation 
projects, and the fact that these projects will be defined during the implementation of the Programme,  the 
following assumptions were made to estimate the potential greenhouse gas emission reduction associated to 
the EDA Programme.  
 
Assumptions and methodology:  
● Project examples were elaborated for the different grant facility windows, these examples includ e 
potential scale, cost, beneficiaries and emission reduction in the case of mitigation projects. Please 
refer to the feasibility study, in Chapter 3, Section  3.7.


---
*Page 72*
---

 
● The logical framework was established: an assumption of amount and type  of projects for each 
facility window was defined taking into account: the funding amounts for each facility window, the 
project  criteria  and requirements,  and the micro -regional  adaptation  needs  and mitigation  potential.  
 
● The greenhouse gas emission reduction for the Programme was calculated implementing the 
following  methodologies:  
 
1. For estimation of GHG Emissions Reduction on renewable energy projects , the calculation method used 
has been developed using CDM (Clean Development Mechanism) approved me thodologies from UN 
Framework Convention on Climate  Change.  
The calculation method proposed in this Funding Proposal used AMS I.I “Grid connected renewable  
electricity generation” and ACM0002 “Grid -connected electricity generation from renewable sources” as 
framework.  
 
For detailed information regarding the estimation methodology please refer to the excel sheet in “Annex 
VIII_Example of Project” of EDA.  
The simplified resulting calculation method for renewable energy projects is presented below:  
 
ER y=BE y - PE y 
 
ER y = BE y − PE y − LEy 
 
Where:  
ERy = Emission reductions in year y (t CO2e) 
BEy = Baseline Emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
PEy = Project emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
LEy = Leakage emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
 
Project Emissions:  For most renewable energy project activities, PEy = 0. CO 2 emissions from on -site 
consumption of fossil fuels due to the renewable project, shall be calculated using the latest version of the 
“Tool to calculate project or leakage CO 2 emissions from fossil  fuel combustion” from UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change or gathered from Public Country Publication as a default value. In case 
biomass is sourced from dedicated plantations, the procedures in the tool “Project emissions from cultivation 
of biomas s” also from UN Framework shall be used.  
 
Leakage Emissions:  For simplification, Leakage emissions in year y (t CO 2e) is assumed LE y = 0. 
Baseline Emissions:  
BE y = EG PJy  * EF grid 
 
Where:  
 
BE y = Baseline Emissions in year y (t CO2e) 
EG PJy = Quantity of net electricity generation that is produced and fed into the grid as a result of the 
implementation of the renewable project activity in year y (MWh).  
 
EFgrid = Combined margin CO 2 emission factor for grid connected power generation in year y calculated  
using the latest version of the “Tool to calculate the emission factor for an electricity system” (in tCO 2e/MWh) 
from UN Framework Convention on Climate Change or gathered from Public Country Publication as a  default


---
*Page 73*
---

 
 
value.  
 
In the examples proposed, EG PJy referred to the parameter “Energy Saving”.  
 
Component 2.1: example proposed for a Photovoltaic Solar Station of 0,5MW (1 systemic public work).  
 
Energy Saving = 𝐼𝐶 × 𝐻𝑠 
 
Energy Saving = 0,5 𝑀𝑊  ∗ (10 ℎ 𝑠/𝑑𝑎𝑦 ) ∗ (30  𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 . 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡 ℎ) = 150 𝑀𝑊 ℎ. 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡 ℎ 
 
 
Nº Beneficiaries:   
 
Nº Beneficiaries = 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦  𝑆𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔   × 𝐶𝑒 
 
Nº Beneficiaries  = (150 𝑀𝑊 ℎ. 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡 ℎ)/(0,3 𝑀𝑊 ℎ. 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡 ℎ) = 500 𝐻𝑜𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑠  
 
IC= Install ed Capacity 
Hs= Hours of Irradiation  
Ce= Electricity Consumption in average house  
 
Emissions Reduction Calculation for 1 Photovoltaic Solar Station of 0,5MW :  
ER =  Energy Saving × 𝐸𝐹𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑  
 
ER =  (150 MWh. month ) ∗ (0,511 tCO2e)  = 76 tCO2e 
  
MWh  month  
ER =  76 tCO2e  ∗  12 months  
  
month  year  
 
𝐄𝐑 =  𝟗𝟏𝟗  𝐭𝐂𝐎𝟐𝐞 /𝐲𝐞𝐚𝐫  
 
 
Therefore, 1 Photovoltaic Solar Station of 0,5MW reduce/mitigate 919 tCO 2e/y. 
It has been assumed 2 Photovoltaic Solar Station of 0,5MW, resulting in a total of 1.838 tCO 2e/y. 
EFgrid= Electricity Grid Emission Factor from Argentina  
 
Component 2.2: example proposed for an Associative Project of 25 families where each family install 1 solar 
thermal collector and 1 solar bomb.  
 
For 1 Solar Thermal  Collector:   
Energy Saving = 𝐼𝐶 × 𝐻𝑠 
 
Energy Saving = (0,005 𝑀𝑊 ℎ/𝑑𝑎𝑦 ) × (250 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠) 
𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
 
Energy Saving = 1,25 𝑀𝑊 ℎ/𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟


---
*Page 74*
---

 
 
For 25 Solar Thermal  Collectors:   
Total Energy Saving = 25 × 1,25 𝑀𝑊 ℎ/𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
Total Energy Saving  = 31,25 𝑀𝑊 ℎ/𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
 
Emissions Reduction Calculation due to Installation of Thermal Collectors :  
 
ER = Total Energy Saving  × 𝐸𝐹𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑  
 
𝐄𝐑 = 𝟏𝟓, 𝟗𝟔 𝐭𝐂𝐎𝟐𝐞 /𝐲𝐞𝐚𝐫  
 
 
 
For 1 Solar Bomb of 210 W average:  
Energy Saving  = 𝐼𝐶 × 𝐻𝑠 × 𝐷𝑠 
 
Energy Saving  =  0,210 𝐾𝑊    × (10 ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑠) × 250 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠   = 525 𝐾𝑊 ℎ/𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
𝑑𝑎𝑦  𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
 
 
For 25 Solar Bombs:   
Total Energy Saving = 525 𝐾𝑊 ℎ × 25  
𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
Total Energy Saving = 13.125 𝐾𝑊 ℎ 
𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
 
 
Emission Reduction due to Installation of Solar Bombs:  
ER = Total Energy Saving  × EFgrid  
 
ER = 13,1MWh  × 0,511 tCO2e  
year  MWh  
 
𝐄𝐑 = 𝟔, 𝟕 𝐭𝐂𝐎𝟐𝐞 /𝐲𝐞𝐚𝐫  
 
 
Therefore, 1 associative project as defined above, mitigate/reduce 22, 66 tCO 2e/y. 
It has been envisioned an investment for 70 associative projects approx., resulting in a total of 1.572 tCO 2e/y. 
2. For the estimation of GHG Emissions Sequestration on afforestation or reforestation projects , the 
calculation m ethod proposed in this Funding Proposal used 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories  Intergovernmental  Panel  on Climate  Change  (IPCC),  Chapter  4: “Forest  Land”  as framework.  
The simplified resulting calculation method for of C sequestr ation projects is presented below:  
 
Carbon sequestration is estimated for aboveground biomass following IPCC (2006) standard methods. This 
estimate equivalent CO 2 as the standardized carbon fraction of biomass in tons per hectare. For carbon 
sequestration,  biomass is converted to carbon using mean annual increment, densities and biomass 
expansion factor values. Then, carbon is converted to equivalent carbon dioxide by stoichiometry.


---
*Page 75*
---

 
Formulae for carbon sequestered in tons per hectare per year is  estimated as:  
 
CI=b×f=MAI×δ×BEF×f  
Where:  
CI: sequestered  carbon  
MAI: mean annual increment (m3/ha/year) 
b: biomass (tons/ha)  
f: carbon fraction (unit -less) 
ρ: wood density (tons/m3)  
BEF: biomass expansion factor (unit -less)  
 
 
 
 
Where:  ESeqCO2=C I×3.667 
ESeqCO2: carbon sequestration factor (tons/ha) 
Component 2.1: example proposed supposing an investment of USD 500.000 and a potential of  
afforestation  project  with native  species  (Algarrobo  - Prosopis  sp) of 322 hectares  in Chaco  Micro  Region.  
 
Carbon stock and sequestration is estimated for aboveground biomass following IPCC (2006) standard 
methods. Carbon sequestered in tons per hectare per year is estimated as:  
 
 
𝐶𝐼   = 𝑀𝐴𝐼  × 𝛿 × 𝐵𝐸𝐹  × 𝑓 
𝐶𝐼   = 9,135 𝑡𝑜𝑛/ℎ𝑎/𝑦𝑟 
 
 
Parameter  Description  Unit Value  Source  
f Carbon fraction  - 0,5 IPCC 2006  
BEF Biomass 
expansion factor  - 5 IPCC 2006  
 Wood Density  g/cm3 
ton/m3 0,58 
0,58 Moglia J. G., González D, Cisneros A. 
B., Giménez A. M., Pan E. y López 
Lauenstein, D. 2016. Evaluación de la 
calidad de madera de Prosopis alba en  
rodales semilleros.  
MAI: Mean  Annual 
Increments  m3/ha/year  6,3 UCAR ( Algarrobo - Prosopis sp) UCAR  
 
Carbon  is converted to equivalent carbon dioxide by stoichiometry in order to obtain the Emission Factor 
Sequestration of CO 2 equivalent for Algarrobo species in Chaco.  
𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂 2𝑒  = 𝐶𝐼 × 3,667  
𝐸𝐹𝐶𝑂 2𝑒  = 33,4 tCO2e/ha/year  
 
Emissions Sequestration:  
 
ES =  10.754 tCO2e/year  
 
It has been assumed only 1 Forestry Project, resulting in an emission sequestration of 10.754 tCO 2e/year.


---
*Page 76*
---

 
 
 Component 2.2: the example project in oriental Chaco micro -region considers an example of an association 
of 25 small  producers of 10 ha each and the project would cover the afforestation of a total of 250 ha with 
native Algarrobo. This this would imply a total investment of 387.500 USD and sequestration of 8.350 
tCO 2e/year and improve the overall sustainability of the f arms.  
 
The   Sequestration Factor for Algarrobo species in Chaco has been estimated also in Component   2.1:  
𝐸𝑆𝐶𝑂 2𝑒  = 33,4 𝑡𝐶𝑂 2𝑒/ℎ𝑎/𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟  
Calculation method of emission sequestration for 1 Associative Project:  
 
𝐸𝑆 = 𝐸𝑆𝐶𝑂 2𝑒 𝑋 𝐻𝑎 
 
 tCO2e  
𝐸𝑆 = 33,4 ha ∗ (250ℎ 𝑎) year  
 
𝐸𝑆 = 8.350 tCO2e/year  
 
 
 
 
It has been assumed 1,5 associative projects according to the allocated investment, i.e, 39 families, resulting 
in a total of 12.941 tCO 2/y. 
 
Total ER = 1.838 tCO 2e/y + 1.572 tCO 2e/y + 10.754 tCO 2e/year + 12.941 tCO 2/y = 27.106 tCO 2e/y 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributions to global low -carbon 
and/or climate -resilient development pathways could be scaled -up and replicated including a 
description of the steps necessary to accomplish it.  
 
The present proposal has an extraordinary potential for scaling up and replication due to the following factors.  
● Flexibility:  Working at a micro -region scale is ideal to put into practice the proposed adaptation and 
mitigation planning methodology since this scale allows for easy scaling up and replication. Even if 
each micro -region is particular in itself due to its social, environmental and economic characteristics, 
the methodological tools and instruments that will be develop ed for the implementation of this 
Programme can be implemented in any kind of micro region and will even become an asset to be 
used in future micro -regions once the Programme is finished. The proposed process and associated 
methodology  will empower  the country for the development  of future  Mitigation  and Adaptation  Plans.  
● Community -based planning:  the planning instruments will be designed with a bottom -up approach, 
based on building consensus and sharing a common vision for the future of the territory. This implies 
efforts of coordination, and commitment from all stakeholders, including provincial and local 
government, local producers, private sector and indigenous communities. This presents a new 
approach to planning and if successful, as expected, it will be replicated in other micro regions and 
provinces.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
 
● Local capacity building:  The capacity building regarding climate change awareness for diverse 
stakeholders such as technical public institutions, municipalities and private sector (smallholders, 
small -scale farmers, indigenous communities, among others) is a key point of the pres ent 
Programme. Aligned with the objective of the EDA pilot, the Programme will strengthen Argentina’s 
capacity to include climate change aspects in the design and implementation of development 
strategies.  
● Local ownership : since the proposal is based on com munity -planning, ownership of the strategy and 
the prioritized projects is an essential pillar of the Programme. This is very important, since it will 
allow the sustainability of the inversions and the efforts. The approach is intended to empower and 
stren gthen the community so that it can continue the collaborative work and planning once the 
Programme is finished. As happened with UCAR’s IDeMi Programme, these types of initiatives are 
successful  and other  micro  regions  become  interested  in adopting  the same approach.  
● Climate change grants:  if these innovative grants prove to be of interest for the private sector, as 
expected, they could be incorporated in future Programmes and Projects designed and executed by 
UCAR as well as other governmental agencies. In  this sense, it is expected that the EDA pilot will 
catalyze  the mainstreaming  of climate  finance  in other  governmental  development  initiatives.  
● Financial Sustainability:  Will be guaranteed  through:  
- The operation  and maintenance  plans  which  will be required  for all investments  made.  
- Direct articulation with rural development programs in UCAR which will incorporate the climate 
change approach in addition to the knowledge of technologies, infrastructure and practices for 
mitigation and adaptation. In t his basis, it is expected that those rural development  programs 
continue implementing climate change  approach.  
- The revolving  funds  which  will be installed  within  the Programme  will contribute  to the sustainability  of 
the projects.  
- It is expected that new Programme’s in UCAR continue to consider climate change mitigation and 
adaptation  actions.  
 
The theory of change showed below illustrates how each output contributes to the long -term objective of the 
Programme and how they are made up of a series of activi ties responding to the identified barriers. Each 
activity leads to intermediary outcomes, the longer -term project outcome and ultimately the impact expected 
from the Programme.  
The theory of change highlights the relation between “activities”, “outputs” an d “outcomes” and also it 
illustrates the main barriers (financial and institutional) that characterize the Programme, so it is possible to 
identify the necessary activities to reduce them and to achieve impacts on climate change.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
 
 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective 
learning processes, or in stitutions.  
 
Aligned with GCF’s EDA pilot objective, the proposed Programme aims to draw lessons learned on: i) the 
development of Mitigation and Adaptation Plans, ii) the implementation of climate finance for low -emission 
and climate -resilient investments  in vulnerable rural areas, iii) the implementation of new technology, best 
practices and ancestral knowledge, iv) the coordination and multi -stakeholder engagement, v) the 
implementation of a gender strategy.  
Knowledge will be generated through the entire  Programme, covering all three components. A substantial 
portion of Lessons Learned will be based on UCAR’s monitoring and evaluation activities, which will include 
the definition of a methodology to systematize the institutional reporting. To such end, ex periences will be 
studied looking back and looking forward to document the learning process.  
The main objective of gaining lessons learned is to identify and systematize information related to successful 
cases in order to promote, disseminate and replicate  best. The objective of monitoring and evaluating 
activities also aims to identify and analyze the problems raised during the execution of the Programme, as 
well as identify experiences that did not turn out as intended in order to learn to overcome such p roblems and 
to avoid them in the future.  
Some of the actions that will be included in the monitoring and evaluation system are:  
❖ Identification of a set of innovative practices which have been successful in adapting to climate 
change or in emissions reducti ons, in each of the micro -regions: the systematization of experiences will 
document the process of adoption and set -up of the practice, which factors enabled such experiences, and 
which  lessons  can be learned  and possibly  replicated  in other  experiences.  
For the dissemination of this activity among producers and authorities, workshops of introduction and 
reflection on these experiences are proposed to be held.  
❖ Evaluations from the beneficiaries' perspective to establish which were the most significant chan ges 
and impacts from their point of view: this will be done during participatory workshops halfway through the 
Programme and upon Programme's  end. 
❖ Creation of  a network  to exchange experiences  and  practices  among micro -regions: this  includes  
visits and exchange of experiences between government technicians.  
❖ UCAR shall conduct regular visits to projects in the micro -regions, in order to gain better feedback on 
the implementation  in each  case,  and know  how the different  micro -regions  are working  in the territory.  
The dissemination of experiences and exchange of knowledge on adaptation and mitigation measures will 
foster the replicability potential of this kind of initiatives.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 80*
---

 
 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained 
participation of private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the 
program.  
The Programme will aid in creatin g an enabling environment by:  
❖ Promoting collaboration, articulation and consensus between public, private and civil society 
agencies across the entire timeframe of the  Programme.  
❖ Facilitating a process that allows all the actors to express their views, exp ectations and  contributions  
to develop a community -based strategy.  
❖ Improving the technical capacity and knowledge of the government agencies, community 
organizations and private sector through the development of the necessary capacities for the definition of 
mitigation and adaptation strategies in the micro -regions and for the design and prioritization of climate action 
projects.  
❖ Providing  the necessary  finance  to empower  the micro -region  in the execution  of actions  and projects  
that will reduce the vulnera bility to climate change and promote a low -carbon development.  
❖ Provide support and assistance to design and implement innovative and ambitious cross -cutting 
integral  projects.  
 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples 
include:  
● Introducing  and demonstrating  a new market  or a new technology  in a country  or a region  
● Using  innovative  funding  scheme  such  as initial  public  offerings  and/or  bond  markets  for 
projects/programme  
 
The successful implementation of this EDA pilot proposal will set the example of innovative climate change 
action in vulnerable rural areas where climate change usually is disregarded in the territorial planning.  
The present proposal innovates in the following aspects:  
● Diverse and recipient -specific financial instruments:  Component 2 provides diverse financial 
alternatives for adaptation and mitigation measures, covering needs at all levels in the area of 
influence of the Programme. This is so, since the Programme contem plates investments for all 
sectors such as infrastructure, energy, agriculture production, conservation, access to water, among 
others. Moreover, the Programme includes financial instruments for all levels of recipients that 
integrate the micro region: i) it addresses public investment through Outcome 2.1 by financing works 
and services for the general rural population; ii) and it also addresses private investment for 
smallholders, small -scale farmersand associations and organizations of smallholders and sm all-scale 
farmers. This approach is innovative for Argentina since there is no existing Programme or Project in 
the country  that addresses  climate  change  needs  in such  an integral  manner.  
● Integral and transversal approach for territorial development:  The u ltimate goal of the present 
Programme is to generate a transformational impact in the development of an entire micro -region, 
and not only implement specific and disperse initiatives. Built on successful experiences: The 
proposal integrates a wide diversity  of mechanisms and instruments that have been proved by UCAR 
in the implementation of different Programmes and Projects. This EDA pilot builds on UCAR’s 
experience and combines the instruments to generate a unique and transversal approach to climate 
action  that will impulse  sustainable  and low carbon  rural development.


---
*Page 81*
---

 
 
 
● Adaptation and Mitigation synergies:  the proposal’s objective is to promote the implementation of 
measures that generate synergies between adaptation and mitigation, in this way changing the 
current approach to current climate action in Argentina that tends to treat adaptation and mitigation  
strategies differentially. UCAR identifies the need to impulse cross -cutting investments and looks to 
promote these by providing direct access to finance for investments in: i) sustainable low -emission, 
climate -resilient agriculture, ii) transformed energ y generation and access, iii) bioclimatic resilient 
infrastructure, and, iv) sustainable forest  management.  
● Low-carbon resilient agriculture : a key point of the proposal is to prioritize financing low -carbon and 
resilient agriculture systems, and the suppo rt of a transformation of systems dependent on 
agrochemicals and fossil fuels. This paradigm shift is essential in such an important productive sector 
in Argentina, and will contribute to increasing resilience and reduce emissions. The Programme will 
also contribute to demonstrate the benefits of organic production and ancestral knowledge, as well as 
it will preserve landscape and community roots in areas where these values are at risk due to the 
expansion of modern agriculture  systems.  
● Appropriate technolo gy and best practices:  the Programme will promote the use of appropriate 
technology for rural agriculture, livestock and agroindustry. To do this, UCAR will work together with 
INTA (National Institute of Agriculture Technology), an executing partner that develops technology 
considering the needs and context of rural producers. INTA also provides capacity building for 
construction, operation and maintenance, health and safety issues that are essential for the 
appropriate use of the technology and the implementation of best practi ces. For instance, INTA 
develops adaptation and renewable energy technology for the application in rural areas, for  example:  
i) dehydrators for vegetables, legumes and seeds to provide added value to their production, ii) solar 
distillers to remove arsenic from drinking water, iii) retrofitting roofs and water cisterns for rainwater 
storage that can be self -constructed with cheap and accessible materials, iv) water reservoirs built 
with ancestral techniques that have been inherited from local knowledge and w hich are specially 
adapted to climate and soil conditions, v) biodigestors for wastewater treatment for small 
agroindustries such as community dairy industries, and, vi) solar water heaters for agroindustry, 
among  others.  
● Revolving Funds for small -scale pr oducers : The Programme proposes self -managed revolving funds 
for the component that finances projects of small -scale producers. The instrument intends to work as 
a strengthening tool for associations and organizations, by complementing the support given th rough 
non-reimbursable funds. The revolving funds will be destined to cover the needs of working capital 
related to adaptation and mitigation projects, and will also enhance an associative resource 
management.


---
*Page 82*
---

 
 
E.2.4.  Contribution to regul atory framework and  policies  
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to 
systematically drive investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional 
low-emission po licies, and/or improve climate -responsive planning and development.  
 
Working at a micro -region scale in a participatory strategic planning process with all the relevant stakeholders 
will strengthen the micro -region and catalyze future collaborative work. The development of an integral 
diagnosis of the micro -region, based on the impact of climate change will result in the elaboration of a 
transformational Mitigation and Adaptation Plan that could be the base for regulatory and policy changes at a 
municipal and provincial level.  
The proposal will contribute to set an example for Mitigation and Adaptation planning at a micro -regional 
scale in which various municipalities will need to interact between each other. This experience will be 
extremely valuable and s erve as a reference for the National Adaptation Plan that will be carried out by the 
National  Ministry  of Environment  and Sustainable  Development  with the aid of GCF  readiness  funds.  
Additionally, the Programme will put into action emission reduction goals  and address adaptation needs 
established by Argentina in its NDC.  
The present Programme is aligned with the Agri -Food and Agro -industrial Participatory and Federal Strategic 
Plan 2010 -2020 (PEA) which is promoted by the National Government as one of the m ain central lineaments 
of its administration in the National Ministry of Agroindustry. The PEA was launched in 2010 and its purpose 
has been to generate a shared vision of the future for the Sector, with contributions from all stakeholders 
comprising such sector. The PEA has promoted the participation of stakeholders of the Sector through 
spaces designed to enable interaction and  dialogue.  
The present proposal is also aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals that include the goals of  
ending poverty, achieving food security and promoting sustainable agriculture, reducing inequality and 
promoting inclusive societies. The Programme will contribute to these goals through the enhanced resilience 
of micro regions by: i) the adoption of climate -resilient agr icultural  practices  that increase productivity and 
food security, ii) improved access to safe drinking water reducing burden of labour (in particular on women) 
and illness, iii) empowering of local communities, particularly women and youth, with improved  decision 
making, planning, and coping capacities against climate -risks and impacts, iv) adopting low -carbon efficient 
technologies and practices that will increase quality of life and improve livelihoods. The Programme’s ultimate 
goal is to develop rural economies and recognizes that smallholder farmers are the backbone of these rural 
economies  and therefore  need  to have  livelihood  security.  
Moreover, the Programme, through enhanced coordination and synergies among the various stakeholders 
strengthens poli cy and institutional frameworks for long -term sustainability project activities, outcomes and 
impacts towards climate resilient development in the country.  
 
Finally, regarding land tenure, the Programme will define within the Programme’s Operations Manual the 
different information/documents that will be considered from the beneficiaries in order to demonstrate their 
linkage with the land that is object of investment. The definition will be based on UCAR’s vast experience and 
trajectory executing rural devel opment projects and programmes within the target population that will benefit 
from the Programme. In cases where the beneficiaries don’t count with the information/documentation 
required by the Programme, UCAR will provide with the guidance and training so  that the beneficiaries can 
initiate official formalities in order to process the requested information/documentation.  
Besides, the trainings on organizational strengthening proposed in Component 1 will include land tenure 
approach.


---
*Page 83*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Economic co -benefits  
 
The Programme will support 5,750 rural families (over 28,750 people) for:  
 
- Adapting to climate change and variability, in a scenario that shows that ecological and human 
systems will suffer from loss of productivity, fragmentation and soil erosion and loss of nutrients, 
displacement or reduction of the geographical range of some species; effects on the quality and 
quantity of water that are expected to affect the availability, stability, access and use of food; 
increase in mass weathering phenomena, such as landslides and rock avalanches; greatest 
droughts  that will increase  the risk of forests  and natural  vegetation  fires.  
- Contributing to GHG mitigation by promoting the adoption of renewable energy and other 
sustainable practices in regions where rural population has limited access to energy, where 
altered hydrological cycle is expected to affect hydroelectric and potable water production and 
where  there  is a high forestation  and reforestation  potential.  
These measures will be promoted in rural areas where the type of beneficiaries prioritized by this Progra mme 
have significant limitations for accessing credit, technology and public sector interventions (see description of 
barriers faced by beneficiaries in section 3.4 of the Feasibility Study: Needs of recipient). The Programme 
activities will promote, in fi ve vulnerable micro -regions of Northern Argentina:  
 
- Increased capacity for developing and implementing efficient adaptation approaches to climate 
change that lead to protection of property and farmer’s  incomes;  
- Further  increases  in financial  stability  during times  of extreme  events;  
- Increase in the use of clean technologies that will promote low -carbon development in the 
territory, leading to efficiency and independency of variations in electricity, water tariffs and 
imports.  
- Significant savings related to energy savings. Estimations are not provided:  tariffs in Argentina 
are in a process of restructuring, and they vary according to every Province. At the Concept Note 
stage, actual sources of energy or the proportion of beneficiaries that will chose differe nt types of 
renewable  energy  are not known  for the purpose  of calculating  cost savings.  
Furthermore, gender perspective promoted by the Programme will enhance self -consumption, 
generation of small -scale income and the care of the family production unit  
 
Besides, the Programme will contribute to the potential for job creation.  
The most direct and valued impact will be the rooting of male and female agricultural producers to the rural 
environment that will be obtained through the adaptive actions and investme nts applied in their production 
systems, as well as with the strengthening of technical presence in the territory and the participation 
processes, community -based planning and the promotion of associativism between producers.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  pl anned  investments  contemplate  a  co -financing  that  in  many cases  will entail  
workforce on the part of the beneficiaries. This implies that beneficiaries will be trained in construction


---
*Page 84*
---

 
 
processes that will give them the potential to offer construction services in the market.  
In addition, public investment and private investment as well will generate work from different suppliers, and  
in many  cases  the promotion  of new technologies  will generate  movement  of new suppliers.  
 
Social co-benefits  
 
Programme activities will promote access to water, energy and sustainable agricultural practices that will 
contribute to increase income, enhancing food supply, and thus improve living conditions of the small  
farmers.  
 
Enhanced resilience and  preserved landscapes, fostered by soil conservation, restoration, forestation and 
reforestation measures, will promote the roots of communities.  
 
The response capacity of small farmers is very low, since very few actually take specific actions to adapt to  
climate variability. Local capacities will be strengthened based on increased skills focused on climate change 
approaches; in addition, participatory processes will enhance local capacity of coming together and making 
collective decisions, increased gende r equality and representation by women within community structures. 
Therefore, social cohesion will be reinforced.  
 
With regards to Indigenous Peoples, the Programme recognises, agreeing with the Permanent Forum on 
Indigenous Issues, that they are among th e first to face the direct consequences of climate change, owing to 
their dependence upon, and close relationship with the environment and  its resources (Seventh session  of 
the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, 21 April to 2 May 2008 i n New York: “Climate 
change, bio -cultural diversity and livelihoods: the stewardship role of indigenous peoples and new 
challenges). This Programme will promote adaptation and mitigation measures with a conservation approach, 
enhancing sustainable practice s in habitats where indigenous communities live. MAPs elaboration will be 
aligned with the communities' culture and knowledge.  
 
Adaptation and mitigation measures promoted by this Programme will contribute to improving socio -economic 
wellbeing and building  resilience of the rural communities to the impacts of climate change. Without the 
Programme’s proposed activities, food security, access to water, energy and ecosystem resilience will remain 
a major challenge which will be exacerbated by climate change. T he Programme will enhance preservation of 
landscapes; will promote preserving the roots of communities; will increase skills focused on climate change 
adaptation approaches; will increase gender equality; and will promote participatory processes that enhan ce 
local capacity of making collective decisions.  
 
- Improved health and  safety  
 
All activities will be linked to training. This training will include the promotion of health and safety aspects 
related to each topic, e.g. safety measures for the construction of boreholes or water cisterns; instructions for 
eliminating potential contamination of water before consumption; safety measures regarding maintenance  
and operation of renewable energy equipment; among  others.  
 
In the case of substitution of  fuels for e.g. heating or cooking, visible results related to improved health will be 
reached.  
Gender co -benefits  
 
Gender dimension is an integral part of the Programme and is incorporated and applied as a cross -cutting


---
*Page 85*
---

 
 
approach, and as an  analytical instrument and object of research.  
 
All the actions included in the Gender Action Plan seek the visibility of women as producers and workers, and 
their empowerment. As the Programme will work with a participative methodology during the preparat ion of 
the MAPs in each micro -region, women will be strengthened on having the tools for participate in real 
aspects.  
 
Through the Gender Action Plan, the Programme will develop local capacities on Mitigation and Adaptation 
with gender approach (technical staff and women and men producers).  
 
Also, it was established evaluation criteria for the financing (Output 2.2 Adaptation and mitigation projects of 
organizations of smallholders implemented) of family agriculture organizations, which will have a positive  
impact on promoting gender equality: associations that have women in their managerial positions will be 
prioritized.  
 
The Programme also established criteria to guarantee the involvement of women in all instances of action, so 
it is expected to increase t he participation of women in family farmers’ organizations, as partners and as 
leaders, to improve their productive knowledges and their capacities related with adaptation and mitigation, 
and to improve their financial knowledges  
 
Finally, the Programme takes into account women's difficulties in planning their participation in activities 
outside the home (due to the established gender roles). So it will be establish meeting times (or any instance 
of participation) considering the possibility of participat ion of both men and women and it will organize ad hoc 
childcare spaces.  
 
Environmental co -benefits  
 
Environmental co -benefits are related to improving communities and ecosystems conditions, as well as 
reducing GHG emissions that will affect them further in  the medium and long term.  
 
Programme activities will deliver a number of specific environmental benefits that include: soil conservation, 
flood control and reduction of erosion; improved tree cover that will have several interlinked environmental 
benefits  such as improved micro -climate, improved soil structure, improved drinking water quality, increased 
biodiversity; restoration of ecosystems, preserving biodiversity and acting as carbon sink; use of clean energy 
that will promote healthier livelihoods by improving air quality and avoiding use of fossil fuels or forest 
resources.  
 
It is important to remember that communities of rural areas are more vulnerable to climate change due to 
their levels of environmental degradation. As expressed by the UNISDR, env ironmental degradation, 
settlement patterns, livelihood choices and behaviour can all contribute to disaster risk, which in turn 
adversely  affects  human  development  and contributes  to further  environmental  degradation.  
 
Implementation of Programme activiti es will increase the ability of ecosystems to sustain essential ecosystem 
provisioning, supporting and regulating services in the face of climate change. This increased resilience to 
climate change will have a positive impact on livelihoods, acting as soft  infrastructure against extreme events.  
 
Finally, with regards to capacity building, the Programme as a whole will support, through training activities in


---
*Page 86*
---

 
 
Component 1, changing attitudes towards adaptation to climate change and to the use of sustainable 
solutions related to GHG mitigation.  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)


---
*Page 87*
---

 
 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and 
groups, overall income level, etc) . 
 
Chapter 1 of the Feasibility Study presents a detailed description of the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the 
country and of the beneficiary groups, specifically the regions where the Prorgamme will be implemented.  
As it was addressed in Chapter  1 and 2 of the Feasibility Study, the North of Argentina not only is the most 
background region according to economic and social indicators, but it also has the most populous presence of 
vulnerable population to climate change (please refer to chapter 2 p oint 1.2 for further information on social 
vulnerability to climate disaster risk).  
The vulnerability to climate change of the economy and local communities of the North of Argentina is a result of a 
number of factors, such as: i) high impact of climate ch ange on highly degraded ecosystems; ii) high poverty levels 
which reduced capacities to cope with climate change; iii) high amount of subsistence family agriculture dependent 
on climate variables; iii) deficient access to drinking water; iv) limited financ ial capacity to finance adaptation 
measures; v) dependence on costly fossil fuel for energy and limited access to sustainable clean energy sources;  
and vi) limited  organization  at local levels  for policy  dialogue  around  climate  change.  
The North region of  Argentina presents an existing environmental fragility that is exacerbated by climate change 
impact as it was described in chapter 1 of the Feasibility Study. This existing environmental fragility includes: 
degradation of natural systems, mainly due to th e advance of the agricultural frontier; disturbance of natural 
processes as wind and water erosion and as a result of absence of planning and maintenance of some civil works; 
problems of natural origin as presence of arsenic in groundwater and soil saliniz ation.  
Besides, there are also problems due to severe degradation processes generated through water and wind erosion; 
soil degradation on account of the agricultural frontier advance and changes in the use of agrochemicals and 
grassland fires.  
And, climate  change will exacerbate current and future risks to health, given the region’s population growth rates and 
vulnerabilities in existing health, water, sanitation and waste collection systems, nutrition, pollution, and food 
production in poor regions.  
As it was previously addressed, according to the changes in climatic variables from 1960 to 2010 and the climate 
projection for the near future (2015 -2039) and for the end of the century (2075 -2099), the NOA and NEA regions will 
be subject to the following clima te tendencies:  
- Increase of mean annual  precipitation  
- Increase of extreme precipitation  events  
- Increase in the length of dry spells, especially in NOA  region  
- Increase of frequency and duration of floods in the NEA  region  
- Increase of annual mean  temperature  
- Significant  increase  in the number  and duration  of heat waves  
- Increase  of tropical  nights  (except  for La Rioja  Province  where  there  is a reduction  tendency)  
Specifically the Programme will work on five micro -regions from the Great North of Argentina that h ave been 
prioritized due to their vulnerability to climate change and the presence of rural development programmes and 
institutional capacity. For more information on micro -regions prioritization process please refer to Chapter 2 point 2.2 
on the Feasibili ty Study.  
The following map summarizes climate change events and related impacts in the Programme’s micro -regions.


---
*Page 88*
---

 
 
 
Map of the Programme’s selected  Micro -Regions  
Source : Prepared by the authors . 
 
 
The projected climate conditions for the Great North region of Argentina will bring about impacts on the environment 
and the livelihoods of vulnerable communities.  
In this sense, increase of dry spells will bring about an increase of arid conditions that can easily lead to 
desertification processes. And this as well can entail less productivity and displacement or reduction of some species 
with possible local extinction. Besides, the risk of forest and natural vegetation fires will increase.  
Besides, effects on the hydrological cycle will a ffect agricultural, hydroelectric and potable water production, with 
related effects on access and use of food and increase in mass weathering phenomena such as landslides and rock 
avalanches.


---
*Page 89*
---

 
 
Risk management in the region  
The disastrous co nsequences that the extreme climate events cause on the region can be aggravated by  
deficiencies in risk management such  as: 
 
- Institutional  weakness:  Fragmentation  and lack of communication  between  government  agencies;  
- Deficiencies in disaster prevention:  lack of qualified human resources, absence of regulations improving 
the living conditions of the people and preserving their property, and little availability of reliable and 
timely  information.  
 
 
How the Programme addresses the issue  
 
The present EDA pro posal promotes a sustainable, inclusive and resilient development of the micro -regions. This will 
be addressed through the development of Mitigation and Adaptation Plans (MAP) that integrate adaptation and 
mitigation measures in the form of projects. The M APs will be developed in each one of the prioritized micro -regions 
through a participatory process looking forth to the generation of local capacity and ownership of the proposed 
actions to address climate change issues.  
 
The Programme will work to benefit  rural small -scale farmers who directly depend on agriculture for their livelihood 
and therefore are considerably vulnerable to climate change impacts. The Programme distinctively focuses on the 
most vulnerable farming communities and groups, including wom en, through Outcomes 2.1 and 2.2.  
The Programme proposed contemplates the following lines of action:  
 
a) Actions intended to raise awareness about climate change impacts, gender equality aspects, strengthening 
of organizations and rights approach, and improve  understanding of institutions, communities and 
organizations of small -holders, indigenous communities and rural workers on the potential adaptation 
measures which may reduce their vulnerability and improve their living conditions. Besides, actions intend to 
develop capacities for the preparation and implementation of Mitigation and Adaptation Plans. These actions 
included in Component 1 are proposed for the Programme’s beneficiaries and for government technicians at 
a local and national  level.  
b) Direct suppo rt to the rural population by developing public investments in infrastructure and  services 
intended to reduce the vulnerability of the specific micro -region and foster low -carbon development. These 
investments are included in Outcome  2.1. 
c) Direct support t o smallholders, small -scale producers and small -scale producers' organizations through 
financing investments for individuals (on -farm) and for associations (off -farm), as well as technical assistance 
in order  to implement  adaptive  and mitigation  measures.  This support  will be channelled  through  Outcome  
2.2 of the Programme, and will potentially be complemented by the support of other Programmes of the 
UCAR and other institutions.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
● Economic  and social  development  level of the country  and the affected  population  
● Absence  of alternative  sources  of financing  (e.g. fiscal  or balance  of payment  gap that prevents  from 
addressing  the needs  of the country;  and lack of depth  and history  in the local capital  market)  
● Need for strengthening institutions and implementation  capacity.


---
*Page 90*
---

 
 
As it was described in Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 of the Feasibility Study, the object region of the Progr amme presents 
extreme climatic conditions and high vulnerable population. The Programme aims to reduce exposure to climate 
change as well as to contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions in such region through five prioritized micro - 
regions in the Provinces of Jujuy, Salta, La Rioja, Formosa and Chaco.  
Besides, the Programme will work to benefit rural small -scale farmers who directly depend on agriculture for their 
livelihood and therefore are considerably vulnerable to climate change impacts. The P rogramme distinctively focuses 
on the most vulnerable farming communities and groups, including women, through Outcomes 2.1 and 2.2.  
The Programme would ensure that beneficiaries (women and men) acquire abilities to adopt conservation agriculture 
and climate -resilient agricultural practices to produce food; and that severely poor vulnerable families have access to 
safe water, renewable energy and are using productive resources and services for food and nutrition security and 
sustainable livelihoods imp rovement.  
 
 
1. Financial  needs  
Smallholders and small -scale farmers:  The main beneficiary group of the Programme encompasses groups of rural 
population with high poverty and vulnerability levels to climate change, including small -scale family producers, 
indig enous peoples and rural workers. Overall, such groups lack such technological capacity and access to 
technology and financing that would allow them to escape the poverty trap caused, among other factors, by deficient 
assets, limited resource, isolation, li mited access to services and markets, food insecurity, land tenure insecurity, and 
low levels of education and organization.  
For these beneficiaries the Programme proposes non -reimbursable funds for the execution of investments/activities 
intended to impro ve the living conditions of the vulnerable rural communities while creating synergies with 
greenhouse gases emission reduction measures. Besides, non -reimbursable funds will be accompanied by self - 
managed revolving funds. The proposed instrument intends t o work as a strengthening tool for associations and 
organizations, by complementing the support given through non -reimbursable funds to smallholders, destined to 
cover the needs of working capital related to adaptation and mitigation projects. This tool wi ll allow the continuity of 
the proposed actions beyond the term of execution of the Programme.  
2. Institutional  needs  
The Rural Development Programmes formulated since 2007, began to incorporate the territorial space dimension 
when considering that a policy f or family farming is only feasible if it is integrated with a strategy of local development 
that revalues rural living space.  
In this way, the environmental issue, and in particular the issues related to climate change, both concepts intrinsic to 
the territory itself, have gained preponderance in the national public agenda of the sector, especially during the last 
five years.  
At the same time, the growing incorporation of climate change concept as a social problem, allows decision -makers 
(different soc ial and economic actors and citizens in general) to become aware of the needs in mitigation and 
adaptation measures for climate change, which implies a greater preponderance to identify their institutional needs.  
Within this framework, the activities carri ed out under component one, will be based on the identification of the needs 
in the micro -regions in order to develop the capacities needed to define strategies in adaptation and mitigation of 
climate change in their territory and incorporate them in the p roject´s formulation process.  
E.5.  Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme


---
*Page 91*
---

 
 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate - 
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabli ng policy and 
institutional  framework,  or includes  policy  or institutional  changes.  
 
The Republic of Argentina has actively taken part in the process of generation and development of the international 
climate framework, particularly regarding the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. For several 
years now, the country has implemented voluntary national mitigation and adaptation actions in different sectors. In 
this regard, Argentina has already submitted three National Communications, has  prepared the "National Climate 
Change Strategy" and has recently sent its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Convention.  
 
National Communications and Biennial Reports. Argentina's government submitted its first Communication in 
1997, a revise d version thereof in 1999, and the Second National Communication in 2007. In November 2015, the 
Third National Communication was published. The Biennial Update Report (BUR) is intended to inform about the 
country's greenhouse gas emissions and is submitted  before the United Nations Climate Change Framework 
Convention every two years. This report was submitted in Paris, in December 2015.  
 
Alignment of this proposal with National Communications:  
 
This proposal bases the geographical prioritization of the NOA and NEA regions on climate vulnerability according to 
studies from the last National Communication for near -future and far -future scenarios, and to the impacts anticipated 
of climate change and variability. Selection of the micro -regions and evaluation of community vulnerability will be 
mostly based on information provided by such technical reports.  
 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  
 
On October 1st, 2015, Argentina submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). Based on the 
achievements made during the twenty -first Conference of the Parties (COP 21), particularly the Paris Agreement, 
Argentina has adopted the decision of reviewing its NDC, which effort will go on for the next years.  
 
Argentina has signed and ratified the Paris Agreement, in September 2016. Therefore, the revised contribution 
supersedes the first NDC version.  
 
The goals provided in such revised NDC by Argentina are:  
 
d) Argentina shall not be in excess of 483 million tons of CO 2eq in net emissions by year 2030. This goal shall   
be achieved through the implementation of a series of economy measures focusing on the energy, 
agriculture, forestry, transportation, industry and waste  sectors.  
e) Argentina submits an adaptation communication including national circumstances, vulnerabilit y and climate 
change impact, efforts already made and in progress, and specific needs that arise from the national process 
conducted at the National Cabinet for Climate  Change.  
Alignment of this proposal with NDC:  On the mitigation side, if all unconditional measures included in the NDC were 
to be implemented, Argentina's contribution to the global efforts required by 2030 to achieve the goal of maintaining 
the temperature increase below 2°C as regards pre -industrial levels would be close to present -day emission 
proportion (0.6% of reductions, compared to 0.7% of emissions). The impact of this proposal in reducing emissions is 
modest, given that it focuses on adaptation of vulnerable areas more than on reducing emissions per se . Anywa y, it 
constitutes a no so negligible contribution in that it finds small -scale solutions which can be owned by small -scale 
producers, and thus can be sustained over time and force a paradigm shift at such level.


---
*Page 92*
---

 
 
On the adaptation side, init ial needs were identified during the first stage of survey of needs that will continue into 
the future. Such needs refer to the spheres of i) research and development, ii) institutional strengthening, iii) 
vulnerability reduction and iv) awareness building  and education.  
This proposal answers to different kinds of needs stated in the NDC:  
➢ In the area of institutional strengthening , the NDC  highlights:  
❖ The need to create human resource capacity and to improve coordination among institutions for 
planning and management of climate change adaptation issues. As described, Component 1 of this 
Programme provides for training activities in adaptation to climate change both intended for the 
Programme's beneficiaries and for the governmental technicians at a national and local level. In 
addition,  all grants  of Component  2 include  specific  training  connected  to each  type of investment.  
❖ The need to create  multi -disciplinary teams  of  support  for  different  initiatives  with the purpose  of 
strengthening territorial ma nagement processes. In this regard, the proposed Programme will be an 
exercise at small scale for the creation of multi -disciplinary teams, which will be evidenced by the 
creation of evaluation committees with specialized technicians from different agencie s, to the 
composition of ad -hoc associations for each micro -region  where the different local actors, among 
who there are both representatives of the beneficiaries and institutions, shall carry on their MAPs.  
 
➢ As for reduced vulnerability , the NDC singles out the  following:  
❖ The need to develop structural and non -structural works to prevent flooding, drought, and heat 
waves. The proposed Programme includes financing lines for public works, for initiatives of an 
association or individual nature that tend to s uch needs. Some examples of the measures that can  
be financed by the Outcome 2.1 for systemic projects of public investments are “works to prevent 
landslides, infrastructure to prevent flooding, access to and storage of surface water and/or 
groundwater, e arly warning systems and the respective contingency plans, community feeding 
systems for livestock in extreme climatic events, bridges or improvements in rural roads, reclaim of 
areas affected by natural disasters”. Some examples of measures to be financed  under Outcome 2.2 
which are aligned to these NDCs’ identified needs are “conservation and management of 
ecosystems; ecological management of pests, weeds and diseases; regeneration of degraded soils 
through the use of organic fertilizers; diversified prod uction systems; local water management, 
systems to improve water quality; erosion  control”.  
❖ Strengthening  of initiatives  that support  land reclaim  and recovery  processes,  including  ecosystem - 
based adaptation. As described in Chapter 3 of the Feasibility Study, examples of activities that can 
be financed under Component 2 are “conservation and management of ecosystems, reforestation 
and forest regeneration, restoration of vulnerable or degraded ecosystems, control of forest fires; 
regeneration of degraded soils through the use of organic fertilizers; diversified production systems, 
erosion control”.  
➢ The creation  or strengthening  of Early  Warning  Systems  at the level of micro -regions  is deemed  eligible  to 
be included in the MAPs. If the micro -regions decided to prioritize such types of measures, the Programme 
will be also contributing to cover the need of "strengthening the early warning systems", included in the NDC 
within the research and development area. 
➢ Lastly,  the training  activities  in adaptation  to climate  change,  plus the communication  and dissemination  of 
lessons learned committed, will contribute to the needs stated in terms of awareness building and 
education . 
 
National Adaptation Plan (NAP)  
 
Argentina is devoted to the design and implementation of a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) before 2019. The NAP 
will have sub -national and sectorial chapters. It will help prioritize adaptation actions at a national level, and to


---
*Page 93*
---

 
 
generate a conceptual and institutional framework to allow designing and implementing local adaptation plans by 
other actors.  
 
Presently, the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development is preparing a Readiness proposal to be 
submitted to the GCF with the pur pose of conducting the construction and implementation of such Plan.  
 
Alignment of this proposal with the planned NAP:  This proposal is aligned with the plan of the Ministry of 
Environment and Sustainable Development, and may be considered a Pilot Programme that brings experience and 
examples of best practices on how to build adaptation strategies with the local actors, and on how to implement, 
execute and monitor them.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
 
UCAR (Unit for Rural Change) falls under the Ministry of Agroindustry to which it reports and has recently been 
accredited as Accredited Entity before the Green Climate Fund. Such unit shall fulfill the functions inherent to an  
AE in line with the fiduciary  and operating  standards  required  at the time of their accreditation.  
UCAR’s financial volume of explicitly designed climate -change activities14 represents a portfolio of more than 467.5 
USD million, from which 350.2 USD million have already been executed; however, considering the n ature of UCAR’s 
programmes, we can state that, to a greater or lesser extent, the whole of its financial volume is related to increasing 
adaptive capacities, representing, to date, a portfolio of over 1,300 million USD of ongoing programmes and 1,276 
million USD of completed programmes.  
UCAR will execute the Programme with the support of all its administrative, accounting and financial, human 
resources, monitoring and evaluation areas.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other rele vant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with 
NDAs on the funding proposal and the no -objection letter.  
Please also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this 
proposal was developed.  
 
In order to ensure country ownership, several multi -stakeholder engagement processes were developed during the 
diverse stages of the Programme formulation:  
✓ UCAR’s EDA proposal was elabora ted in close consultation with the NDA and the National Climate 
Change Direction of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development to ensure the goals and 
activities are in line with the national  priorities.  
✓ As it was previously described, the proposed EDA is aligned with the National Determined Contribution 
(NDC) on both, mitigation and adaptation strategies, as well as with the National Adaptation Plan that will 
be carried  out by the National  Ministry  of Environment  and Sustainable  Development . 
✓ The NDA  has reviewed  UCAR’s  EDA Proposal  and has submitted  a No Objection  Letter.  
✓ Multi -stakeholder  consultation  was carried  out in various  instances  and at different  levels,  as described  
 
 
14 Considering the Adaptation Fund Project, PRODERI’s adaptation projects and PROSAP’s irrigation projects.


---
*Page 94*
---

 
 
below:  
i. Stakeholder engagement for Micro -Region Strategy: In each of the five Programme’s 
prioritized micro -regions, a participatory process was held in the framework of the IDeMi and 
PISEAR Programmes that are being executed in the Micro -regions, as it has been previously 
described (please refer to Chapter 2 point 3 in the Feasibility Study for more information). The 
stakeholders that have actively participated in these processes are f or example: National  
Institute of Agriculture Technology (INTA), National Institute of Industrial Technology (INTI), 
Family Agriculture Secretariat (SAF), Ministry of Production of the provinces, Ministry of 
Environment of the provinces, representatives o f smallholders, private sector and  
representatives of indigenous  communities.  
ii. Stakeholder engagement for Climate Action Validation: Secondly, an inclusive and gender 
balanced workshop was carried out in each of the micro -regions to elaborate on the local climate 
related adverse impacts that had been previously identified by the stakeholders in each of the 
strategic plans for the IDEMI and PISEAR programmes. The stakeholders that participated of  
this process include representatives of: provincial ministrie s, municipalities, indigenous 
communities,  small  farmers  association,  and technicians  from INTA,  SAF,  among  others.  
The stakeholders of the micro -regions expressed their interest in executing climate related 
initiatives and continuing the collaboration with UCAR.  
iii. Stakeholder engagement with Indigenous Communities: within the framework of the 
formulation of the EDA Programme, information and consultation processes for Indigenous 
Communities of the selected micro -regions took place. It is important to ment ion, that  the 
province of La Rioja doesn’t have registration of indigenous communities in Los Llanos Mircro - 
Region. Please find the commitment letters of information and consultation in the Annex II. 
Throughout the implementation of the Programme, the me chanisms of participation, information 
and consultation will take place every time the actions affect the Rights of Indigenous 
Communities, as established in point 9 of the Environmental and Social  Management  
Framework  (ESMF).  
 
Please refer to chapter 2,  point 3 of the feasibility study for more information on the stakeholder engagement 
process for the development of the EDA Proposal and for information regarding the consultation process in the 
micro regions.  
 
Stakeholder engagement throughout the EDA Pro gramme development : 
✓ The present EDA Programme proposes the development of Mitigation and Adaptation Plans (MAPs) at a 
micro -region level through Component  1 proposed activities.  
A participatory process involving key stakeholders will take place for the MAPs development. Through 
Component 3 of the Programme, the methodology for the MAPs elaboration for each micro -region will be 
designed and established in order to assure an effective participatory process. The methodology will be 
built considering the met hodologies applied in UCAR’s IDeMI Programme and the pilot experience in the 
Yavi Micro -region, two very significant experiences in UCAR.  
The methodology will stipulate how the different meetings will be held, how the calls for participation to 
the meeting s will be done according to each particular case, and other mechanisms and instruments in 
order to accommodate the needs and characteristics of the stakeholders, as well as the implementation 
of gender equity considerations in the stakeholder engagement pr ocesses.  
Regarding potential rural organizations of family agriculture producers and indigenous communities that 
could be eligible for financing, UCAR counts with a record that accounts for at least 187 organizations 
(between 30 and 55 organizations accord ing to the micro region).  
 
Role of the National Designated Authority (NDA) in the EDA’s Implementation Arrangements


---
*Page 95*
---

 
 
The role of the NDA signaled in the EDA ToRs has been taken into account by proposing its participation with 
Oversight functions.  
According to the EDA Pilot Terms of reference, the NDA is to have a strong role, both in the stage of identification 
and nomination of an entity to develop the proposal, and in the monitoring and evaluation of the programme in the 
Fund’s relevan t guidelines. This is why the NDA has been included in the Steering Committee, since it is the m ost 
strategic role. The NDA will guarantee that the GCF objectives and proceeds are understood and implemented. 
According to the ToRs, the NDA is expected to r eport to the Secretariat on the relevant aspects from their oversight 
function.  
For further details on the Programme’s implementation arrangements please refer to section C.7 in the Funding 
Proposal.  
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appr opriate, financial soundness of the project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or  barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment.  
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the p roject/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
 
 
As established in the Timetable of Programme Implementation (ANNEX V) and the Budget (ANNEX VI), activities in 
the first year will be focused on establishing the baseline and on the development of workshops and technical 
assistance for the participatory processes in the micro regions. These  will be held mainly by Component 1 (39% of the 
component to be executed in the first year) and by Component 3 (26% of the component to be executed in the first 
year, from which 33% is related to the cost of the baseline and the household survey).  
 
Only fr om the second year onwards, activities related to investments, which are concentrated under Component 2,  
will take place, and activities under Components 1 will be more related to the backing of the concepts that have been 
installed during the first year of intense technical assistance, especially related to gender issues, and backing of 
project  formulation.  
 
The last year will be focused on the finalization of the adaptation and mitigation activities, lessons learned activities 
and exit strategy. The expe cted curve of execution of the funds is shown in the figure below.


---
*Page 96*
---

 
 
  
Expected curve of execution of the Funds    
8.000.000    
7.000.000    
6.000.000    
5.000.000    
4.000.000    
3.000.000    
2.000.000    
1.000.000    
-   
 Year  1 Year  2 Year  3 Year  4 Year 5  
 
Source :Prepared by the authors  
 
 
All in all, budget assigned for Components 1, 2 and 3 accounts for 7.2%, 79.4% and 13.4% of the total budget, 
respectively, which is in line with the trends observed in other UCAR's projects and programmes. Therefore, it can be 
affirmed that most of the funds will be destined to concrete adaptation and mitigation investments for public works and 
smallholders.  
 
Budget assigned for the different outputs of the project are shown in the figure below.


---
*Page 97*
---

 
 
 
Proportion of Budget assigned to each Output  
1% 
 
3% 6% Output 1.1 Local capacity  on climate  
11%   change generated and  awareness  
raised  
 
Output 1.2 Micro regions with 
enhanced capacity to lead 
community -based adaptation and  
40%  mitigation  actions  
Output 2.1 Systemic projects of  
40%  public investment  implemented  
 
Output 2.2 Adaptation and 
mitigation projects of organizations 
of smallholders implemented   
 
Source :Prepared by the  authors  
 
 
Of the total budget requested to execute the present GCF Programme, 83.8% is the amount requested to the GCF, 
3.8% is the Grantees’ co -finance, 7.6% is the local governments’ co -finance and 4.8% belongs to UCAR’s co - 
finance15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 Besides, UCAR will provide with a parallel co -financing of at least USD 500,000 from other Programmes that will be 
implemented in the selected micro -regions.


---
*Page 98*
---

 
 
Programme's Funding Source Distribution  
4% 
5% 
GCF 
7% 
 
Local governmen ts' 
co-finance  
 
Grantees' co -finance  
 
84%   
UCAR's co -finance  
 
 
 
Source : Prepared by the authors  
 
 
 
The budget assigned in this Programme for gender issues is significantly out of line in comparison with UCAR's 
experience in other projects and programmes. More than USD 300,000 will be destined to professionals and 
workshops in the subject, specific accompaniment to women in project formulation and travel and services expenses 
to ensure women's participation and a ccess to grants.  
 
 
Cost Efficiency  
The cost efficiency of the Programme is guaranteed since:  
➢ The Programme has been designed to maximize availability and use of the requested resources in favour of 
rural population. This is so because the cost of technical  assistance is internalized by a substantial  
percentage by the R&D institutions of the National State working for rural development in the area of 
intervention (i.e. INTA, and Family Agriculture Secretariat), and the conformation of ad -hoc associations th at 
will be contributing to the implementation of the Programme with their working time. Besides, UCAR’s existing 
structure will have a substantial part in the Programme’s execution through the key participation of its different 
administrative and technical  areas. This way, execution costs are significantly reduced, shifting the weight of 
such  resources  to multiply  the number  of beneficiaries  with access  to adaptation  and mitigation  measures.  
➢ Sustainability  criteria  and appropriation:  adaptation  and mitigation  technologies  proposed  in the Programme  
have been developed under sustainability criteria, which provide greater efficiency potential. Such 
technologies will be subsequently adjusted and corroborated in participatory action research. Thus, propos als 
will be corroborated in terms of sustainability by expert governmental technicians in the context of intervention 
for the issues identified and clearly adapted to the target population. Capacity building activities will also be a 
guarantee of the perma nence and appropriation of technologies by the beneficiaries.  
➢ Collaboration:  collaboration  among  organizations,  as well as stakeholder  engagement  at the local scale,  is a 
crucial element in long -term change. Stakeholder engagement will be promoted as described in chapter 2, 
point 3 of the feasibility study.  
➢ Programme  management  and monitoring:  UCAR  has proven  experience  in managing  rural development  
projects  and  programmes  with  external  financing.  It  will  apply  the  best  practices  in  govern ance  and


---
*Page 99*
---

 
 
management to execute and monitor the Programme activities.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co -financing ratio (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long -term low emission investment.  
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
As mentioned in section B.2, the amount of co -finance covered by grantees will depend on the investment elements 
as following: 20% for subcomponent 2.1 and 10% for subcomponent 2.2.  
Regarding co -finance for subcomponent 2.1 a higher co -finance may be requeste d based on a  case -by-case 
analysis, as appropriate, according to the sub -project in question.  
In this regard, according to the assumptions made that the micro -regions will destine 25% of total investments to 
GHG mitigation projects, mainly by means of generation of renewable energy (78%) and forestation with native 
species (22%), the co -financing ratio obtained is 0,19. This means that grantees (including smallholders and local 
governments) will leverage 19% of the investments made for greenhouse gas mi tigation.  
Co-finance provided by UCAR (including UCAR’s parallel co -financing) will be principally destined to development 
outcomes of the micro -regions, thus allowing the destination of GCF funds to cover climate action to increase 
resilience and catalyze  a low carbon development.  
The Programme will set a precedent for incorporating climate change into UCAR's development agenda and its 
learnings will contribute to include similar actions in current and future operations managed by the organization. In 
addition, it will prioritize investments in leading producers to motivate the replicability of investments through private 
or other public funds.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please  specify  the expected  economic  and financial  rate of return  with and without  the Fund’s  support,  based  on the 
analysis conducted in  F.1. 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operatio ns (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.).  
 
 
While working with vulnerable populations some climate change measures have a net private cost (i.e. the costs to 
the farmer are greater than the benefits they receive) but a net social benefit (i.e. the total benefits to the farmer and 
to society, including the environmental improvement, outweigh the total costs). Multi -functional measures can be 
particularly beneficial from a social perspective, as they contribute to multiple aims. Without public support, 
underinvestme nt in these socially beneficial measures is likely to occur.  
Based on other support programs for Family Agriculture managed by UCAR, the Internal Rate of Return is expected 
to exceed 22% and the NPV is positive in all cases.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
Please refer to section F2.


---
*Page 100*
---

 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF  
core 
indicator 
s Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total  project  financing  US$ 26,327,124  
(b) Requested  GCF  amount  US$ 22,055,875  
(c) Expected lifetime emission  reductions  overtime  731,851  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a  / c) US$ 35.97 /  tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b  / c) US$ 30.14 /  tCO 2eq 
 
Estimated cost per tCO 2eq 
 
The estimation of emissions reductions has been made assuming that micro -regions would allocate 
approximately 25% of the funds to mitigation measures, related to renewable energy generation (78%) 
and afforestation or re-forestation with native species (22%).  
 
For detailed information regarding the estimation methodology please refer to the excel sheet in Annex 
VII. 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
(1) GCF finance contribution  to mitigation  5,513,969  
(2) Total financing from  non  GCF  sources  4,271,249 
Ratio  (1)/(2)  1.29 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)


---
*Page 101*
---

 
 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3 ). 
 
Based on the above analysis, pl ease provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2.  
 
 
The expected benefits achieved after the implementation of the Programme are difficult to quantify for the present EDA 
Programme since the projects are not yet defined.  
However, due to the inherent characteristics of the interventions that will be financed by the Programme, it is expected 
that the generated ext ernalities will have positive benefits for the community, surpassing the investments made.  
As mentioned in section E.6.3, based on other support programs for Family Agriculture managed by UCAR, the  
Internal  Rate  of Return  is expected  to exceed  22% and the NPV is positive  in all cases.  
The economic benefits provided by the Programme for vulnerable communities will lie in the strengthening of 
productive systems, through the adoption of local adaptation and mitigation measures to climate change and access to 
energy from renewable sources. This will have a positive impact on the cost structure of their production, which is 
predicted from the analysis of the family farming systems in each project. The projects that will be financed will analyze 
the following: (i ) profit (Gross Margin), (ii) net family income (Profit + value of family labour) and (iii) Situation withou t 
project.  
As mentioned in section B.2, the amount of co -finance covered by grantees will depend on the investment elements as 
following: 20% for s ubcomponent 2.1 and 10% for subcomponent 2.2.  
Regarding co -finance for subcomponent 2.1 a higher co -finance may be requested based on a case -by-case analysis, 
as appropriate, according to the sub -project in question.  
Co-finance provided by UCAR will be pri ncipally destined to development outcomes of the micro -regions, thus allowing 
the destination of GCF funds to cover climate action to increase resilience and catalyze a low carbon development.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  
 
Based on the nature of the EDA Programme, specific technologies have not been chosen. However, the best types of 
technologies have been pre -identified regarding their capacity to provide adaptation solutions and mitigation options, 
based on the knowledge of the climate change impacts in the micro -regions, as well as their mitigation potential. For 
more infor mation on the rationale, please refer to the Feasibility Study to obtain the detail of the vulnerability 
assessments and the mitigation potentials of the micro regions. Examples of potential projects have been developed 
for providing a better idea of the p ossibilities. As general criteria, the technology that will be used in the projects will 
have to be developed and proven to be efficient, subject to any changes necessary in terms of the specificities of each 
area of intervention, production systems, and s ocial and cultural profile of the beneficiary group.  
 
All the same, the Programme considers the hiring of Technical Experts that will lead the capacity building processes at


---
*Page 102*
---

 
 
the local level, focused on the different types of stakeholders (l ocal governments and smallholders), in order to ensure 
that the identification of the technologies to invest on are the most appropriate to the needs, the scale, the 
beneficiaries’ capabilities, the geography and the impacts of climate change / mitigation opportunities, that they include 
measures for sustainability over time (appropriate M&O, for example). The Technical Experts will accompany the 
Programme activities so that the formulation stages consider all these variables. At the end of the approval lin e, there 
will also be an Independent Technical Committee that will ensure that the developed proposals are sound.  
 
The fact that the Programme will establish agreements with institutions that are present in the territory of the micro - 
regions, such as the National Institute for Agriculture Technology or the Under -secretary of  Family  Agriculture, 
provides better guarantee that the adopted technologies are appropriate to the local possibilities in terms of cultural 
appropriation and functioning.  
 
Technologi es to be selected will also pass through the assessment of a Social specialist on the field, as well as the 
environmental and social assessment by the Environmental and Social Management Unit in  UCAR.  Therefore, 
aspects related to environmental, gender, cultural, indigenous peoples issues related to the technology will also be 
analyzed, ensuring that a systemic and sustainable decision is taken.  
 
The adoption of a participatory approach is an essential part of the rationale behind the Programme since such  
approach will see to: a) satisfy the needs and demands of the target population, b) strengthen the beneficiaries in their 
actions as a group and as individuals through the specific practice of preparing and implementing their own projects 
and, c) increase  participation of the beneficiaries in the several stages of any project – in the decision -making, in the 
follow -up, and evaluation – in such a way that transparency, fairness and actual implementation of the project can be 
ensured. During the first phase of the Project execution, procedures and training on participatory management 
mechanisms will be provided to ensure the engagement of the beneficiaries throughout the full cycle.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and opera tion), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) 
standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and Action 
Plan.  
 
According to the objectives and planned activities, the Programme will generate low and moderate negative 
environmental impacts, providing important positive impacts on the environment and the community. for the medium 
term 
The environmental and social impacts expected to be low and moderate and therefore class ified in category B , 
requiring the formulation of an Environmental Analysis that considers the eight IFC's Performance Standards and its 
recommendations.  
Please refer to the Annex IV to view the ESMF.  
 
 
Capacity of UCAR to implement the ESMF  
The capacity of UCAR to implement the ESMF is principally based on its Environmental and Social Unit, which is 
responsible for the management of these items across the institution.  
Its main responsibilities are:  
- To ensure  compliance  with environmental  and social  requirements  and procedures  agreed  with the External  
Financing  Agencies  in the execution  of the UCAR  Programs  and Projects.


---
*Page 103*
---

 
 
- To advise and train the executing agencies in the specific themes related to the environmental and socio - 
cultural management of the Programs and  Projects  
- To participate in the preparation of the manuals and operating regulations, in the subjects of its competence, 
of each  Program and  / or Project  to be executed  as a result  of new agreed  loan operations.  
- To perform ran dom environmental and social audits on samples of the portfolio of Programs and Projects 
managed by  UCAR.  
- To carry out the control and monitoring of the execution of the Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(PGAS)  and Plans  of Indigenous  Peoples  (PPI)  of the Programs  and Projects  that foresee  their realization.  
- To coordinate the execution of the ex -post environmental and social assessment of each corresponding 
Program and  Project.  
- To prepare Environmental Impact Reports, Management Plans, and Environmental Data Sheets for UCAR 
Programs and  Projects.  
 
 
UCAR´s Environmental and Social Unit has a vast experience in activities associated with the planning, negotiation, 
formulation, administration, monitoring and evaluation of programmes and projects with the according approach. For 
guarantee this, different programmes have an ESMF.  
The main programme for rural infrastructure has its own ESMF, with an accurate guidance. Environmental and Social 
Unit´s staff is adequately trained to follow up o n environmental incorporation in this kind of projects  
Another example is the following programmes: Forest Sustainability and Competitiveness (IDB), Sustainable 
Management of Natural Resources (IBRD) and Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forest Lands capes (GEF). 
Each one have an ESMF, which application is monitored by UCAR  
On the other hand, UCAR’s experience in Increasing Resilience and Enhancing Livelihoods of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and regions, has been proved by the execution of a  significant number of rural development 
programmes such as PRODERI, PRODEAR, PRODERNEA and PRODERNOA (IFAD). The climate perspective was 
explicitly included in PRODERI and fully developed through the expertise gained with the on -going Adaptation Fund 
project in the Northeast of the country.  
 
 
Costs related to ESMF (contemplated in EDA Budget – Annex VI)  
 
 
Under the Output 1.2 (Activity 1.2.3. Technical support for proposal development and submission) are considered 10 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), assuming that 1 public work per micro region will be performed 
within the type of projects that exceed UCAR's capacities and 1 public work per micro region will be performed in the 
categories of water management, irrigation, drainage, or  infrastructure (that can be assessed by UCAR's existing 
formulation teams)  
 
 
Also, is consider 1 environmental and social inspector, 1 environmental specialist based in UCAR's offices (that will 
supervise all the environmental issues) and 1 social special ist, with specific knowledge on Gender and Indigenous 
Peoples Issues, based in UCAR's offices too.  
 
 
Travel expenses for the staff and for the inspector are contemplated also in EDA Budget.  
 
 
1. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS OF  PROGRAMME  
Adaptation  and  m itigation  actions  of  Component 2  have  potential to generate  negative  environmental and  social


---
*Page 104*
---

 
 
impacts. As evaluated, within the activities of component 2, the public investment projects are those that have greater 
environmental and social risk (Moderated Impact, B -Category). Consequently, a more detailed and in -depth analysis 
and evaluation is considered for these projects from the design, before being approved and continuous with the 
execution follow -up. 
The potential negative impac ts would be verified only at medium or small scale, at local level and in many cases for 
short periods of time, for example, the construction phase of infrastructure works.  
2.   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARD ASSESSMENT  
The stages of project formulatio n, evaluation and classification are central for ensuring that projects achieve good 
environmental and social performance, are well designed, considering the needs and interests of the community, 
evaluating the possible negative impacts that the activities  can generate in the environment and people, and include 
the measures necessary to avoid them, reduce them to the maximum or eliminate them when possible.  
This proposal anticipates the evaluation of adaptation and mitigation projects based on the following  grounds: i) 
environmental legislation and impact assessment systems in force in the Provinces where the Projects are conducted;  
ii) the institutional characteristics of the proposed Programme; iii) the nature of the environmental and social impact 
caused by e ach Project; and iv) the Performance Standards of  IFC. 
Each project will follow the procedures of environmental and social assessment detailed in the Environmental and 
Social Managing Framework depending of on the preparation stages and the type of project . 
 
A. At the Identification and classification Stage , projects are classified into A, B or C, depending on how 
elaborate they are, their location, and the preliminary identification of their impacts' level. Projects classified as 
Type A are non -elegible for t he Programme.  
 
B. At the Analysis and Evaluation Stage , the environmental and social studies required would be conducted 
depending on the type agreed upon in the Project Profile. C -Type Projects do not require any environmental 
and social impact assessment. H owever, if provincial legislation were to require it, such assessment will be 
conducted  and submitted  before  the competent  provincial  authority.  
 
For projects classified as Type B, the performance of an ESIA will be a prerequisite. According to the nature 
and complexity of the project, the need to deepen the analysis and the possibility of a project's site inspection 
by UCAR’s Environmental and Social Management Unit (UGAS) will be considered. In both cases,  projects 
will carry out a public consultation pr ocess and will submit an Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) for the project execution stage. Once the ESIA on any project is conducted, the UCAR will proceed to:  
(i) call the public hearing on the project and on the ESIA according to the instructions provided in the 
Environmental and Social Manual; (ii) obtain the environmental authorization by the relevant provincial 
authority for its subsequent referral to UGAS; and (iii) prepare the environmental and socio -cultural 
specifications of the bidding documents based on the measures for the construction stage, which are a part to 
the PGAS. Such will be reviewed and approved by the UGAS prior to their publication. Any projec ts requiring a 
public  hearing  will incorporate  its results  to the project's  ESIA.  
 
C. At the Execution and Monitoring Stage , compliance with the ESMP of ESIA will be verified under the 
supervision of Technical Implementation Unit and UGAS. To such end, an Environmental and Social Works 
Inspector will be hired for the tasks described in the Environmental and Social Manual as supervised by the 
UGAS. Such inspector should understand the legal framework in force as the environmental and social 
operating  policie s incorporated  into the Management  Plan that he or she must  supervise.  
 
Throughout all the project's cycle phases, UCAR's UGAS will supervise the application of the environmental and social 
procedures established in the Environmental and Social Manual and should provide general guidance and specific 
technical assistance upon request.  
Monitoring and Evaluation Activities  
UCAR will carry out the monitoring and evaluation activities as well as the supervision of the territorial actions


---
*Page 105*
---

 
 
coordinating, supervising and supporting the activities of the Technical Implementation Unit. Monitoring indicators as 
well as all the information generated will be disaggregated by sex, age, and ethnicity related to the different axes of 
action.  
Please re fer to the Annex IV to view the layout of the Procedure of Environmental and Social Categorization and 
Evaluation of Projects.  
 
 
3.   RESETTLEMENT POLICY FRAMEWORK (RPF)  
Those projects that imply involuntary resettlement by displacement of communities are not eligible under this 
Programme’s framework. The PS 5 of IFC applies to projects in which:  
a) The involuntary deprivation of lands that produce, as a result, the loss of assets or the access to them, or the 
loss of income or livelihood  sources.  
b) The involunt ary restriction of the access to zones deemed as parks or protected areas by the law, with the 
consequent  adverse  effects  for the subsistence  of the displaced  persons.  
In case it is established that any project generates involuntary resettlement of populat ion in the above -mentioned 
terms, the formulation of a Resettlement Plan (RP) will be required according to the guidelines established in ESMF.  
 
 
4.   INDIGENOUS PEOPLES PLANNING FRAMEWORK (IPPF)  
A.   Effects of the Programme on Indigenous People.  
Taking i nto account the nature, objectives and approach of the Programme, it is understood that:  
- There  are Indigenous  People  in all the selected  micro  regions  (except  Los Llanos,  La Rioja  Province)  
- The activities  do not show  controversial  aspects.  Negative  effects  on indigenous  are not expected.  
- Problems  will be diagnosed  and given  priority  from a participatory  approach.  
- All projects  will be formulated  and assessed  from a participatory  approach.  
The execution mechanisms of the Programme will guarantee the communities’ participation in all the stages of the 
design of the activities, thus reducing the possibility of complaints towards them.  
 
 
B. Social Assessment  Plan  
A Social Assessment of the projects will be carried out about those activities in which indigen ous people are not the 
direct beneficiaries but they affect the areas in which they are present. The purpose of the evaluation is to determine 
its possible effects, either negative or positive, on the communities, and to evaluate alternatives of the projec t in the 
cases when the negative effects cannot be  reduced.  
 
 
C. Indigenous Peoples  Plans  
In the event that the social assessment determines positive or negative effects of a project on indigenous peoples, an 
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) will be made to ensure that a) the indigenous people affected by the project receive 
the social and economic benefits appropriate from the cultural point of view, and b) if possible adverse effects on 
indigenous peoples are identified, such effects be avoided and reduced as much as possible, mitigated or 
compensated.  
 
 
5.   GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM)  
This mechanism seeks to facilitate interaction between the Programme and the community to receive all kinds of


---
*Page 106*
---

 
 
concerns, complaints and grievances, and trying to solve potentially controversial situations through dialogue and 
negotiation.  
The Micro Region Ad -hoc Association will be responsible for the implementation of the GRM, and will appoint a 
referent and set the space for receiving complaints, concer ns and queries made by the population in relation to the 
execution of the projects. The mechanism will be implemented in a transparent and accessible manner  for  all 
members of the community and it will provides fair, equitable and lasting results within a reasonable time after filing the 
complaint.  
The following are the steps for registering and resolving queries and / or complaints:  
1) Reception and registration of queries or  complaints  
2) Evaluation of concerns: in order to determine their  relevance  
3) Response to Concerns and  Conflicts  
4) Monitoring  
5) Conflict  Resolution  
 
 
Please refer to section 10 in Annex IV for a more detailed description on the Grievance Redress Mechanism.  
 
 
6.   PROGRAMME'S GENDER STRATEGY  
A Gender Assessment was developed to provide the context for gender issues in Argentina and in the region and 
sector of implementation of the Programme. This evaluation provides a framework regarding the actions taken and 
current  policies  with  regard  to   gender  equality  based  on  the  commitments   made  by  our  country  through      
the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women and its  optional protocol (CEDAW) 
and the proposed objectives for the agenda of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). Please find the Gend er 
Evaluation in Annex  III. 
This evaluation serves as a general framework to address gender issues within the implementation of the EDA 
Programme, as it establishes strategic lines to ensure equality between men and women in terms of resource 
distribution and control, access to opportunities of social and economic life, as well as full participation in decision - 
making spaces.  
The gender assessment has identified the opportunities to promote gender equality and has established the 
framework for the developm ent of the Gender Action Plan for the EDA Programme. Please find the Gender Action 
Plan in Annex  III. 
The gender strategy will be contemplated in the design of the methodology that will be elaborated to guide the 
elaboration of the MAPs.  
The Gender strategy will entail the permanent consideration of situations of gender inequality, working with different 
tools at each intervention, action or activity and will develop the means of adjustment or affirmative action to attain 
equal opportunities for men and women. This entails, also, advice, accompaniment and training activities for technical 
equipment and decision -makers of the Programme, and the organizations and institutions with which the Programme  
is to work.  
Gender dimension is an integral part of the objective of social equity, which is why it is incorporated and applied as a 
cross -cutting approach, an analytical instrument and object of research, which allows account to be taken of the 
contributions and differential demands or needs of men and wom en. These asymmetries occur both in institutions and 
in the development of work in the countryside. Women are invisible but active part in productive work and provide 
silent  management  of farms  and organizations.  It is necessary  then to denaturalize  certain  cultural  patterns  and to


---
*Page 107*
---

 
 
arbitrate directed measures that equate the opportunities and make effective the enterprises  
 
 
The Gender Action Plan establishes instruments and processes for the incorporation of the gender approach to 
address each component of the Programme. In particular, the Gender Action Plan contains the specific guideline to 
guarantee the following:  
 
a. The development of capacities for the preparation and implementation of Mitigation and Adaptation Plans will 
conside r gender aspects, through workshops and specific training on gender and climate change related with the MAP 
design, both for technical staff and for  producers.  
b. A target of percentage of investments destined to women, depending on the results of the baselin e and taking into 
account  the information  identified  in the gender  assessment  and in UCAR’s  experience  
c. Investment for associations will be destined to mixed -gender groups (men and women). Associations that have 
women in their managerial positions will be prioritized. A criterion for gender equity is included in the evaluation 
process.  
 
The Gender Action Plan also establishes the following principal considerations to be applied across all Programme 
activities:  
● Fostering  the composition  of mixed  groups,  including  men and women  in equal  proportions.  
● Developing information disaggregated by  sex. 
● Ensuring that men and women, adult and young population actively partakes in groups. To such  end, 
promotion actions and specific motivation techniques will be imple mented for women to participate, to take part 
in groups of interest and organizations and of the economic and political decisions in the different spaces of 
participation and  decision -making.  
● Guaranteeing that the information and dissemination systems, as well as support materials of the training and 
technical assistance training of the Programme services, are not designed in a sexist language and are free of 
any stereotyped  roles.  
● Ensuring that times, frequencies and places of all activities for each compo nent (meeting, workshop, among 
others) are compatible with women's time  availability.  
● Implementing  systems  of childcare,  so that women  may take part in Programme  activities  in full. 
● Training for technical teams related to productive and management aspects must contain a gender approach, 
so that they involve women in the topics, and capitalize on the potential for management and trading by 
women.  
● Technical teams conducting field work must foster the active participation of women in technical assistance 
activities,  must  orient  technical  assistance  bearing  in mind  the individual  conducting  the task at hand.  
● Approval  of MAPs  and projects  will be subject  to the supervision  of a gender  expert.  
 
 
According to the Gender Action Plan, specific measures will be taken in each component according to the expected 
outcome. All results promote the increasing participation of women in each activity.  
 
 
In the first instance, it was established that the target of participation of women in Component 2 is 30%, according to  
the previous experience of work registered by UCAR. 30% of the investments made through this Component must be 
managed by women. This goal would be modified once the Programme have the results of the baseline, to adapt it in 
case it is necessary, because it is important to know how many women are involved in this kind of activities  
(adaptation and mitigation), in each  micro -region.


---
*Page 108*
---

 
 
Another important goal to take into account is the amount of organizations (formal or informal), cooperatives  and 
associations that must be mixed (women and men): at last 50% of the total of organizations.  
To avoid the reproduction of male patterns in organizations and decision -making spaces, the Programme has two 
criteria:  
- Organizations, cooperatives or associat ions which don’t allow in their statutes the formal association of women 
will not be eligible for  projects  
- Priority will be given to those organizations where women are part of their decision -making bodies. 
In order  to strengthen  women’s  capacities  in adaptation  and mitigation  processes,  the Programme  proposes:  
- To empower women on adaptation and mitigation technologies and bring them the knowledge to access 
grants, by workshops specifically for  women  
- To support women on the field, with the accurate reso urces to participate in meetings and workshops and 
facilitate  their participation  in potential  formulation  activities  
At technical level, the Gender Action Plan consider different activities and measures to guarantee that all process have 
the accurate professional skills to take in account gender perspective and to promote the involvement of women in all 
stages:  
- Specific training on gender perspective (related to mitigation and adaptation), to build capacities on technical 
staff and stakeholders,  before  the participative  processes  begin,  as a condition  to star the MAP’s  design  
- Specific  trainings  on gender  perspective  for technical  staff and stakeholders  during  the participative  processes  
- Workshops to analyze women participation in the ongoing processes with all technical staff involved working in 
the micro regions (5 persons per  Micro -region)  
- Training materials / Publications / Dissemination materials: minor publications (flyers, radio, TV spots, others) 
for building  capacity  and supporting  calls for proposals  based  on women  participation  
- MAPs  will be carried  out with an appropriate  methodology  to incorporate  gender  perspective  
- All MAPs will contain a Gender Section, whith a specific diagnosis including the needs of women to use 
innovative  technologies  and women  participation  and their use of mitigation  technologies  
- Each MAP will consider the specific mechanisms to guarantee equal representation for men and women, 
including women territorial organizations (health organizations, human rights organizations, violence against women 
organizations,  etc.) 
Also, the Programme will hire a gender expert for supporting all of the capacity building process, for project formulation 
and support women on the field. UCAR’s gender staff will give technical support to each m icro-region during the 
preparation on MAPs and Technical Experts Committee and Territorial Formulation Team will have a  daily and 
constant interaction with social specialist of the Coordination Unit and with gender expert.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.  
As demonstrated by its accreditation as AE to the GCF, UCAR has an extensive expertise in working with in ternational 
funds and has a good track record in implementing programmes and projects using international financial  
management  practices.  For this Programme,  UCAR  will be responsible  for fiduciary  aspects  and will be accountable


---
*Page 109*
---

 
 
for all financial and investment activities.  
 
The procurement of goods and services (including consultants’ services) for activities financed by the Grant will be 
carried out in accordance with UCAR’s standard practices and procedures, which are aligned to the GCF  and national 
laws, including its procurement and consultants’ guidelines.  
 
Besides, the Programme’s financial management will be in compliance with the AE’s financial management policies 
and guidelines. A financial management and procurement operational m anual will be established for the Programme  
as a prerequisite to  approval.  
 
UCAR shall provide to the GCF:  
 
- annual progress reports on the status of the Project implementation, including the disbursements made during 
the relevant  period  or more  frequent  progress  reports  if requested  by the GCF;  
- annual audited financial statement of the Accredited Entity Grant Account, prepared by an independent auditor 
or evaluation body. The Programme’s financial statements will be audited in accordance with internationa l 
auditing standards and acceptable terms of  reference.  
UCAR will observe the highest ethical standards during the procurement and execution of this Programme. UCAR will 
ensure the substantive quality of the Programme implementation; the effective use of b oth international and national 
resources allocated to it, and (iii) the proper coordination among all Programme stakeholders, in particular national, 
sub-national and local partners. A detailed procurement plan by year for the Programme is provided in Anne x X. 
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G.2.  
 
The main risk factors of the Programme are:  
 
1. Institutional risk : this addresses the  institutional coordination between UCAR, the provincial authorities and 
the territorial technical  institutions.  
 
2. Operating and Technical  Risk:  
a. Investment in mitigation: Given that the communities define the MAPs in a collaborative and participatory 
manner, there is no establishing beforehand which actions will be prioritized for each micro -region. 
Therefore, it is not possible to determine with a degree of certainty how many mitigation projects will be 
executed.  
b. Interest of the business private secto r: the business private sector might be reluctant to participate in 
adaptation and mitigation projects to be promoted by the  Programme.  
c. Capacity building attendance: capacity building and training workshops do not have appropriate 
stakeholders  attending . 
d. Quality of the projects defined in the MAPs: this means the risk that the projects defined in the MAPs do 
not align  themselves  with the Programme's  objectives  and with the GCF  guidelines.  
e. Interest  to Invest:  Even  though  some  of the benefits  of the projects  set forth in the MAPs  may arise  in 
relatively short periods of time (an example could be infrastructure improvement, the appropriate 
management of  the natural vegetation, the  installation of  renewable  energy technology,  among  others),


---
*Page 110*
---

 
 
other interventions may take longer (for example, the improvement of soil quality based on agro -ecological 
practices, reforestation and native forest regeneration, among others). The investments having long -term 
benefits may prove discouraging, but are th e root of any structural and transformative change towards best 
productive and sustainable practices. On the other hand, some technological investments must necessarily 
be accompanied by training on its best use to guarantee a positive impact.  
f. Communiti es' execution capacity : this refers to the beneficiaries' lack of capacity to  execute the  projects  
defined in the  MAP.  
 
3. Economic  risk:  
a. Inflation: A high inflation level generates a risk in the estimation of costs of the production processes that 
may be carried over to the product selling price or may be taken in by each project depending on the target 
market. On the other hand, a high inflation leve l means that public funds aimed at granting credits for 
production firms and encouraging demand must have a very high nominal rate to attain a real positive rate 
and let the fund be sustainable in economic terms, considering that soft credits are granted i n local 
currency. Also, inflation affects more heavily the purchasing power of the population with fewer resources. 
Therefore, the impacts expected from an improvement in quality of life may be reduced if inflation generates 
worse  conditions.  
However, thes e are the circumstances that account for the need of the Programme in a country such as 
Argentina, and in a region where the poverty level is high and the life conditions are worse than the 
country's  average.  
b. Exchange  rate:  
AR Peso Appreciation: variation in the exchange rate may affect the programme's capacity to cover the 
costs expected in the case of appreciation of the local currency.  
AR Peso Depreciation: Should a lag occur between the currency in the period where funds are allocated  
for non -reimbursa ble contributions or grants and the time of expenditure, there might be loss of the buying 
power of the currency since depreciation would be carried over to the price of equipment and technologies 
to acquire in the short  term.  
 
4.  Climate risks : extreme c limate events may affect compliance with the activities established in the MAPs.  
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Institutional risk: this addresses the institutional coordination 
between UCAR, the provincial authorities and the territorial 
technical institutions. The proposal of this Programme is 
consistent with national policies and is aligned with the 
objective of the provinces of reducing rural poverty, reducing 
the vulnerability of a sector seriously harmed by climate 
variability, and generating opportunities for sustainable  local  
development.   
 
Technical 
and 
operational   
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 111*
---

 
 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
These risks may be overcome through timely communication between UCAR, the provinces, and the local 
institutions. The existing fluid communication - due to the extensive experience of UCAR in the provinces and its 
articulation with technical institutions - makes it likely for the coordination to be successfully implemented.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Investment in mitigation: Given that the communities define 
the MAPs in a collaborative and participatory manner, there 
is no establishing beforehand which actions will be  
prioritized for each micro -region. Therefore, it is not possible 
to determine  with a degree  of certainty  how many  mitigation  
projects will be executed.   
Technical 
and 
operational   
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
The Programme will seek to hold training to sensitize on the benefits of mitigation activities, associa ted for example 
with the use of renewable energy, energy efficiency, soil conservation, and carbon stock. It is understood that, to a 
great extent, adaptive measures related to the agricultural system entail a positive impact upon mitigation of 
greenhouse gas emissions. So it is estimated that the investments to be financed through the projects in the micro - 
regions will be definitely cross -cutting thus contributing both to adaptation and to mitigation.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Capacity building attendance: capacity building and training 
workshops do not have appropriate stakeholders attending  Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
Through Component 1, training is anticipated in cross -cutting issues to sensitize about climate change, gender, 
organization strengthening, and natural resource sustainable management, among others. Such component will 
include the identification of the relevant stakeholders to participate, as well as the dissemination and calls through 
the network of  public and technical institutions with a good outreach in the territory. On the other hand, training 
related to investments regarding best practices and best use of technology from the investments of Component 2  
will be held. In this regard, training wil l be held aimed at people related to the investments, and gender equality will 
be guaranteed therein. To such end, training will be held in times when women can attend, and alternatives will be 
offered for child care during training  hours.  
Selected Risk F actor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Quality of the projects defined in the MAPs: this means the  Technical  Medium (5.1 - Low


---
*Page 112*
---

 
 
risk  that  the  projects  defined  in  the  MAPs  do  not  align  
themselves with the Programme's objectives and with the 
GCF guidelines.  and 
operational  20% of project 
value)   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of  risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
A clear methodology will be developed for preparing the MAPs specifying the strategy approach towards adaptation 
to and mitigation of climate change, defining the thoroughness of the analysis of vulnerability to climate change for 
the micro -region, and clearly specifying the criteria and the requirements to meet for the projects to be defined in the 
MAP. Also, training will be held in aspects of climate change and adaptive and mitigation measures to generate local  
capacities in the identification and definition of community -based adaptation and mitigation activities. On the other 
hand, the micro -regions will have technical support from an inter -disciplinary team of technical experts who will 
accompany and take part  in the process of preparation of MAP in order to ensure the thoroughness and quality of 
the process. Lastly, the evaluation stages, both of MAPs and projects, are intended to evaluate the alignment of 
such proposals with the Programme's and the GCF's  objectives.  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Interest to Invest: Even though some of the benefits of the 
projects set forth in the MAPs may arise in relatively short 
periods of time (an example could be infrastructure 
improvement, the appropriate management of the natural 
vegetation, the installation  of renewable energy technology, 
among others), other interventions may take longer (for 
example, the improvement of soil quality based on agro - 
ecological practices, reforestation and native forest 
regeneration, among others). The investments having long - 
term benefits may prove discouraging, but are the root of  
any structural and transformative change towards best 
productive and sustainable practices. On the other hand, 
some technological investments must necessarily be 
accompanied  by  training  on  its   best  use  to  guarantee  a 
positive impact.   
 
 
 
 
Technical 
and 
operational   
 
 
 
 
 
Low (<5% of 
project value)   
 
 
 
 
 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
The MAPs must include investments that are feasible of being implemented by the target population and the 
activities of which may be sustained over time. It will be fundamental to build awareness in the local actors as to the 
benefits and needs for mitigation and adaptation measures so that the micro -region may have a sense of ownership 
over the initiatives. The holding of training to ensure the appropriate use of technologies will be fundamental. Such 
training shall be entrusted to technical and research institutions which currently work in site and which can continue 
providing support and subsequent collaboration upon completion of the Programme so as to ensure its  
sustainability.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk


---
*Page 113*
---

 
 
   occurring  
Communities' execution capacity: this refers to the 
beneficiaries' lack of capacity to execute the projects defined 
in the MAP.  Technical 
and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
The technical team which will accompany the communities in defining the MAP and the relevant projects shall 
analyse the execution capacity of the proposed projects and shall assist in the design of projects that can be 
executed and that can be sustained over time. UCAR has experience in accompan ying small -scale producers and 
producers' organizations, and shall proceed to take the necessary steps and trainings so that the former may benefit 
with the adaptation and mitigation projects.  
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Inflation: A high inflation level generates a risk in the 
estimation of costs of the production processes that may be 
carried over to the product selling price or may be taken in 
by each project depending on the target  market. On the  
other hand, a high inflation level means that public funds 
aimed at granting credits for production firms and 
encouraging demand must have a very high nominal rate to 
attain a real positive rate and let the fund be sustainable in 
economic terms, considering that soft credits are granted in 
local currency. Also, inflation affects more heavily the 
purchasing power of the population with fewer resources. 
Therefore, the impacts expected from an improvement in 
quality of life may be reduced if i nflation generates worse 
conditions.  
However, these are the circumstances that account for the 
need of the Programme in a country such as Argentina, and 
in  a  region  where  the  poverty  level  is  high  and  the  life  
conditions are worse than the count ry's average.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
Fixed assets and contributions to infrastructure should be made in the short term so that inflation may not affect the 
contributed funds. Similarly, funds must be maintained in U.S. Dollars whilst they are not allocated, so as to avoid 
losing purchasing power and instead enhance their buying capacity in the short term. Furthermore, the 
implementation of solar equipment and energy efficiency will allow minimizing, both at a household and a corporate 
level, the impacts of inflation on the energy bills for the beneficiaries.  
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
AR Peso Appreciation: variation in the exchange rate may  Financial  Medium (5.1 - Low


---
*Page 114*
---

 
 
affect the programme's  capacity to cover the costs expected 
in the case of appreciation of the local currency.   20% of project  
value)   
AR Peso Depreciation: Should a lag occur between the 
currency in the period where funds are allocated for non - 
reimbursable contributions or g rants and the time of 
expenditure, there might be loss of the buying power of the 
currency since depreciation would be carried over to the 
price  of equipment  and technologies  to acquire  in the short  
term.   
 
 
Financial   
Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
 
 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
Maintain the funds not yet spent in U.S. Dollars and encourage acquisition of equipment as soon as the funds from 
the grants and from the non -reimbursable contributions are awarded.  
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk  
occurring  
Climate risks: extreme climate events may affect 
compliance with the activities established in the MAPs.  Social and  
environmenta 
l Medium (5.1 - 
20% of project 
value)   
Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures  lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
The 5 -year Programme duration will allow scheduling the activities so as to reduce the risk which may be caused by 
drought or flooding upon the activities.


---
*Page 115*
---

 
H.1. Logic  Framework.  
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  
under the Results Management Framework . 
 
The EDA ToR establishes that unlike the traditional direct access modality, there will be no submission of 
individual projects to the Fund because decision -making for the funding of the specific pilot activities will 
be devolved to the country level. Conse quently, the following logical framework includes: estimations of 
target impacts, outcomes and outputs assuming a distribution of allocation of Mitigation and Adaptation 
resources in the 5 micro -regions, which is not yet known. The Programme expects that e ach micro -region 
will define during the first year  of the implementation of the Programme, the adaptation and mitigation 
priorities and the different strategies selected for the micro -region. Once these priorities are identified, the 
public institutions an d smallholders will be able to present projects through the different financial windows. 
Therefore, we expect to up -date the expected impacts, outcomes and outputs indicators in the 
corresponding Annual Update Reports , firstly after the first year of the i mplementation of the Programme 
when all the mitigation and adaptation plans are already approved, and following as the projects are 
defined. In this way, we will be able to better estimate the expected results of the Programme.  
 
 
 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level16 
Paradigm shift objectives  
 
Increased climate - 
resilient  sustainable 
development  
Shift to low emission 
sustainable 
development 
pathway  Programme's objective: topromote community based adaptation and low -carbon 
development in micro -regions, which are vulnerable to climate variability  
This objective will be attained through:  
Component 1: the project will raise awareness on the impact of climate change and generate 
capacity to design and implement local adaptive an d mitigation strategies  
Component 2: the project will provide direct finance for the development of resilient 
infrastructure, the promotion of sustainable natural resources management, the adoption of 
low-carbon and climate resilient agriculture, and the t ransformation of the generation and 
access to energy from renewable sources  
 
 
 
 
 
Expected Result   
 
 
 
 
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)   
Baseline   
Target   
 
 
 
 
Assumptions     
 
Mid-term 
(if     
applicable)   
 
 
Final  
 
 
 
 
16 Information on the Fund’s  expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement 
Frameworks available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement):  
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 116*
---

 
 
Fund -level impacts  
 Male and Female benefiting of 
mitigation and adaptive strategies 
promoted by the project       
Number of direct beneficiaries 
(families), among which:  1150  5.750  
Female -headed families  345 1.725  
Families headed by young people  
under 30 years old  173 863 
Indigenous families  690 3.450  
Number of indirect beneficiaries 
(individuals), among which:  5.750  28.750  
Female  2.588  14.375  
Male  3.163  14.375  
Indigenous people (male and female)  3.450  17.250  
A1.0 
Increased 
resilience 
and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of 
the most 
vulnerable 
people, 
community 
and regions  1.1 Change in expected losses of lives 
and economic assets (US$) due to the 
impact of extreme climate -related 
disasters in the geographic area of the 
GCF intervention  Household 
survey  Pre- 
programme 
assessment    
 
 
 
 
 
(*) Macroeconomic 
stability in the 
region  
Change in expected  losses of 
economic assets due to the impact of 
extreme climate -related disaster  No major climate 
disasters  
1.2 Number of males and females 
benefiting from the adoption of 
diversified, climate -resilient livelihood 
options (including fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)      Assuming access to 
water project and 
silvo-pastoril 
projects prioritized 
in microregions and 
agroecological 
practices for rural 
smallholders  Number of male and female (indirect 
beneficiaries), among which:  0 152 7.600  
Female  0 76 3.800  
Male  0 76 3.800  
Indigenous people (male and female)  0 91 4.560  
Number of direct beneficiaries 
(families), among which:  0 304 1.520


---
*Page 117*
---

 
 
 Female -headed families   0 91 456  
Families headed by young people  
under 30  years old  0 46 228 
Indigenous families  0 182 912 
A2.0 
Increased 
resilience of 
health and 
well-being, 
and food 
and water 
security  2.3 Number of males and females with 
year-round access to reliable and safe 
water supply despite climate shocks 
and stresses, among which:  Household 
survey  Pre-program 
assesment  2.375  11.875  Public and private 
stakeholders 
continue supporting 
the microregion 
developmentAssum 
ing that 50% of the 
rural smallholder 
families prioritize 
the access to water 
resources, and 
assuming three 
public investment 
systemic project of 
access to safe 
water for 1500 
additional families  
 
Assuming that at 
least 500 
households 
implement 
improved 
agricultural and 
livestock practices, 
which will allow 
them to improve 
their food security in 
periods at risk of 
climate change 
impacts  Number of males  0 1.188  5.938  
Number of females  0 1.188  5.938  
Young people (male and female) under  
30 years old  0 356 1.781  
Indigenous people (male and female)   0 1425  7.125  
Area (ha) of agricultural land made 
more resilient to climate change 
through changed agricultural practices  Program M&E 
reports and 
records  0 100 500 
2.2 Number of food secure households 
in periods at risk of climate change  
impacts, among which:  Household  
survey  0 100 500 
Female -headed households   0 30 150 
Families headed by young people  
under 30 years old   0 15 75 
Indigenous families   0 60 300 
A3.0 
Increased 
resilience of 
infrastructur 
e and the 
built 
environment 
to climate 
change 
threats  3.1 Number and value of physical 
assets made more resilient to climate 
variability and change   Pre-program 
assessment    Assuming 5 public 
investment 
systemic projects of 
adaptation (refer to 
Annex VII for the 
assumptions made 
in the allocation of 
resources)  
Number of physical assets made more  
resilient to climate variability and   0 0 5


---
*Page 118*
---

 
 
 change       
 Value of physical assets made more 
resilient to climate variability and 
change   0 0 8,71 
Million 
USD   
A4.0 
Improved 
resilience of 
ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  4.1 Coverage of ecosystem protected 
and strengthened in response to 
climate variability and change   Pre-program 
assessment  0 1.222  Assuming projects 
of afforestation or 
reforestation: 1222 
hectares  
M1.0  
Reduced 
emissions 
through 
increased 
low-emission 
energy 
access and 
power 
generation  1.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (tCO2eq) reduced as a 
result of Fund funded projects  Program M&E 
reports and 
records  0 3.410  10.230  Assuming there are 
2 public works 
systemic projects in 
two micro regions of 
renewable energy 
prioritized and 30% 
of funds for 
smallholders 
projects are 
allocated to 
renewable energy 
projects.  
M3.0  
Reduced 
emissions 
from 
buildings, 
cities and 
industries 
and 
appliances  3.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (tCO2eq) reduced or 
avoided as a result of Fund funded 
projects  Program M&E 
reports and 
records  0 40 140 High uncertainty. As 
the rest of the 
targets, these will 
be adjusted during 
first year's review of 
logical  framework. 
A change of light 
bulbs in a public 
building, could 
reach a reduction of 
20 tCO2e/y. If it is 
assumed that 3 
projects of this 
nature could be 
demanded by the 
micro regions, a 
total of 180 tCO2e 
could be reduced at 
the end of the 
project.


---
*Page 119*
---

 
 
M4.0  
Reduced 
emissions 
from land 
use, 
deforestation  
, forest 
degradation, 
and through 
sustainable 
managemen 
t of forests 
and 
conservation 
and 
enhancemen 
t of forest 
carbon 
stocks  4.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (tCO2eq) reduced or 
avoided (including increased removals) 
as a result of Fund funded projects  Program M&E 
reports and 
records  0 23.695  71.086  Assuming there are 
2  public 
investments 
systemic projects in 
two micro regions of 
reforestation or 
afforestation 
prioritized. And 
assuming 10% of 
funds allocated to 
sustainable  
management of 
forest or 
silvopastoral 
system  
(*) IT WILL BE PART OF THE BASELINE STUDY TO ASSESS THE EXPECTED CHANGE OF ECONOMIC ASSETS DUE TO IMPACT EXTREME -CLIMATE 
RELATED DISASTERS AND TO DETERMINE THE BASELINE  
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
 
 
Expected Result  Indicator   
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions     
Mid-term 
(if applicable)   
Final  
Project/ 
programme 
outcomes   
Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A6.0 Increased 
generation and use 
of climate 
information in 
decision -making  6.2 Use of climate information 
products/services in decision -making 
in climate -sensitive sectors, 
disaggregated by stakeholder  Surveys  Pre- 
program 
me 
assessm 
ent   Participation and 
interest of all 
stakeholders in the 
proposed trainings 
(10  workshops,  2 
per micro region: 1 
for technical staff 
and local authorities, 
1  for  organizations 
of smallholders, on 
adaptation to climate 
change, including 
use of climate 
information among 
others). The level of 
use of climate 
information  derives  
from a qualitative  Level of use of climate information from 1 
(little or no use of climate information) to 5 
(regular use in decision -making)    
Technical staff and government officials  2,5 4 
 
Rural smallholders  2 4


---
*Page 120*
---

 
 
      evaluation in which 
knowledge of 
beneficiaries are 
evaluated before 
and after the 
training.  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity 
and reduced 
exposure to climate 
risk 7.1 Use by vulnerable households, 
communities, business and public - 
sector services of Fund -supported 
tools, instruments, strategies and 
activities to respond to climate change 
and variability  Household 
survey & in - 
depth 
qualitative 
analysis  Pre- 
program 
me 
assessm 
ent   Assuming 60% of 
smallholders 
implement adaptive 
strategies and 
silvopastoral 
projects, which also 
increase resilience 
of rural smallholders  Number of rural families implementing 
directly climate resilient or diversified 
agriculture or livestock actions, 
among  which:  0 287 1.437  
Female -headed families  0 86 431 
Families headed by young people  
under 30 years old  0 43 216 
Indigenous families  0 172 862 
Number of rural smallholder 
organizations or associations with 
enhanced capacity to respond to 
climate change  and variability   0 10 50  
Number of rural smallholder 
organizations or associations or 
groups with active women 
participation   0 5 25  
Number of rural families benefiting 
from systemic projects, among which:   0 800 4.000   
Female -headed families  0 240 1.200  
Families headed by young people  
under 30 years old  0 120 600 
Indigenous families   0 480 2.400   
Average increase in production for 
smallholders with improved 
agricultural practices   0 0 6%  
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of 
climate threats and 
risk-reduction 
processes  8.1 Number of males and females 
made aware of climate threats and 
related appropriate responses  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  Pre- 
program 
me 
assessm 
ent


---
*Page 121*
---

 
 
 Number of rural male and female 
smallholders made  aware of climate 
threats and related appropriate 
responses   0 350 1.750   
Number of males  0 245 1.225  
Number of female  0 105 525 
Number of young people under 30 
years old (male and female)  0 53 184 
Number of Indigenous people (male  
and female)  0 210 1.050  
Number of public technical staff and 
government officials   
0  
26  
130 
Male staff  0 16 78 
Female staff  0 10 52 
Young staff (male and female) under  
30 years old   
0  
8  
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M.6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers  6.2 Number of households, and 
individuals (male and females) with 
improved access to low -emission 
energy resources  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records     Assuming there is a 
priority in two 
microregions to 
choose at least 2 
renewable energies 
public investment 
systemic projects 
along with 30% of 
resources of 
subcomponent 2.2 
allocated to 
smallholders’ 
associative projects 
of renewable 
energies  Number of rural households  0 5.480  2.740  
Number of indirect beneficiaries, 
among which:  0 2.740  13.700  
Male  0 1.370  6.850  
Female  0 1.370  6.850  
6.3 MWs of low -emission energy 
capacity installed, generated an/or 
rehabilitated, as a result of GCF 
support  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records    1 MW  Assuming there are 
two renewable 
energy public work 
systemic projects  
M 7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of 
buildings, cities, 
industries, and 
appliances  7.1 Energy intensity / improved 
efficiency of buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances as a result 
of Fund support  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 TBD TBD Improved efficiency  
/energy intensity 
indexes will need to 
be calculated with 
different 
methodologies 
depending on the  
type of energy


---
*Page 122*
---

 
 
      efficiency project  
M9.0 Improved 
management of 
land or forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions 
reductions  9.1 Hectares of land or forest under 
improved and effective management  
that contributes to CO 2 emission  
reduction  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 0 1.222  Assuming there is a 
priority in at least  2 
microregions to 
choose afforestation  
/ reforestation 
projects and 
silvopastoral 
systems  
Project/ 
programme 
outputs   
Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Local capacity 
on climate change 
generated and 
awareness raised  Number of public staff and 
government officials trained in climate 
change, among which:  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 100 130 There is continuous 
participation and 
support from the 
local government, 
organizations  Female staff  40 52 
Young staff under 30 years old  30 39 
Number of public staff and 
government officials trained in gender 
perspective, among which:  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 100 130  
Female staff  40 52 
Young staff under 30 years old  30 39 
Number of smallholders' 
organizations or associative groups 
trained in organizational 
strengthening  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 35 50  
Number of smallholders' 
organizations or associative groups 
with active participation of women 
trained in organizational 
strengthening   0 17 25  
Number of smallholders' 
organizations or associative groups 
trained in climate change  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 35 50  
Number of smallholders' 
organizations or associative groups 
with active participation of women 
trained in climate  change   0 17 25  
Number of smallholders' 
organizations or associative groups   0 35 50


---
*Page 123*
---

 
 
 trained in gender perspective       
Number of smallholders' 
organizations or associative groups 
with active participation of women 
trained in gender  perspective   0 17 25  
Number of smallholder trained in 
climate change, among which:  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 250 250  
 
Female   
75  
75 
Young smallholders under 30 years  
old 38 38 
Indigenous  150 150 
Number of smallholders trained in 
gender perspective, among which:  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 250 250  
 
Female   
75  
75 
Young smallholders under 30 years  
old 38 38 
Indigenous  150 150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Micro -regions 
with enhanced 
capacity to lead 
community -based 
adaptation and 
mitigation actions  Number of Mitigation and Adaptation 
Plans (MAP) approved  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 5 5  
Number of Mitigation and Adaptation 
Plans (MAP) with their Gender 
Section and their proposals of 
activities related with gender issues   0 5 5  
Micro regions with enhaced capacity 
to design, implement and monitor 
adaptation and mitigation projects   0 0 5  
Micro regions with enhanced gender 
capacity   0 5 5  
 
Number of women who receive 
specifically technical support on 
adaptation and mitigation 
technologies and to access grants in 
each micro region (female -headed 
families)   0 345 1.725


---
*Page 124*
---

 
 
 Number of comprehensive and 
gender -sensitive proposals 
developed and submitted, with the 
support of the capacity building 
activities.   0 14 68 Assuming that 100% 
of formulated 
systemic projects of 
public investment 
are approved (10), 
and 1.2 times the 
number of grants 
awarded to 
organizations of 
smallholders.  
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Systemic 
projects of  public 
investment 
implemented  Number of grants awarded for 
systemic projects of public 
investment  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 2 8  
Number of families living in rural 
areas benefiting from systemic 
projects of public investment  Programme 
M&E reports 
and records  0 800 4.000   
Female -headed families  0 240 1.200  
Families headed by young people  
under 30 years old  0 120 600 
Indigenous families  0 480 2.400  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Adaptation and 
mitigation projects 
of organizations of 
smallholders  
implemented  Number of grants awarded for 
adaptation and mitigation projects of 
organizations of smallholders  Program M&E 
reports and 
records  0 10 50  
Number of grants awarded for 
adaptation and mitigation projects of 
organizations of smallholders with 
active participation of women   0 5 25  
Number of families living in rural 
areas benefiting from adaptation and 
mitigation projects of organizations  or 
groups of smallholders, among 
which:   0 350 1.750   
Female -headed families  0 105 525 
Families headed by young people  
under 30 years old  0 53 263 
Indigenous families  0 210 1.050  
Number of female and male receiving 
technical assistance and training for 
the implementation of mitigation and 
adaptation plans   0 350 1.750


---
*Page 125*
---

 
 
 Number  of female   0 105 525  
Number of male   0    
Young people under 30 years old 
(female and male)   0 53 263  
Indigenous people (female and male)   0 210 1.050   
Number of self -managed revolving 
funds implemented   0 2 10  
Families benefiting of self-managed 
revolving funds, among which:   0 83 415  
Female -headed families  0 25 125 
Families headed by young people  
under 30 years old  0 12 62 
Indigenous families  0 50 249 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
 
1.1.1 Training 
workshops on 
climate change 
adaptation, 
mitigation, gender 
perspective and 
organizational 
strengthening  10 workshops on adaptation to climate change and mitigation 
technologies appropriate to each scale  $ 156.600  
Local consultants, 
transportation, venue, 
general supervision,  
monitoring   
16 trainings for 30 persons each on gender perspective and 
organizational strengthening for technical staff and 
stakeholders  
3 workshops (1 per year from year 3 to 5) to analyze women 
participation in the ongoing processes with all technical staff 
involved working in the micro regions  
1.1.2 Learning 
exchanges on 
adaptation and 
mitigation  
technologies  1 learning exchange (1 for smallholders, 1 for local authorities  
= in each case, 2 persons per micro region travel to a 
successful experience = 10 person per MR).  $ 93.750  
Local consultants, 
transportation, venue, 
general supervision,  
monitoring   
1.1.3 Develop and 
disseminate training 
and dissemination 
materials on climate 
change and grant 
facility  At least 3 minor publications (flyers, radio, TV spots, others) 
for building capacity and supporting calls for proposals, and 3 
high quality videos for the dissemination of implemented 
project activities  $ 84.375  
Service contracts, 
communication 
specialist, participation 
of local stakeholders, 
general supervision,  
monitoring .  
1.2.1 Micro -regional 
meetings for 
establishing 
institutional 
agreements on the 
participative  
processes and  Training, workshops, and conference: 10 meetings for 
institutional agreements (2 per micro region)  $ 61.500  
Local consultants, 
transportation, venue, 
general supervision,  
monitoring.


---
*Page 126*
---

 
 
sharing information  
on grant facility     
 
1.2.2 Participative 
workshops and 
technical support to 
micro -regions on 
access to grants  20 forums (4 per micro region) during the first year  $ 150.500  
Local consultants, 
transportation, venue, 
general supervision,  
monitoring.   
45 inter -forum meetings (9 per micro region) during the first 
year. Assuming transportation for 4 institutional stakeholders  
2 workshops per micro region to bring technical support 
specifically for women on adaptation and mitigation 
technologies and to access grants.  
 
 
 
 
 
1.2.3 Micro -regional 
adaptation and 
mitigation 
assessment and 
technical support  At least 5 studies (1 per micro region) and environmental and 
social Impact assessments, considering 1 public work per 
micro region will be performed  $ 1.355.000  
Professional services  
contracts 
Local consultants 
(gender, E&S, project  
formulation) 
Transportation, workshop  
services 
General supervision,  
monitoring.   
Expert support to local technical staff to enhance their 
capacity on formulating adaptation and mitigation projects  
Expert support on gender perspective for project formulation 
and support to women on the field 
Logistic support for women on the field (to ensure 
transportation and facilitate their participation in potential 
formulation activities) and travel expenses  
At least 1 technical study per micro region  
2.1.1 Awarding and 
implementation of 
grants for systemic 
projects of public  
investments  At least 8 grants for systemic projects of public investment  $ 10.407.249  
Grants, general 
supervision, monitoring.   
2.2.1 Awarding and 
implementation of 
grants for 
adaptation and 
mitigation projects 
for organizations 
and associations of  
smallholders  At least 50 grants for adaptation and mitigation projects for 
small holders  $ 10.500.000  
Grants, general 
supervision, monitoring.   
2.2.2 Awarding and 
implementation of 
self-managed 
revolving funds for 
adaptation and 
mitigation projects 
for organizations 
and associations of  
smallholders  At least 10 self -managed revolving funds for adaptation and 
mitigation projects for small holders  $ 500.000  
Grants, general 
supervision, monitoring.


---
*Page 127*
---

 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and  Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid -term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.  
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project/programme.  
 
Monitoring and ev aluation  
UCAR has established procedures for the monitoring and evaluation of the different programmes. In this case, these 
procedures will be adjusted and up -dated to suit its specific features. The monitoring and evaluation activities will 
include the fo llowing:  
- Inception  workshop:  
An initial workshop will be organized during the first month of the implementation of the Programme to be attended by 
the executing parties, the Technical Implementation Unit, the Steering Committee, responsible agents, and UCAR. The 
workshop will establish the execution and implementation mechanisms, as well as the finalization of the necessary 
agreements between the different parties to ensure transparency and efficacy in carrying out the Programme. In the 
inception worksho p, the guidelines for the monitoring and evaluation of the Programme will be provided to all relevant 
stakeholders and the indicators will also be analyzed and discussed with them to ensure appropriation of the M&E 
System, and the importance to comply with  the guidelines provided to learn and ensure the correct follow -up of the 
Programme. Also, the Gender Action Plan will be presented with its indicators, to guarantee that all the parties involved 
in the execution of the Programme knows the gender objective s and do an adequate gender monitoring and evaluation. 
It is expected that at the end of the project, each participant will be able to identify the M&E system requirements, the 
different indicators, the responsibility of each person in the process of repor ting, collecting data, registering the 
information, elaborating different reports and communicating the progress of the Programme to the different publics.  
Models of agreements between the relevant parties can be found in Annex I – Model Contracts. Specifi cally, during the 
inception workshops the agreements to be signed are the agreements between UCAR and the ad -hoc associations. 
The relevant parties that need to be in place will be defined during the participatory processes that have been  
described in Com ponent 1. However, as the institutional framework of the micro -region, it will be assured that the ad - 
hoc associations are composed of actors from public, private and scientific -technological sectors that are related to the 
micro -regions. Besides, agreeme nts will be signed with other public institutions which are present in the  micro -regions,  
e.g. National Institution of Agriculture Technology or the Under -secretary of Family Agriculture, in order to obtain 
support for the formulation and implementation of the projects. These agreements are exclusively focused on technical 
cooperation, and thus these institutions will not manage or transfer funds: only expenses derived from their technical 
work  such  as travel  expenses,  materials  for training  sessions  and similar  will be covered  by the project.  
- Registration  of information , informatic  arrangements  and monitoring  support  
The M&E sector within UCAR will be responsible for the development of the different registration tools and its 
dissemination among beneficiaries.  Each micro -region will have to comply with a semester report with information  
about the evolution of the expected outputs and results included in the logical framework, along with a description of  
the different  activities  done,  difficulties  experienced  within  the period  and the evolution  of the projects.  
Each project financed by the micro -regions will be registered in the Informatics System of UCAR (SIIG Spanish 
acronym) to allow for a better information, monitoring and evaluation scheme. As mentioned in  other sections, specific 
indicators will also be included to measure each project of the different beneficiaries. In this regard, UCAR will also 
provide additional support for the correct measurement of each of the indicators included in the projects.  
For the monitoring of the counterpart of smallholders, there will be a specific questionnaire, which will register in -kind 
and cash counterparts made. The in -kind counterpart is usually estimated, according to the market value of the 
contribution. Therefore, if they work to install the different on -farm investments instead of paying someone professional


---
*Page 128*
---

 
service to do it, they register the counterpart as the work -hours and the salary it would have cost.  
- Six-monthly  Reports  from the micro -region  beneficiaries  and on-site monitoring  visits  
The Programme will be monitored by means of six -month evaluations to supervise the progress made from the 
beginning of its implementation. These evaluations will help identify the lessons learned joi ntly with the players 
concerned and the beneficiaries of the Programme. UCAR’s authorities and members of the Programme will perform 
regular visits to the Programme areas based on a schedule agreed in the Annual Work Plan, including the financial 
monitorin g of the implementation.  
Each report will include a Gender Section, with special attention to the progress and results of Gender Action Plan 
implementation and of the indicators refer to women participation included in the logical framework.  
- Annual Reports to be submitted to the Green Climate  Fund:  
Annual Reports of the Programme with relevant information about the evolution of the project, progress made towards 
the achievement of goals, lessons learned, risk assessment, project outputs delive red by the Programme, progress 
made towards outcome’s achievement, expenditure and acquisition reports along with any other relevant information 
included in the template of the Green Climate Fund. The AE -UCAR -will be responsible for collecting and submitt ing the 
annual report to the Fund, according to the template and regulations provided.  
- Annual Gender Reports to be submitted to the Green Climate  Fund:  
Each year, the social specialist based in UCAR and the gender expert will register all the information f or monitoring the 
process of participation of women and men. These will include the results of basic indicators and the new ones, 
provided by the baseline study and the household survey during the first year. The reports will include relevant 
information a bout gender issues and lessons learn about women involvement and their participation in climate change 
activities.  
- Mid-term  evaluation  
The Programme will be submitted to an external and independent evaluation in the middle of its term of 
completion, or onc e half of the funds are allocated. This evaluation will determine the pertinence of the Programme  
after some time of its implementation, the efficacy of the actions, the efficiency of the activities implemented; and the 
progress made towards the achieveme nt of the results. It will also identify any required corrective actions that will help 
the coordination of the Programme to better achieve programmes goals and an efficient allocation of resources. The 
external review will focus on the progress made to re ach the expected results, the status of the institutional 
arrangements for implementation, and the examination of the action  plans.  
The mid -term evaluation will include an assessment of the implementation of the Gender Action Plan and, if it is the 
case, r ecommendations of the course of action. It is expected to have a mid -term evaluation of Programme’s gender 
strategy.  
It is envisaged that there may be a re -definition of prioritized micro regions in the event of delays or issues in the 
execution of funds in any of the micro -regions prioritized by the Programme.  
- Results Evaluation and Final Report after termination of the  project:  
Once the Programme is completed, and within the following six months, an external final evaluation will be conducted  
to verify the achievement of the expected results and its impact as initially planned or modified by the mid -term 
evaluation and recommendations. It will also analyze the sustainability of the actions, the effectiveness of the strategies 
implemented and potentiality  to replicate them. The efficacy and pertinence will also be included along with transversal 
topics such as the impact on women, indigenous families and young people in the area. A special analysis will be 
fostered in analyzing the contribution of the Prog ramme to the GCF core results identified in the logical framework, 
specifically  those  selected  after the first year of the implementation  of the Programme.  
The Final Report will include the data of the results evaluation, which will be done through a house hold survey and will 
allow the evaluator to estimate the outcomes achieved, the adaptation and mitigation capacity generated in the 
community -level and government officials along with the broader impact in the micro -region sustainable development.


---
*Page 129*
---

 
The results and final report will include a Gender Section, with the impact results of Gender Action Plan, a thorough 
analysis on the main gender issues related to climate change and the effectiveness of Programme’s gender strategy. 
Also it will be verify if all the gender indicators and targets were achieved and / or exceeded.  
- Case -studies and qualitative  assessments  
It will be promoted within the micro -regions to identify good practices in the management of natural resources, adapti ve 
and mitigation strategies and to document them with participatory systematizations and specific case studies.  
Among the case studies, one of them will be on women empowerment and climate change, as a good practice related 
to Programme’s gender strategy.  
- Knowledge management and  learning  
The M&E system will ensure the dissemination of information, lessons learned, good practices and all relevant data 
from the project. A participatory approach will also be promoted, to ensure the ownership of the Programme  by all the 
stakeholders and to promote evidence -based informed policy to government officials.  
 
 
Activity  Responsible Party  Frequency  
Baseline study (household survey)  ● External  consulting  At the beginning  of the 
program  
Initial Workshop (IW)  ● TCU 
● UCAR  1st  month of execution  
IW Report  ● TCU 
● UCAR  1 month after the IW  
Field visit  ● TCU 
● UCAR  Every six months  
Measurement of proposed indicators to evaluate 
Programme performance and efficacy  ● UCAR  Every six months  
Technical reports  ● TCU 
● UCAR  To be defined by the  project 
team  
External mid -term evaluation  ● External  consulting  
● UCAR  Halfway implementation  
External evaluation upon Programme completion  ● External  consulting  Upon  completion  of the 
implementation  
Results evaluation (household survey)  ● External  consulting  Upon  completion  of the 
implementation  
Final report  ● TCU 
● UCAR  Upon  completion  of the 
implementation  
Publications  ● UCAR  To be defined


---
*Page 130*
---

 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
□ NDA No -objection  Letter  
□ Feasibility  Study  
□ Integrated  Financial  Model  that provides  sensitivity  analysis  of critical  elements  (xls format,  if applicable)  
□ Confirmation  letter  or letter  of commitment  for co-financing  commitment  (If applicable)  
□ Project/Programme  Confirmation/Term  Sheet  (including  cost/budget  breakdown,  disbursement  schedule, 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex  I 
□ Environmental  and Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  or Environmental  and Social  Management  Plan 
(If applicable)  
□ Appraisal  Report  or Due Diligence  Report  with recommendations  (If applicable)  
□ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If  applicable)  
□ Map indicating the location of the  project/programme  
□ Timetable of project/programme  implementation  
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.


---
*Page 132*
---

 
 
 
 
Page 1  
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Climate action for rural development: community -based adaptation and 
mitigation in Argentina  
Accredited entity  UCAR  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  2017 -08-24 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Link to disclosure  http://www.ucar.gob.ar/index.php/institucional/manuales - 
reglamentos -y-salvaguardas/2524 -programme -climate -action -for-rural - 
development -community -based -adaptation -and-mitigation -in-argentina  
 
A simplified impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the requirements  
for a category B project is contained in the Envi ronmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  http://www.ucar.gob.ar/index.php/institucional/manuales - reglamentos - 
y-salvaguardas/2525 -programme -climate -action -for-rural - development - 
community -based -adaptation -and-mitigation -in-argentina -2 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  2017 -08-24 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Spanish  
Link to disclosure  http://www.ucar.gob.ar/index.php/institucional/manuales - 
reglamentos -y-salvaguardas/2524 -programme -climate -action -for-rural - 
development -community -based -adaptation -and-mitigation -in-argentina  
 
A management plan (ESMP) consistent with the requirements for a 
category B project is contained in the Environmental and  Social 
Management Framework (ESMF).  
Other link(s)  http://www.ucar.gob.ar/index.php/institucional/manuales - reglamentos - 
y-salvaguardas/2525 -programme -climate -action -for-rural - development - 
community -based -adaptation -and-mitigation -in-argentina -2 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Not applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Not applicable