=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20170911134603+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.22
/ModDate: D:20170911175103+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.22
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals  – Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP047  GCF/B.1 8/04/Add. 02 
11 September  2017  Meeting of th e Board 
30 September –2 October 2017 
Cairo, Arab Republic of 
Egypt 
Provisional agenda item 14(g) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ GCF -EBRD Kazakhstan Renewables Framework ”
submitted by European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority(ies)  or focal point (s);
and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national  
designated authority(i es) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund , the funding proposal titled “GCF -EBRD 
Kazakhstan Renewables Framework ” submitted by European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development  is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board 
Memb ers and Alternate Board Members  to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, 
legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.18/04/Add.02  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal summary submitted by the accredited entity                                                              1 
 No-objection letter issued by t he national designated authorities  or focal point s                           58           
 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                                                                                            59


---
*Page 3*
---

PUBLIC  
 
PUBLIC  
Project/Programme Title:  GCF-EBRD Kazakhstan Renewables Framework  
Country/Region:  Kazakhstan / ECA  
Accredited Entity:  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)  
Date of Submission:  December  21, 201 6


---
*Page 4*
---

PUBLIC  
 
PUBLIC  Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
 • Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all other 
sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they wish to 
present the information. Accredited entities can eith er directly incorporate information into this proposal, or provide 
summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents such  as project appraisal 
document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

PUBLIC PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  Section A: PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 
 
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme title  GCF-EBRD Kazakhstan Renewables Framework  (the 
Framework /the Programme)  
A.1.2. Project or programme  programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     Kazakhstan / ECA  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  Ministry of Energy of the Republic of Kazakhstan  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  EBRD  
Beneficiary:  Eligible entities will be 1) local or international private 
or institutional companies or in exceptional cases local public 
investors developing renewable energy projects  
2) electricity distribution and transmission companies.  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☒ Large (>250)   
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☒  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  December  21, 201 6 
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Jan-Willem van de Ven , Associate Director , Energy Efficiency and 
Climate Change team  
George Holroyd, Head Multilaterals , Donor Co -Finance  
Organization  EBRD  
Email address  vandevej@ebrd.com   
 holroydg@ebrd.com  
Telephone number  +44 (0)20 73387 821 
+44 (0)20 7338 8594  
Mailing address  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,  
One Exchange Square,  
London,  
United Kingdom,  
EC2A 2JN  
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:


---
*Page 6*
---

PUBLIC PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  ☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, relocation 
of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐ 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Kazakhstan is one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gas es (“GHG ”) in Central Asia, with ca. 72% of  its electricity generated 
from coal . GHG emissions hav e increased by 40% since 2006 due to the economy’s overdependence on fossil fuels. At the same 
time, Kazakhstan possesses significant resources of renewable energy, such as wind, solar and hydro. Access to a reliable source 
of energy is of fundamental impor tance for the economic development and improving living standards in Kazakhstan.  
Consequently, the diversification of energy sources and decarbonisation of the economy are  priorit ies of the Government of 
Kazakhstan.  To achieve the renewable energy target s, the Government of Kazakhstan adopted renewable energy regulation that 
includes the introduction of feed -in tariffs  (“FiT”) and work  in progress auction scheme . 
 
The EBRD proposes to the GCF to implement an investment framework programme with a  5 year duration lead ing to the total 
investments of  USD 550 million from the EBRD,  private sector investors, other financial institutions  along with the proposed 
investment from the GCF. The investments  will be in the form of loans to renewable energy sources ( “RES”) developers to finance 
the construction, connection to the grid, commissioning and launch of the RES projects (solar, wind, small hydropower and 
biogas) and to electricity distribution and transmission companies to finance modernisation and strengthen ing of the electricity 
grid to enhance the integration of RES into the electricity grid . Under the investment Programme , financing of small hydropower 
projects will not constitute more than 20% of the total Programme costs and will be limited to only financing of small  hydropower 
projects with a capacity up to 35MW1. Biogas will constitute a very small portion of the Programme and is unlikely to exceed 20 
MW on a cumulative basis.  
 
The total investment amount of USD 550 million is estimated based on the projected pipeline of up to 3 30 MW RES project s. The 
total requested contribution from the GCF is USD 110 million  - for concessional loans (USD 10 6 million) and technical assistance 
(USD 4 million).  
 
The main objectives of the Programme are  the following :  
- to facilitate competitive entry of low -carbon investors into the market currently dominated by  conventional fossil fuel  
power producers  and kick -start renewable investments which have been stagnant due to market barriers ; 
- to support the construction of an estimated 330 MW of new RES capacity ( ca. 18% of the Government’s RES target by 
2020)  under the FiT scheme and the auction scheme (no more than 35% of the total GCF financing ), in combination with 
the power network upgrades to facilitate this RE S uptake ; 
- to support further regulatory reforms  in the energy and carbon market  of Kazakhstan , including the development of the 
auction system which is expected to lead to costs reduction  ensur ing long -term sustainability of RES projects ; and 
- to provide capacity building support to RES sector  to promote gender equality through equal opportunities policies and 
practices within their operations.  
 
Based on the experience with the current portfolio, the expected direct CO 2 emissions reductions by the new RES generation are 
ca. 0.64 million tons CO 2 equivalent per year once all sub-projects are operational  (with the expected project lifetime  of 20 years ). 
 
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if 
applicable)  Approved on December 14, 2016  
                                                             
1 In accordance with the Kazakh RES law, hydro power plant projects with capacity of up to 35 MW are considered as small 
hydro projects.


---
*Page 7*
---

PUBLIC PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  Expected financial close (if applicable)  4Q 2017 (first sub-project)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start:  4Q 2017 (estimated signing date of the first sub -operation)  
End:  3Q 2022 (estimated expiry date of the investment period )  
Programme lifespan  The investment period of the Programme is expected to be up to 20 years 
for Component #1 and up to 5 years for Component #2. The lifespan of the 
Programme is up to 20 years from the signing of the last loan agreement, 
making for a total lifetime of 2 5 years.


---
*Page 8*
---

PUBLIC  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  B  
 
Section B: FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme  
 
The GCF -EBRD Kazakhstan Renewables Energy Framework will support Kazakhstan  to develop capacity aggregating  ca. 330MW 
RES projects, which will help Kazakhstan to  achiev e ca. 18% of its 2020 RE S goals via the following two components:  Component 
#1 – scaling up renewable energy investments, by blending EBRD and GCF financing  and leveraging additional debt financing from 
international and development financial institutions and in the future from commercial banks, as well as private sector 
investments , and  Component #2 – enhancing renewable energy integration, policies and plan ning through a comprehensive 
technical assistance  and policy dialogue  programme . Indicative information regarding the expected use of the funds for 
Component #1 and the budget for Competent #2 is presented in Section C.3. Project / Programme Description . 
 
1) Component #1 – Scaling up renewable energy investments  
The Programme  will support the development and construction of 8-11 sub-projects with the total investment of up to  USD 550 
million  within the next 5 years . The Programme  will consist of the EBRD debt financing of up to EUR 200 million  (USD 214 million  
in equivalent ), the GCF financing of up to USD 106 million , other lenders co -financing  and private sector invest ments  of USD 230 
million in predominantly private and in exceptional cases public developers to finance the construction, connection to the 
electricity grid, commissioning and launch of renewable energy projects and in electricity distribution and transmission companies 
to finance th e modernisation and strengthening of the electricity grid in order to enhance the integration of renewable energy 
sources into the electricity grid.  The focus of the Framework is on the renewables projects  developed under  the FiT scheme, 
although projects under the competitive tendering  would also be eligible up to a maximum of 35% of the total GCF financing 
under Component #1. The proposed Programme will provide project sponsors access to a source of long -term debt financing 
requ ired for financially viable renewable energy projects in Kazakhstan at competitive pricing. Appropriately structured, long -term 
debt financing is essential for the successful construction and implementation of RES projects as such  financing source is limited in 
the domestic Kazakh market.  
 
The provision of concessional financ ing from the GCF will help overcome risk and cost barriers for the development of RES 
projects in Kazakhstan, which are not sufficiently addressed by the FiT and/or other forms of the G overnment support, due to the 
nascent  development of the sector.  
 
 
2) Component #2 – Enhancing renewable energy integration, policies and planning  
The provision of grant in the amount of USD 4 million  for technical assistance by the GCF will enable the EBRD to work with the 
Government and key public sector  stakeholders in further refining and developing the legal and regulatory framework, and 
build ing the national capacity necessary for promoting the development of RES  projects.  
 
The provision of GCF support  is expected to have a transformational impact at a sector  and country level, and will build upon the 
basis  set by  the Clean Technology Fund in Kazakhstan.  
 
Component  Sub-component (if 
applicable)  Amount (for 
entire 
programme)  Currency  GCF funding 
amount  Currency of 
disbursement to 
recipient  
Component 1.   
Financing of sub-
projects   
 
N/A 550 million 
USD ($)  USD 106 
million  USD  
Component 2.  
Technical assistance and 
policy engagement  Sub-component 2.1 
Technical assistance 
and capacity building  3.5  million 
USD ($)  USD 3.5 
million  USD


---
*Page 9*
---

PUBLIC  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  B 
 Sub-component 2.2 
Policy engagement  3.5  million 
USD ($)  USD 0.5 
million   
USD  
Total  557  million 
USD ($)  
 USD 110 
million   
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing   557 million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient   
(i) Senior Loans  
 (vi) Grants  106 
4  
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) As defined in the term 
sheet  Not applicable   As defined in 
the term sheet   
Not applicable  
 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  110 million USD 
($)  
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
Loans  
Senior 
Loans  
Equity  
Grant  2142 
93  
137  
3 million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)   
EBRD  
Other lenders  
Sponsors  
EBRD / other 
donors  TBD based on 
market and 
project 
conditions.  
TBD 
N/A 
N/A 
 TBD based 
on market 
and 
project 
conditions.  
 TBD 
N/A 
      N/A  
 senior  
senior  
junior  
Options  
Lead financing institution: EBRD  
Each GCF loan under the Framework will be provided alongside a loan from EBRD and other co -financiers loans 
on a pari passu basis .   
(d) Financial 
terms 
between GCF Special Fund  (See the details in Section C.7)  
In line with the Article 10 of the Agreement Establishing the EBRD ( “AEB”), the GCF resources are ‘special 
resources’ of the EBRD. The ‘special resources’ from the GCF and EBRD’s ‘ordinary capital resources’ shall at all 
                                                             
2 The amount of USD 214 million is based on the EBRD’s Board approved Framework for renewables in Kazakhstan in the 
amount of EUR 200 million. EUR/USD exchange rate 1.07 is used.


---
*Page 10*
---

PUBLIC  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  B 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  times and in all respects, be held, used, committed, invested or otherwise disposed of entirely separately from 
each other. In this regard, the EBRD has establish ed the GCF Special Fund (the “Special Fund ”) through which all 
payments from the GCF and repayments to the GCF will pass. The GCF resources in the Special Fund will not be 
comingled with the EBRD’s ordinary capital resources or other donor resourc es as far as financial flows are 
concerned. The EBRD will treat the resources from the Special Fund as assets of the EBRD for the purposes of 
the privileges and immunities provisions of the AEB .  
  
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
Commercial financing for long tenors and for structured project finance transactions is currently limited  for renewable energy 
projects in Kazakhstan. Based on the studies carried out for the Burnoye solar project, l ong-term financing of renewable energy at 
the maturities required is not available from local commercial banks or from the domestic bond market.


---
*Page 11*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C  
Section C: DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
C.1. Strategic Context  
 
Kazakhstan has been an early and enthusiastic proponent of sustainable development, aligning national strategic plans and 
programs with the green economy objectives. These are underpinned by ambitious low carbon and sustainability targets defined 
by the national legislation and international agreements. The ambitious targets established by these policy commitments require 
a significant scaling  up of financ ing from the public and private sources.  
 
Kazakhstan possesses significant renewable energy resources , such as wind, solar and hydropower. The country’s hydro potential 
is estimated as 27 TWh per year and wind potential at 18 TWh per year while solar potential is estimated at 3.9 -5.4 TWh as 
compared to the total annual electricity consumption of 91 TWh , out of which ca. 72% is met mainly by coal -fired power plants.  
The leading  coal- and gas -fired power plants in Kazakhstan representing 80% of the fossil fuel -based installed capacity are built in 
the Soviet era and  are more than 30 years old. Since the Government of Kazakhstan estimates that 73% of the  existing  power 
generation facilities are obsolete and require mode rnisation  on the back of the forecasted  increasing electricity demand at ca. 
3.2% p.a. over 2010 -2025 , an overwhelming amount of investment is needed to restore  and expand the power generation 
syste m. The levelised cost s of electricity for  supercritical coal (meeting the EU standard s on pollutant emissions ), wind and solar 
power plants are USD  52-59/MWh, USD  70-75/MWh and USD  86-96/MWh , respectively . When the environmental , health  and 
climate externality cost s of emissions are taken into consideration, together with the  anticipated  cost reduction in power 
generation from wind and solar on the back of  the steep learning curve (e.g. IRENA e stimates that LCOE for solar and wind 
between 2015 and 2025 could fall by up to 59% and 35%, respectively), it is expected that the difference in the leveli sed cost of 
electricity between coal and renewables will significantly narrow. As an example if the Kazakh Emissions Trading Scheme ( “ETS”) 
price costs be USD 5 per tonne of CO 2, then t his equates in a n additional electricity price of about USD 5 per MWh for  high 
efficiency  coal based power plants , which will cover 33% of the gap between RE S and new coal. Based on the mentioned trends 
there is a strong additionality case for the GCF to sponsor and leverage the paradigm shift to renewable energy in Kazakhstan . The  
investment  results under the F ramework will encourage the Government  of Kazakhstan and the sector  to achieve  the RES targets 
between 2020 and 2050, FiT scheme and carbon market . As the market grows over time, it will become attractive to the private 
sector.  
 
Recogni sing climate change and environmental challenges associated  with the coal -fired generation , and seeing the need to 
diversify the country’s economy  due to its over dependency on the natural resources sector , the Kazakh Government launched a 
strategic initiative called the Green Economy in 2013 under which a number of actions have been planned including the 
development of renewable energy sources. The initiative became the platform for Kazakhstan’s commitment during the UNFCCC 
Conference of Parties in Paris as was communicated by the Kazakh Government in its Intended  Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) to reduce GHG  emissions. The INDC , and now NDC as Kazakhstan ratified the Paris Agreement,  calls for an 
economy -wide target of 15% reduction in GHG  emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 . This reduction target  reflec ts a reduction of 
at least 22% below projected business as usual emissions. On 27th of October 2016, the Kazakh Senate adopted the Law “On 
ratification of the Paris Agreement”. See the table below for the Kazakh key green economy targets.  
Summary of key Green Economy targets  
Sector  Indicator  2020  2030  2050  
GHG Emissions  
 Reduction in GHG emissions (1990 
baseline)  N/A -15%  N/A 
Electricity  Share of alternative source of 
electricity   3% (renewables 
only)  10% (renewables wind and solar)  
20% (other alternative sources)  50%  
Energy 
Efficiency  Reduction in energy intensity of 
GDP (2008 baseline)  -25%  -30%  -50%


---
*Page 12*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
 
The current renewable energy policy framework was introduced in Kazakhstan, with the support of the EBRD technical assistance , 
in June 2013 and assumes support of renewable projects through the FiT. Due to the introduction of th e RES support mechanism , 
Kazakhstan’s RES market has seen continued growth of the overall generation volume coming from wind, solar and small 
hydropower plants. Power generated from these sources increased by 32% in 2016 as compared to 2015, though in absolute 
terms it continues to remain relatively insignificant at less than 1% of the overall power generation.   
 
The EBRD has been supporting the Government of Kazakhstan in developing the Green Economy legislation over the last 8 years, 
which includes the work on the development o f commercially viable renewable energy legislation, the development of an 
emission trading system  (Kazakh Emissions Trading Scheme) , the development of the domestic carbon credit  project, and the 
development of Kazakhstan’s INDC to the Paris Agreement in 2015. The EBRD is currently work ing with the Astana International 
Finance Centre on the consideration of a Green Financial System, which would help to align capital  flows with the green economic 
development.  
 
Achieving Kazakhstan’s vision of the green economy transition and closing the green investment gap will require a significant 
mobili sation of the private sector. There is a growing base of knowledge which demonstrates that pr ivate sector investment can 
be leveraged and barriers overcome through a range of proven measures and interventions. The Kazakhstan’s financial sector is 
currently unable to support the private sector in opening up the innovative and technically demanding niche of RES projects. 
According to the recent EBRD research  entitled “Green Financial System in Kazakhstan”3, the current potential of the financial 
sector to support the Paris Agreement is limited. The f inancial sector is currently shallow in both absolute and relative terms , and 
is in need for financial instruments that can help to develop this nascent market . The EBRD proposes to scale up investment in 
RES in Kazakhstan by establishing the proposed Programme  that will, with the support from the GC F, finance independent RES 
projects and scale up the RES investments in Kazakhstan.  
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline  
 
Emissions baseline  
Between 2000 and 2012, Kazakhstan almost doubled its GHG emissions, i.e. from 157 mt CO 2e to 291 mtCO 2e (WRI -CAIT, 2014). 
Compared to other countries in Central Asia, Kazakhstan is the largest GHG emitter in absolute terms, of which 85% is from th e 
energy sector. In relative terms, Kazakhstan has the highest emissions growth rate  in Central Asia  durin g this period (Figure 1) . As 
Kazakhstan generates 72% of its electricity from coal, this translates into a relativel y high grid emission factor at 0.844  tCO 2/MWh.  
  
Figure 1 GHG emissions indexed to 2000 level  
                                                             
3 www.greenfinance.kz


---
*Page 13*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
 
 
Barriers  
Renewable energy production in Kazakhstan is insignificant at less than  1%. This has been the case due to the following barriers:  
- Financial barriers: the lack of availability of long -term financing f rom the local and international banks in Kazakhstan to 
fund RES projects, particularly given the long tenors these projects typically require. Availability of equity also 
constrained project development given that the macroeconomic risk perception is relatively hi gh. Absence of full 
indexation of FiT for foreign currency fluctuations also constrains the development of RES as long -term local currency 
financing  at affordable rates are limited in the country.  
- High real and perceived risk for the first movers:  the lack of private sector participation in RES projects as well as high 
transaction costs pose challenges in initiating investments.   
- Infrastructure constraints: the current infrastructure needs to be assessed and enhanced to integrate RES into the grid.  
- Constraints  of institutional capacity: the regulatory bodies have constraints in  the capacity in man aging grid balancing, 
integrating RES projects into the domestic emissio ns trading system, reviewing and further develop ing and administering 
the RES tenders .  
- Externality cost : with an abundant and cheap power generation source of coal, as well as  a lack of an appropriate carbon 
price, it has been challenging for private sector project developer s to compete with coal fired power plants in terms of 
costs given absence of internalis ation of  the environmental cost of using carbon -intensive energy sources.  
 
Framework impact on baseline  
The Framework will help to facilitate systemic change in the country’s power generation sector where coal remains the dominant 
fuel by supporting the development of private renewable energy projects and moving towards sustainability of the power market . 
Furthermore, the Framework will have a demonstration effect of new ways of financing and new technologies , and will assi st with 
the reduction of Kazakhstan’s carbon intensity, with the expected GHG emission reductions of ca. 640,000  tonnes of CO 2 annually 
once all sub-projects are operational. The EBRD has developed a methodology to assess CO 2 reductions driven by the proposed 
Framework. For details, please refer to section E1.   
 
The Framework will contribute towards  the country’s target on the share of renewable s accounting for 3% of country’s total  
power  generation by 2020 . No installed capacity target  has been announced but, based on a certain assumptions related to the 
average load factor of various technologies and the future power generation , it is estimated to be ca. 1,800MW . In addition to


---
*Page 14*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
substitute carbon -intensive power generation at a country level, the increased installed renewable capacity supported by this 
Framework being in the south ern regions of Kazakhstan  would help reduce the power deficit in those areas.  While the 3% RE S 
target by 2020 may seem modest, the Framework is expected to have a demonstration effect in Kazakhstan’s RES industry further 
contributing  towards the Government ’s 30% alternative energy target by 2030.  
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Proposed Operation  
The EBRD proposes to the GCF to implement an investment Programme with  a 5-year duration  leading to the total investments of 
USD 550 million from the EBRD, private sector, other financial institutions along with the proposed investment from the GCF. The 
investments will be in the form of loans to RES developers to finance the construction, connection to the grid, commissioning and 
launch of the RES projects (solar, wind, sma ll hydropower4 and biogas) . 
 
The proposed Programme builds on the following milestone achievements and experience of the Bank : 
i) Implement ation of  the Ukraine Sustainable Energy Lending Facility  (USELF, see Annex 1);  
ii) Successful development and operation of the largest solar power plant  in Kazakhstan -  the 50MW Burnoye SPP  (see 
Annex 2); and  
iii) Policy dialogue of up to 8 years with the Government of Kazakhstan on the green economy transition , including 
renewable energy legislation . 
 
The benefit of the Programme for Kazakhstan is to develop  the market of independent RES developers by creating a large pool of 
projects and project sponsor s, attracting attention from both local and international banks , increasing the integration of  RES into 
the energy market and enabling access to the carbon market, altogether  ensuring long -term sustainability  and competitiveness of 
the RES market .  It will contribute towards  the achievement of the 3% target share of renewable power generation at a country 
level by 2020, substitute carbon intensive power generation in the north and reduc e the power deficit in the southern regions of 
Kazakhstan.  
 
Furthermore, the Programme will contribute considerably to Kazakhsta n’s climate mitigation efforts.  Kazakhstan is a country with 
very high emissions of CO 2 from power generation, and the RES financed by the Programme  will therefore have a substantial 
impact on Kazakhstan’s GHG emissions by adding clean energy i nto the power generation mix. Based on the experience with the 
current portfolio, the expected direct CO 2 emissions reductions by new and additional RES generation are ca. 0.64 million tons 
CO 2 equivalent per year once all sub-projects are operational, with an estimated lifetime of 20 years.   
 
GCF Contribution  
The total requested contribution from the GCF is USD 110 million for concessional loans and technical assistance.  
 
Component #1: Scaling up renewable energy investments  
The GCF is requested to provide  concessional financing  of up to USD 10 6 million, or ca. 19% of the total projects costs of USD 550 
million  to address the real and perceived risks and cost disadvantages as well as the lack of availability of long -term financing from 
the local and international banks in Kazakhstan.  Eligible projects are the sub-projects either (i) awarded a PPA under the FiT 
Scheme or a competitive tender, in each case in terms acceptable to the EBRD, or (ii) electricity distribution and transmission 
companies to fi nance the electricity grid  connection  to enhance the RES integration into the electricity grid.  The latter part of the 
sub-projects on  the modernisation and expansion of the transmission and distribution network s aims  to remove 
technical/technology and system operation barriers that currently hinder the efficient integration of RES, especially small - and 
medium -size wind and PV projects. Typical projects on the electricity distribution and transmission networks  involve  
modernization and expansion of  substations and lines modernisation, installation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition  
(SCADA ) systems , automatic control and communication systems, energy management systems and smart metering systems.  
Financing of electricity distribution and transmission companies will not constitute more than 20% of total Programme costs and 
will be limited with the network modernization necessary for renewables integration into the grid. The total GCF financing of sub-
                                                             
4 Under the  Kazakh FiT scheme, small hydropower is defined as an installed capacity below 35MW.


---
*Page 15*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
projects developed under a competitive tender will not exceed 35% of the total GCF financing under Component #1 of the 
Programme.   
 
 
Pricing of the GCF co -financing will be determined based on detailed due diligence of the sub-projects individually and on the 
principles  specified in the Term  Sheet  agreed with the GCF Secretariat.  The concessional financ ing from the GCF  is critical as it will 
reduce the financial risk for the project sponsors in a relatively untested market, address the cost disadvantages s uffered by 
renewable technologies in Kazakhstan, and bridge a capital gap that would otherwise remain within the financial structure of the 
sub-projects, in the absence of commercial lending for renewable energy projects from local  and international banks.   
 
 
The EBRD anticipates that all solar and transmission and distribution sub -projects under the Programme  will go under  Category B 
and the wind, small hydropower, and potentially biogas projects will go under  a combination of Category A and B. Hence  each 
sub-project will be individually reviewed and categorised and a due diligence will be undertaken accordingly.    
 
Component #2: Enhancing renewable energy integration, policies and planning  
 
The Programme will be supported by a technical assistance  and policy dialogue  programme that will  further unlock the 
renewable energy market potential in Kazakhstan and is  estimated to amount USD 7 million.  The GCF is requested to provide USD 
4 million or 5 7% of this component  to public entities and regulatory authorities to support regulatory reform and institutional  
capacity -building  programme . Technical assistance to private developers will be source d from the EBRD and/ or other donors , but 
not from the GCF .  
 
The following s pecific goals  for the regulatory reform s have been set in consultation with the Kazakh authorities and other 
donors:  
i) conduct systemic change in the sector ; 
ii) achieve critical mass of private RES projects ; and 
iii) enable high -level development of RES.  
 
Further support of the regulatory reform programme financed by the Framework will target improvement of the  three major 
instruments of the  RES market development in Kazakhstan : FiT, introduction of the auction system and carbon price.  The policy  
dialogue and technical assistance  initiatives  will include, inter alia  the following aspects : 
- Further review of the FiT system, and the mechanism of FiT calculation ; 
- Design and introduction of the auction based system for RES projects, in close coordination with other donors -sponsored  
projects ; 
- Development of the domestic energy and carbon market and integration of the RES projects/programmes in that market, 
and explor ing the use of Paris Agreement article 6  instruments to further leverage the RE S developments beyond the 
GCF sponsored programme to ensure a long -term  sustainability ; and 
- Addressing barriers restricting women’s access to employment and skills in the high -value energy sector.  
 
All resources used for C omponent #2 will be used for the procurement of consultancy services according to the EBRD 
Procurement Policies and Rules.  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
Since its inception, the EBRD has in total invested EUR 22.2 billion over 1,267 climate mitigation and adaptation projects to 
promote efficiency and innovation investments in energy for its countries of operation which resulted in 83.6 mt CO 2 emissions 
reductions. The EBRD has been financing renewable energy projects since 2006 and has as of 31 December 2016 financed more 
than 4.54GW of renewable energy capacity for total investments of EUR 2.4 billion. These investments in renewable energy al one 
led to 12.4 mt CO 2 emissions reductions. The projects financed by the EBRD include all technologies and in particular wind, hydro 
and solar.  
 
The EBRD is committed to increase the share of renewable energy projects financed on an annual basis as part o f its Green 
Economy Transition (GET) Approach to deliver the mandate of transition impact.  GET aims to reduce GHG emissions, increasing


---
*Page 16*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
the role of cleaner fuels and renewable energy, supporting reform and commercialisation of the power sector including t hrough 
the mobilisation of private sector infrastructure investment. Please refer  to the link to EBRD’s GET Approach 
http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/strategies -and-policies.html.  
 
All projects are subject to appraisal under the EBRD’s Environmental & Social Policy (ESP) to ensure sustainable development of all 
operations receiving the EBRD financing.  
 
The EBRD also ha s a solid experience in working closely as a trusted partner to g overnments in promoting renewable and 
sustainable energy through policy dialogue. The EBRD has contributed towards the implementation  of a number of frameworks 
for renewables in its countries of operation such as in Romania, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Poland, Mong olia, Serbia and more recently 
Jordan  and Egypt , and intends to accelerate the initiative in Kazakhstan  along with the GCF.  
 
In 2016, the EBRD consolidated its proven record helping countries in their transition towards clean energy by financing 10 
renewab le projects amounting  EUR 238 million and more than 300 MW.  In Kazakhstan,  as of 31 July 2017, the EBRD  signed loan 
agreements for three  renewable energy projects  in Kazakhstan:  Yereymentau wind farm (50MW) , Burnoye solar (50MW)  and 
Burnoye solar extension (50MW) .    
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
Electricity Market Overview  
The country’s power sector was shaped during the Soviet era and predominantly relies on coal -fired power plants concentrated in 
the North (c a. 72% of generation), next to large open pit coal deposits.  Approximately 1 7% of electricity is generated by gas fired 
power plants and only about 10% comes from non -fossil fuel – five hydropower plants built several decades ago.  
As most of the capacity is loc ated in the North, the Southern Kazakhstan has historically experienced a power deficit and relies on 
high voltage transmission lines delivering electricity from the North as well as from the neighbouring Kyrgyz Republic. In to tal, 
there are 118 power stations in Kazakhstan with the installed electric capacity of 2 2GW and available capacity of ca. 19GW.  At 
the same time, there are 41 power companies of which the five largest account for c a. 58% of generation, while the ten largest 
account for c a. 80% of the total electricity output.  
Electricity production and consumption was growing steadily in Kazakhstan over the past 10 years apart from minor reductions  in 
2009 and 2013.  Overall, the Kazakh economy remains energy intensive with oil & gas, mining and  industrial companies being the 
major consumers of electricity, followed by households and the transport sector. Up until 2013, the country had an electricit y 
deficit which was covered through imports from Russia and the Kyrgyz Republic. However, in 2013 K azakhstan became a net 
exporter of electricity supplying excess capacity from the northern plants to Russia but that was suspended in 2015 due to th e 
unfavourable KZT/RUB exchange rate. In 2016 exports to Russia were resumed supporting electricity generati on in the country.  
At the same time, the country’s power system lacks manoeuvrable balancing capacity and has to rely on Kyrgyz hydropower 
plants for balancing.   
Electricity output and consumption in Kazakhstan, million kWh


---
*Page 17*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
 
Source: The Kazakh Operator of Electric Power and Capacity Market  
 
RES Market Overview  
- The market for renewable energy generation in Kazakhstan is nascent, while technical potential is high. The country’s 
hydro potential is estimated as 27 TWh per year and wind potential at 18 TWh per year while the solar potential is 
estimated at 3.9 -5.4 TW h as compared to the total annual electricity consumption of 91 TWh currently dominated by 
coal fired power plants. As of 1Q2017  Kazakhstan has a cumulative installed RES capacity of 2 96 MW ( or 1.3% of the total 
power generation capacity of  22 GW), of which 50 MW is represented by the Burnoye SPP project sponsored by a JV 
between United Green Energy Ltd with Samruk -Kazyna Invest LLP and financed by the EBRD.  
- The Government of Kazakhstan has set a target to increase the share of energy generation fr om the RES  in the country’s 
energy balance up to 3% by 2020  (versus  the current share of energy generation from the RES at less than 1% ). This is 
part of the country’s NDC target of reducing GHG  emissions by 15% below 1990 levels by 2030.  
Cumulative instal led capacity by fuel type in 2015 
Fuel type  Cumulative installed capacity, 2015  
Coal  65.9%  
Gas  20.4%  
Oil  0.3%  
Hydropower  12.8%  
Non -hydro renewables  0.6%  
Source: GlobalData  
 
Legal/Regulatory Overview  
- The Kazakh Government commenced the development of the renewables regulations in 2009 and subsequently the 
Renewable Energy Law in June 2013 by setting the Framework for renewable energy development via introduction of the 
FiT.  
- As p er the renewables law,  RES ha s priority of dispatch and sell electricity to a single off -taker – the Financial Settlement 
Centre ( “FSC”), a wholly owned subsidiary of the National Grid Operator, KEGOC.  
- Upon the commencement of the commercial operation of a plant, the tariff is set fixed for 15 years subject to annual 
adjustments for the Kazakh CPI and differentiated by the types the RES in the following way:  
RES technology  KZT USD  equivalent*  
Solar  KZT 34.61/kWh  USD  11 cents/kWh  
Wind  KZT 22.68/kWh  USD  7.2 cents/kWh  
Small hydro  KZT 16.71/kWh  USD  5.3 cents/kWh  
Bio energy  KZT 32.23/kWh  USD  10.2  cents/kWh  
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 1H16 1H17
Output 71,553 76,365 80,074 78,434 82,296 86,203 90,248 91,973 93,935 90,797  94,077  46,042  50,787  
Change % 6% 7% 5% -2% 5% 5% 5% 2% 2% -3% 4% 10%
By fuel
TPPs 63,813 68,217 68,495 71,574 74,306 78,354 82,640 84,268 85,689 81,371  82,110  40,394  44,494  
HPPs 7,740   8,148   7,437   6,859   7,990   7,849   7,608   7,701   8,236   9,250    11,606  5,469    6,081    
By zones
North 55,420 57,873 59,081 59,724 65,204 68,314 70,970 71,916 72,676 69,258  70,968  34,935  39,256  
South 7,636   9,224   10,914 8,161   8,229   8,484   9,487   9,915   10,469 10,810  11,731  5,594    5,498    
West 8,498   9,268   10,079 10,549 8,862   9,405   9,790   10,141 10,790 10,729  11,377  5,513    6,033    
Consumption 71,916 76,440 80,620 77,960 83,767 88,136 91,444 89,641 91,661 90,847  92,312  45,217  48,549  
Change % 6% 6% 5% -3% 7% 5% 4% -2% 2% -1% 2% 7%
By zones
North 47,207 49,695 52,237 50,814 58,327 60,589 62,554 60,786 60,865 60,399  61,768  30,308  32,538  
South 14,332 15,523 16,426 15,016 16,176 17,966 19,005 18,623 19,856 19,393  19,013  9,313    9,921    
West 10,378 11,222 11,957 12,130 9,264   9,582   9,885   10,232 10,940 11,055  11,530  5,596    6,089    
Net export (363)     (75)       (545)     474      (1,472)  (1,933)  (1,197)  2,332   2,274   (51)       1,765    825       2,238


---
*Page 18*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
* USD /KZT Exchange Rate is 314.5, as of 2 8 April , 2017.  
 
- In early 2017 the Ministry of Energy introduced amendments to the Renewable Energy Law including amendments on the 
FX indexation , an introduction of  reserve fund  and a siting plan on the recommended allocation of RES facilities . 
According to the amendments, a RES developer is entitled to indexation of the FiT provided that the project costs include 
liabilities in hard currencies in case of at least 25% devaluation  or appreciation  of tenge against USD. The FX indexation 
formula is presented below, where T t +1 is the FIT effective during tim e t+1 , CPI t is the consumer price index accumulated 
for 12 months, USD t + 1 = current rate of tenge to US dollar and USD t is average KZT / USD exchange rate calculated for 
the preceding 12 month period:  
Tt+1= Tt∗(1+0.7∗(CPI t−100% )
100%+0.3∗USD t+1−USD t
USD t) 
- In the absence of more than 25% depreciation per year against USD, the FiT is adjusted only for annual CPI.  
- The Ministry of Energy in January 2017 has introduced the reserve fund within the FSC to cover the short -term liquidity 
needs. The size of the reserve fund is to amount 3% of the total annual RES payments. The FSC is to accumulate the 
required amount of the reserves via additional  surcharges in the RES support tariffs to the conditional consumers.  
- Changes in the RES Law also provided for the need for a siting plan on the recommended allocation of RES facilities (the 
“Siting Plan”). This Siting Plan considers  the RES development targets and its purpose is to identify the most suitable 
areas where RES should be implemented. The Siting Plan shall be established and approved by the Ministry of Energy at 
least once a year. In addition to the country -level targets, the Siting Plan provides a summary of all RES projects that can 
be connected to the network within a defined area.  
- On 24  July 2017 the Government of Kazakhstan adopted a primary legislation which envisages an introduction of auction 
based system for further development of RES in Kazakhstan. It is expected that over the next year the Government  of 
Kazakhstan  would adopt a se condary legislation on an introduction of auction based system to be followed with a first 
auction on RES capacity conducted in 2018.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
EBRD  
Not applicable . 
 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Component 1  
The Framework focuses on financing of the RES  projects under the FiT scheme. Under the Program me each Borrower  planning to 
develop a sub -project concludes a PPA, based on the Ministry Energy approved template, with the FSC.  The key elements of the 
PPA are the following:  
- Each Borrower  (the “Seller”) sells electricity generated at the relevant power plant (the “Facility”) in accordance with 
and in the manner contemplated by the PPA.   
- Seller’s obligations will include designing, procuring, constructing, erecting, installing, testing, commissioning, owning, 
operating and maintaining the network assets necessary to interconnect the Facility to the transmission network in 
accordance with t he relevant network connection directives. The Seller is required to install an electric meter on the site 
and comply with KEGOC’s standards and instructions for the network operation.  
- The FSC (the “Buyer”) is required to buy all electricity generated by e ach Facility and recorded by the commercial meter 
at the point of delivery  dispatch on a priority basis. No curtailment is allowed. The electricity generated by each Facility 
is then procured to the thermal electricity generators in proportion to their ele ctricity output. Interest of 0.1% is charged 
on overdue amounts of payments from the Buyer per overdue calendar day. The total overdue interest is capped at 10% 
of the overdue amount. The term of the PPA is 15 years starting from the commercial operation d ate. 
- In disputed occasions, the final source of amounts to be paid will be actual amounts generated/consumed in the 
wholesale electricity market provided by the National Dispatching Centre within KEGOC.  
 
In addition to the PPA, t he Connection Agreement  is concluded between the regional electricity distribution company or KEGOC 
and each developer , set ting out the terms of interaction between the parties relevant to the connection of and the delivery of 
electricity by each Facility to the network.


---
*Page 19*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C 
 
Under the Renewable Energy Law, t he FSC sells  the purchased electricity from the RES to the obligated purchasers (thermal 
generators) proportionately to their output at the tariff set by the FSC. The obligated  purchaser s are obliged to purchase 
electricity from the FSC at the tariff set monthly by the FSC, which includes the costs of purchasing the electricity from re newable 
energy sources. In accordance with the Renewable Energy Law, the obligated purchaser in turn sell s the renewables electricity to 
large consumers and energy supply ing companies along with the internal generated energy . There are currently 41 thermal 
generators of which 10 account for ca. 75% of the country’s electricity generation.   
 
Component 2  
The EBRD will be directly involved in all aspects of the implementation of the grant component of the Program me. All 
procurement will be done in accordance with EBRD’s Procurement Policies and Rules, which stipulate a strong involvement in 
working with cli ents on all related documents and processes.


---
*Page 20*
---

PUBLIC  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  C C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme  Implementation5 
 
 
 
                                                             
5 The information is preliminary and depends on actual implementation of the Programme.  
 
Component / Subcomponent / Activity Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Component 1 (loan for project finance)
1.1 Scaling up renewable energy
investments* x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x c
Component 2 (grant for technical assistance)
2.1 Technical assistance and capacity
building**
2.1.a. Institutional capacity building
(including implementation support for
auctions and tenders, and project preparation
for public entities) x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x c
        2.1.b. Vocational training development x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x c
        2.1.c. Promote gender equality x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x c
2.1.d. Capacity building toFSC (MRV and
telemetry requirements/rules) x x x x x x x x x x x x x x c
   2.2 Policy engagement***
2.2.a. Design and introduction ofthe
auction based system x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x c
2.2.b. Further review ofFiT system,
elaboration of the mechanism of FiT
calculation x x x x c
        2.2.c. Strategies for carbon market x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x c
Subtotal of component 2
TOTAL x: ongoing
c: complete
* related to output 1 in the logic framework in the funding proposal
** related to output 2 in the logic framework in the funding proposal
*** related to output 3 in the logic framework in the funding proposal2022 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


---
*Page 21*
---

PUBLIC  
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  D 
SECTION D: RATIONALE  FOR  GCF  INVOLVEMENT  
 
 
 D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
The GCF involvement in the proposed Programme is critical as it will:  
i) address real and perceived risks and cost disadvantages as well as the lack of availability of long -term financing from 
local and international banks in Kazakhstan ; 
ii) attract international and domestic private sector investors to participate in the Kazakh RES market ; 
iii) reduce the financial risk s of the project sponsors in an untested market  through decreased interest rate sensitivity and 
lower medium term cash flow pressure through longer term financing ; and 
iv) provide for bridging of a capital gap that would otherwise remain within the financial st ructure of the project.  
 
Furthermore, through the proposed Programme, the GCF will facilitate achievement of the target on the share of renewable 
power generation at a country level (3% of total generation by 2020), reduce power deficit in the southern regions of Kazakhs tan 
by increasing installed renewable capacit y in the South and assist in the further development of the Kazakh Emissions Trading 
Scheme  by the potential supply of domestic carbon credits. This supply of carbon credits is an essential part for the working of 
the Kazakh ETS, and hereby underwrites the  paradigm shift towards pricing carbon  for the emitters, and incentivising the carbon 
neutral technologies such as renewable energy . The RE S projects may register for a domestic carbon credits status, which under 
the current rules may use international accepted methodologies, such as the Clean Development Mechanism. Finally, the 
successful implementation of the various sub -projects is expected  to encourage the development of similar projects by other 
private investors, who have several concerns related to technical and operational challenges associated with severe climate 
conditions as well as commercial and regulatory risks related to the nove l nature of the country’s renewable energy market.  
 
D.2. Exit Strategy   
Sub-project Level  
The exit strategy for development finance is through repayment of the EBRD/GCF loan at maturity.  
 
Renewable Sector Level  
Following the PPA expiration the  individual sub-projects become price -taker s in the electricity market.  At a sector level, 
providing the financ ing and technical assistance will contribute to the development of a self -sustaining market for renewable 
energy projects in Kazakhstan, as outl ined above.


---
*Page 22*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
Section E: EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the proposed 
project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and indicative assessment 
factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where relevant and applicable.  This 
section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
The economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan is the largest economy in Central Asia. In 2015, the World Economic Forum ranked 
Kazakhstan the 50th out of 144 countries in its Global Competitiveness Ranking, which considers multiple macroeconomic and 
financial factors, such as market size, GDP, and tax rates, among others. The power industry  is represented by more than 5 .4% of 
total industrial output of the country in 201 6. Most of Kazakhstan’s electricity ( ca. 72%) is produced by coal -fired power plants.  
 
With respect to climate change, Kazakhstan ranks among the top 10 energy -intensive economies in the world about double the 
energy intensity of the USA or Canada.  Mirroring the high -energy  intensity, the country is the fourth most GHG  intensive country 
in the world.   Kazakhstan is more than twice as GHG intensive as the European and Central Asian regional average, and more than 
three times as intensive as the OECD average.  
 
The CO 2 emissions of the electricity sector in Kazakhstan are substantial, at 0.844 tCO 2/MWh of electricity generated. Adding 
zero -emissions renewable energy capacity therefore has an immediate and substantial impact. In some locations, especially in 
the south of the country, adding power capacity will also help to balance the grid, and there by reduce transmission system losses.  
Without taking the latter part into account, the introduction of the Programme will help to initialize the process of replacement 
of the outdate d and polluting electricity generating technologies and is expected to ac hieve CO 2 reduction of  at least  0.64 million 
tons CO 2 equivalent per year once all sub-projects are operational , for a lifetime of 20 years . 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 
eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual   
643,229  tCO 2e (once all sub-projects will be in 
operation)  
Lifetime   
12.86  mtCO 2e 
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only)  Total   
3,000 short -term jo bs (during construction) 
and 150 long -term jobs (during operation)  
Percentage 
(%)  
N/A 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Examples include:  
• Expected increase in the number of households with access to low -emission energy  
• Expected increase in the number of small, medium and large low -emission power suppliers, and installed 
effective capacity


---
*Page 23*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
• Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision -making  
• Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks  
• Other s 
 
The EBRD developed a standardised baseline methodology based  on a CDM approach to conservatively assess CO 2 reductions 
driven by the Programme . The methodology calculates the CO 2 savings based on the total estimated  installed capacity of wind,  
PV, hydro , bioenergy power plants to be deployed by the Programme in Kazakhstan. The grid emission factor ( “EF”) takes into 
account the current energy mix supplied in Kazakhstan and was estimate d at 0.844  tCO 2/MWh  based on the Project Design 
Document prepared for Yereymentau wind project . It is assumed that total RES capacity under the Framework to be developed 
will be ca. 330 MW in total consisting mainly of PV, wind and small hydro. With a conservative assumption of the load factor s for 
these 3 main types of  technologies,  the estimated electricity production is 762,120 MWh, c orresponding to 643,229  tons CO 2 per 
annum . The total CO 2 emissions reduction over lifetime of the sub-projects of 20 years is estimated at 1 2.86 million CO 2. The 
detailed calculation  is set out below . 
 
  
 
Estimated cost for carbon reduction (total investment cost/expecte d lifetime emission reductions  tCO 2eq) 
- USD 106 million /tCO 2 for GCF contribution = 8.2 USD /tCO 2 
- USD 550 million /tCO 2 for total Programme  cost = 42.8 USD /tCO 2 
 
The Programme’s investment costs and the mitigation costs ( USD per ton CO 2 mitigated over 20 years) are in line with those of 
the similar RES projects in other countries of the EBRD’s operation such as Ukraine and Russia.  
 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze  impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
The paradigm shift is envisaged to take place along three phases from short to long -term. In its  current phase, the RE S 
development is triggered by a FiT system and further leveraged by optional carbon credits for the Kazakh ETS as per legislati on. 
The incentives provided will help to establish a beachhead capacity of renewable energy in Kazakhstan, enabling the 
development of national skills and a suppliers / services infrastructure. In a second phase within  2-3 years, Kazakhstan would fully 
switch to an auctioning system for additional RE S capacity and generation, which would help to bring down the investment costs 
through competition. In a third phase the further decarbonisation of the power sector would be carried in full by the energy and 
the carbon market (Kazakh ETS), and by an increased demand for electricity through the electrification of othe r sectors (e.g. 
transport).  
 
This Programme would focus its technical assistance activities across three different timelines, short, medium and long term . The 
long -term  perspective is required to drive the transformational change, whilst short term the fo cus is on issues like implementing 
regulations and training and the medium term on the enabling of an auctioning system for renewable energy.  
 
The Programme  will enable the development of a scaled -up and viable RES market in Kazakhstan.  By demonstrating the 
Unit 
installed 
capacityCapacity 
factor
(MW)
Solar PV 150 0.12 157,680 0.844 133,082 20 2,661,638
Wind 120 0.35 367,920 0.844 310,524 20 6,210,490
Hydro/ bioenergy 60 0.45 236,520 0.844 199,623 20 3,992,458
Total 330 762,120 643,229 12,864,586Lifetime 
emissions 
avoided (tCO2)TechnologyAnnual 
electricity 
Generatio
n (MWh)Grid EF 
(tCO2/M
Wh)Annual 
emissions 
avoided 
(tCO2)Lifetime 
(yr)


---
*Page 24*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
commercial viability of the RES projects,  it will encourage commercial lending in the future.   The Programme  will provide a highly 
visible demonstration to other potential developers that projects can be successfully implemented in thi s market.  By supporting 
the development of RES projects in accordance with best international practices, the Programme  will help establish standards 
that can be replicated and will further encourage other developers to enter the market.   It is essential f or suppliers to see a 
growing RE S market uptake, for those to undertake upfront investments in setting up their development and services 
infrastructure. A well working suppliers network established in Kazakhstan is essential to reduce risks to operations a nd bring 
down transaction costs.  
 
Furthermore, the Programme  will support and facilitate financing structures which are not widely available for these types of 
projects from local banks but which may be expected to enter the market once precedents are established.   As long -term,  limited 
recourse financing is essential to enable increased levels of investment for renewable energy projects in Kazakhstan , the 
Programme  could have a fundamental role in establishing this market.  
 
The Programme  will enable th e involvement of private sector resources to design and implement RES projects taking full risk for 
long -term finance. This will allow bring ing optimal private sector technical and financial expertise in diversification of energy 
sector in Kazakhstan.  
 
A Theory of Change model for the Programme  is provided in Annex 5. 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
The Programme  is building on multi -annual and multi -donor engagement in the regulatory aspects of the Kazakh renewable 
energy sector. The EBRD has throughout been the lead donor agency in this field, and the results from the investment and 
tracking of the Programme  will be fed back into the regulatory development process. This will also be a key element of the 
technical support and capacity building  which  will be provided to the Ministry of Energy, KEGOC (national transmission company), 
RES developers in order to strengthen local capacities to develop (project design, financing, construction, operation and 
maintenance) and integrate renewable s into the grid.   
 
 
These activities will result in the build -up of valuable lessons learnt and the enhancement of linkages between authorities, 
sponsors, financiers, suppliers and construction and consulting companies, and consequently the adequate strengthening of local 
governance and institutional knowledge required for successful and sustainable implementation of RES projects . 
 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment


---
*Page 25*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
The fundamental purpose of the Programme is to enhance the long -term viability of private sector participation in harnessing 
Kazakhstan's renewable energy potential, thus enabling the scale necessary to bring the generation sector, and so the economy  as a 
whole, onto a lower -carbon development path.  
 
The Programme builds on the ambitious efforts of the Kazakh Government to encourage the renewable generation market via the 
Renewable Energy Law, and the FiT / auction  scheme. In the long -term, the involvement of the private sector at scale is necessary to 
bring in the financing, the skills and the technology necessary to decarbonize Kazakhstan's carbon -intensive power sector to a level in 
line with the country’s overall clean energy potential. The Programme bri ngs together the necessary capacity enhancement and the 
provision of adequately blended financing in order to overcome the barriers, and to demonstrate and pave the way for sustaine d 
private sector participation in the long -term.  
 
Concretely, the following activities will create conditions conducive to sustained private investments in the sector  by the following 
activities : 
• design and introduce the auction based system for RES projects ; 
• develop the integration of the RES projects in domestic energy  and carbon market, and explore the use of Paris Agreement 
article 6 instruments to further leverage the RES developments beyond the GCF sponsored programme to ensure a long -
term sustainability ; 
• training and capacity building for FSC, KEGOC and regi onal di stribution companies.  
 
The purpose of the Programme is to enhance emission reductions and low -carbon development, by supporting the market for private 
sector investments in power generation from renewables in Kazakhstan. As such, the current proposal:  
• Contributes to demonstrating the viability of a new market supports the uptake of low -carbon technologies with low market 
penetration rates.  
• Makes use of funding support mechanisms which are relatively new for the Kazakh power sector and the blending of 
multi lateral climate finance into project finance packages as proposed by the current Programme. Some of the capacity 
strengthening activities will target the enhanced management of the FiT scheme so as to make it sustainable, flexible and 
attractive for contin uous investments.  
 
The Programme will introduce and demonstrate viability and attractiveness of the new modern technologies, as well as project 
implementation and financing practices, resulting in facilitating competitive entry of low carbon players into a market curre ntly 
dominated by their higher -carbon counterparts.  Overall, the Programme will help unlocking the renewable potential of Kazakhstan 
and facilitate investments in the sector which would essentially create a new ind ustry and bring in new players  thus contributin g to 
the competitiveness in the country’s economy.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 26*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
The sub-projects under the Framework will seek to identify any remaining gaps in regulation drawing upon previous substantial work 
in consultations with the Kazakh authorities and other donors , and include regulatory support program that will help to  
- conduct systemic changes in the sector ; 
- achieve the critical mass of private renewable projects ; and 
- enable  high -level developments of the RES.   
 
The planned program  will provide support to the regulatory reform including carbon market related policy engagement, on best  
strategies to integrate the RES projects/programmes under domestic and/or Paris Agreement flexible mechanism; reviewing how the 
RES sector will be dealt with under the Kazakh Emissions Trading System carbon budget; supporting development of the MRV syst em; 
introduction of the auction based system for the RES projects.   Framework will enable the  policy shift that supports the move 
towards sustainability of RES market by creating a large pool of projects and project sponsor interest; and international int egration of 
RES market development and enabling carbon market access, by this ensuring longer term sustainability of the framework regulatory 
outcomes.   
 
The Program me will also contribute to ongoing national efforts to coordinate with the G overnment and support private sector actors 
to implement the first 3 year Action Plan for the Concept on the Family and Gender in the Republic of Kazakhstan to 2030 , in 
partnership with the National Commission for Women, Family and Demographic Policy .  In particular, the Programme  will help  
facilitate clients to review and inform ongoing policy dialogue processes  led by EBRD , with the long -term  objectives of reducing legal 
and regulatory barriers affecting priority recruitment areas, expanding legal awareness for women’s equal access to the labou r 
market . 
 
 
 E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
The Programme will bring:  
- Socio -economic benefits through employment from construction and operation ; 
- Socio -economic benefits from sustainable energy supply ; 
- Socio -economic benefits from end -user costs reduction resulted from more efficient competitive tendering scheme;  
- Cumulative effects on climate through reduction in GHG emissions ; 
- Decrease of air pollutant emissions and other types of environmental pollution associated with traditional energy 
production, leading to improved air quality and reduced health risks ; 
- Penetration of modern construction/production patterns and technologies, demand in high skilled personnel ; 
- Enhanced a ccess to employment opportunities for women in the high -value, high -growth energy sector . 
 
Gender Impact  
While the RES market is vital to Kazakhstan’s economy, women are not equally sharing in increased employment opportunities in  the 
Power and Energy sector, and are thus not well positioned to benefit from opportunities connected to the development of renewable 
energy sources.  The Government’s sectoral employment forecasts show that skills -related challenges are particularly pronounced in 
the natural resources and power & energy sectors. Based on employer surveys, the Ministry of Healthcare and Social Developmen t 
anticipates that mor e than 10,000 vacancies will appear in the electricity supply sector over the next five years, across almost all 
levels and occupations. This corresponds to a 14 % increase from a baseline of 279,941 jobs in 2015. Existing legal regulations that bar 
women f rom certain types of occupations will limit the extent to which these employment opportunities will be open to the widest 
possible talent pool. This creates challenges for employers as well as inclusion barriers.  Women are currently only minimally 
represen ted in the Energy sector ( ca. 31% of total Industry Employment) and are particularly absent from the higher paying jobs (with 
average ~20% pay gap across all salary levels – the third largest gap by sector in Kazakhstan. Not only are there legal prohibitio ns 
against women working in certain jobs but also few women possess the university and vocational skills training that would qua lify 
them for positions in RES engineering, industrial management and core operations.   Without attention to strengthening equal ity of 
opportunity in th e Framework, existing legal exclusions to women working in specific roles are expected to spill -over and discourage 
women from applying their talents or seeking training opportunities in RES sectors.


---
*Page 27*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
 
Strengthening of women’s participation in the high value RES sectors:  Given the scale of the proposed Programme , it would create 
an opportunity to work closely with eligible RES project developers to develop and implement a comprehensive plan to ensure 
women and men are able to equally access opportunities connected to operations in terms of direct technical and operations skil ls 
and employment. For example, it will be  ensure d that appropriate infrastructure for women (e.g. separate bath rooms) and security  
measures will be put  in place to accommodate female workers in the otherwise male dominated energy sector. The implementation 
of additional measures  will be sought in line with EBRD Environment and Social Policy ( “ESP”) Performance Requirements ( “PR”), 
safeguarding  ‘decent and fair workplace’ principles and core labour standards: for example, equal pay for work of equal value, labour 
rights, occupational health -care services, enhanced safety standards, childcare services for women with children, and on –site 
kindergartens for children of working parents . The EBRD will also develop partnerships with vocational education and training 
(“TVET ”) institutions and Kasipkor Holding (public authority responsible for the quality assurance of colleges and universities) , to 
enhance young women’s access to developing relevant technical skills  through training  unskilled or low -skilled women to ensure their 
recruitment in companies that will execute sub -projects . This intervention can potentially benefit the local female labour force, as 
many more women – who otherwise might have been unemployed – will have access to economic opportunities in the energy sector 
through training and placement programs offered.   Sub-projects under the framework will aim to strengthen equal op portunities  
(“EO”) for women to compete on equal footing with men. Progress strengthening EO in the sub -projects will inform and be reflected 
in on -going national policy dialogue with the Government of Kazakhstan on addressing legal and regulatory barriers  to women’s 
employment.  An overview of strengthening equality of opportunity and gender equality through Kazakhstan Renewables Framework 
is outlined in Annex 3. RES project developers will  also aim to promote workplace equality and a culture of diversity by supporting the 
move of women workers from semi -skilled to skilled and managerial/leadership positions through training/reskilling, mentoring, and 
employing ‘buddy’ sys tems and other programs/systems. RES project developers  will also aim to raise awarene ss of gender issues 
within public and private entities working in the energy sector in Kazakhstan by conducting a series of gender awareness work shops, 
especially in relation to the topic of gender in the workplace, to enable concerned entities get a bette r sense of what it takes to 
achieve gender equality in the work environment.    
 
Addressing gender and household consumption practices: At sub -project level, a consumers’ survey will be undertaken before the 
commencement of activities as well as after the provision of services to assess both men and women consumers’ satisfaction levels 
with energy provision.   This will enhance the client’s knowledge of consumers’ preferences and further improve the services provided 
through identifying and addressing consum ers’ different needs in terms of access to and use of electricity, ultimately leading to 
improved customer satisfaction and efficient corporate practices.  
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
n/a 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Economic Impact  
There is very limited local experience and knowledge in the area of RES in Kazakhstan.   The continuing high inertia in the sector of 
renewable energy leads to lack of risk appetite of investors and needs to be mitigated by the success story of RES projects.  
 
 
Concessional financ ing provided  to the  RES projects will address the remaining market barriers of limited availability of commercial 
financing for renewable energy projects, and prohibitive lending conditions of local financial institutions for innovative ty pes of 
investments such as RES proje cts. 
 
Social Impact  
At the request of the Government of Kazakhstan in 2012 the EBRD has commissioned a study on the affordability and potential s ocial 
impact of RES for Kazakhstan that demonstrated that electricity cost increases are not a significant port ion of residential expenditure 
even with relatively high penetrations of RES investments in need of FiT support.


---
*Page 28*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
Overall, renewables are not expected to create affordability issues in the near future  for several  reasons. Reaching the 3% target 
would require about 1.5 to 2GW of renewable capacity to be built over the next four years requiring investment of ca. EUR 2 -3 billion.   
One of the main constraints to achieve this would be the lack of long -term debt financi ng, particularly in local currency .   
Furthermore, even if the target is achieved renewables would still represent a relatively small portion of the sector cash fl ows. In the 
long run, once the PPA expires after 15 years the energy production at such plant  is likely to continue and it would become a price 
taker. Finally, the cost of renewable energy projects has been decreasing steadily, which is likely to lead to reduced tariff  levels for 
new projects, while at the same time the cost of thermal generation will continue to increase with inflation and thus the gap between 
renewable tariff and thermal will become smaller.  
 
The EBRD also  commissioned a study to analyse the social impact of renewable energy feed -in-tariffs in Kazakhstan with the objective 
of add ressing concerns of governmental agencies that inflation and a rapid build -up of renewables capacity will become 
unsustainable in social terms due to the added electricity tariff. Though the findings of the study show that electricity is not a 
significant proportion of residential expenditure even with relatively high penetrations of renewable energy investments, the Bank 
will work with clients and appropriate regulatory authorities to ensure that renewable energy feed -in-tariffs do not adversely affect 
the coverage of electricity, especially among poor households and those headed by women, widows, persons with disabilities, and 
elderly persons. Tariff levels that do not properly reflect women’s lower incomes or their use of energy – related appliances will 
constrain women’s energy access. For that purpose,  gender -sensitive public consultations will be  undertaken to assess communities’ 
willingness to pay. In this context, it is important for the AE to note that connections or user -fee requirements that do not  integrate 
affordable options – such as revolving funds, grants, and affordable credit facilities to improve household connectivity – will neglect 
the needs of poor households, vulnerable persons (including the disabled, elderly, widows) and female –headed households. To note, 
the country gender profile states that women in Kazakhstan typically make decisions related to household energy consumption, 
therefore changes in the costs and source for electricity generation may fall disproportionately on women.


---
*Page 29*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs and NAP s 
The Kazakh Government launched a strategic initiative called the Green Economy in 2013 under which several  actions have been 
planned including the development of renewable energy sources. The objective is to bring the share of new renewable energy in  
electricit y generation from nearly zero to 3% by 2020, and then to increase  it further to 30% by 2030 and 50% by 2050.  
 
The initiative became the platform for Kazakhstan’s commitment during the UNFCCC Conference of Parties in Paris as was 
communicated by the Kazakh Government in its INDC to reduce GHG  emissions.  On 16th of November 2016, the President of 
Kazakhstan signed the Law “On ratification of the Paris Agreement”.  The INDC , and now NDC as Kazakhstan ratified the Paris 
Agreement, calls for an economy -wide target of 15% reduction in GHG  emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 reflecting a reduction of 
at least 22% below pro jected business as usual emissions.   
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
The EBRD was established in 1991 to nurture a new private sector in a democratic environment. The EBRD provides project financing 
for banks, industries, and businesses, both new ventures and investments in existing companies.  It also works with publicly owned 
companies, to support privatization, restructuring state -owned firms and improvement of municipal services. The Bank uses its close 
relat ionship with governments in the region to promote policies that will support the business environment. The Bank also has a 
strong environmental mandate and is committed to financing projects that are environmentally sound and sustainable.  
 
The EBRD’s activities in the area of green finance are driven by its Green Economy Transition (GET) Approach. This approach consists 
of providing finance, supporting policy reform and providing technical assistance. Under the GET, the EBRD has committed over  EUR 
1,464 million  (USD 1,566 million equivalent)  in green finance in Kazakhstan since 2006. The supported projects cover such areas as 
cleaner energy and renewables. These account for around half of the total volume.  The EBRD has been the lead in Kazakhstan’s 
participation in the Clean Technology Fund, which provide s USD 200 million of concessional climate finance to Kazakhstan, and which 
has enabled a range of high -priority projects supporting the move towards a Green Economy in Kazakhstan.  
 
The Bank signed loan agreements for three  renewable energy projects  in Kazakhstan:  Yereymentau wind farm (50MW) Burnoye solar 
(50MW) and Burnoye solar extension (50MW) .  
 
Beyond finance, the EBRD has been working with the Government of Kazakhstan on improving the regulatory framework for green 
finance by supporting policy reform in areas  such  as renewable energy, energy efficiency and carbon markets.  The Bank’s activities in 
the Kazakh power sector have delivered major impacts in terms of energy efficiency, renewable energy a nd decarboni sation of the 
country’s economy.  The EBRD has a long history of engagement with the government on sustainable energy, dating back to 2008, 
and has been close involved in the Renewable Energy and Green Economy Laws, and the Kazakh Carbon Market  development.  
 
The Bank has a strong, well -established presence in the ECA region and is therefore uniquely well placed to contribute to the 
challenge of climate change adaptation in the region. It has a network of around 200 professional staff located across the region to 
support project development, implementation and monitoring, together with sustained policy dialogue and business relationship s 
with governments, local institutions, industry, banks, utilities and investors.  The EBRD currently operates in 36 countries within the 
region and has at least one resident office within each of these. Some larger countries, such as Kazakhstan and Turkey, also have sub -
regional offices to bring EBRD staff closer to the business needs.  Regional offices are typically staffed by a mixture of international 
and national staff and provide an in -depth knowledge of the social, economic, and political conditions within the country and help to 
generate and implement new projects as well as monitor existing operations , and facilitate dialogue and business relationships with 
governments, local institutions, industry, banks, utilities, and investors.


---
*Page 30*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Engagement with NDA  
The EBRD has several  meetings  with Ministry of Energy ( NDA ) with regards to this Programme through face -to-face meetings, 
presentations and email correspondence. The Programme inputs were included in the National Plan of Kazakhstan for the GCF. 
Ministry of Energy p rovided its no-objection letter for the Programme on 24 February 2017 .  
 
The Strategic Environmental Review ( “SER”) conducted by the EBRD in 2014 -2015 included two -tier public consultations campaign. As 
required by the EU SEA Directive, all relevant stakeholders were identified (central and local authorities, professional comm unity, 
NGOs and general public) and consul ted on the scope of the assessment, and then were given the possibility to review and comment 
the SER report. Consultations were hold in Almaty and Astana. The s takeholder engagement plan as well as the consultations minutes 
are available at the SER websit e:  http://kazreff -ser.com/index.html  
 
Engagement with stakeholders including Civil Society Organisations ( “CSOs ”) 
The EBRD recognises the important role of CSOs in raising awareness and stimulating behavioural change and has engaged with a 
wide range of stakeholders including local CSOs.  
 
The Programme's design and implementation are consistent with the Fund's requirements for stakeholder engagement and 
disclosure, as well as the GCF's Criteria for Programme and Project Funding. A Stakeholder Engagement Framework , developed 
according to the principles of the  EBRD’s ESP PR10 will guide communication with and participation of stakeholders  to continue to 
engage throughout the course of the project. This will have two tiers: on the project level, developers wi ll be requested to fully 
comply with the above -mentioned PR 10; on the Programme level, targeted measures will be designed, including, but not limited to, 
regular monitoring of public awareness of the programme progress , public disclosure of information, w here relevant going beyond 
the requirements of national/local legislation, as well as developing meaningful customized  consultation mechanisms. By this, the 
Stakeholder Engagement  Framework will ensure that the views and concerns of local stakeholders are adequately reflected and that 
the Programme objectives, risks, and results are communicated effectively, ensuring local ownership of this Programme.  
 
The Programme will ensure that careful stakeholder mapping is undertaken, that consultations are designed in a gender responsive 
way and that women have an equal opportunity to participate in project related discussions and initiatives.  
 
The EBRD requires its clients to be aware of and respond to stakeholders’ concerns related to the project in a timely manner . For this 
purpose, the client will establish an effective grievance mechanism, process, or procedure to receive and facilitate resoluti on of 
stakeholders’ concerns and grievances, in particular, about the client’s environmental and social performance. EBR D requires a 
Grievance Mechanism to be developed as an integral part of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan during the ES due diligence for al l sub -
projects.  
 
EBRD also has its own Project Complaint Mechanism that has also established its own accountability m echanism, the Project 
Complaint Mechanism ( “PCM ”), that has been established to assess and review complaints about Bank -financed projects. It provides 
individual(s) and local groups that may be directly or adversely affected by an EBRD project, as well as CSO’s , a means of raising 
complaints or grievances with the Bank, independently from banking operations.  
 
PCM has two functions:  
• a Compliance Review function which seeks to assess whether a Bank approved project complies with relevant the 
EBRD’s policies, specifically relevant environmental policies and project -specific provisions of the Public Information 
Policy, and  
• a Problem -solving Initiative which has the objective of restoring dialogue between the parties, where possible, to trying 
to resolve the underlying issues giving rise to the complaint or grievance. A problem -solving initiative might include 
independent fact -finding, me diation, conciliation, dialogue facilitat ion, investigation or reporting .


---
*Page 31*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
The Programme will address  the barriers discussed earlier and facilitate private sector participation in a sector that has a limited 
private sector engagement . The Programme will introduce and demonstrate viability and attractiveness of the new modern 
technologies, as well as proje ct implementation and financing practices, such as limited recourse -based finance, project finance, etc.  
Implementation of the Programme will demonstrate that projects containing green energy components, RES in particular, can be 
replicated in the long -term.   
 
The financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addressing existi ng barriers 
for scaling up of renewable energy sources, providing the least concessionality and without crowding out private  investment.  From a 
risk-return and contribution perspective, this is the least concessionality that was identified based on the EBRD’s experience.  The 
amount of the GCF financing for each sub -project will be calibrated  on a project by project basis in accordance with the EBRD’s 
guidelines on the use of concessional finance.   
 
The impact the GCF’s contribution goes beyond supporting crucial infrastructure investment needs and mobilises technical assi stance 
programmes wi th a transformative impact on the Kazakhstan’s energy sector through promoting development of renewable energy 
resources.  Key to cost efficiency will be the size of the programme, as well the fact that both the GCF and the EBRD would sponsor 
this Programme . The size would help to give comfort to the technology suppliers that face costs to establish and market themselves. 
Size and presence of the international organisations, may help to create the investors comfort needed to price more competiti vely. In 
turn  it may also attract a larger number of market players. Eventually market size and growth will be the key basis for cost effic iency, 
which can be augmented by increasing standardisation, procedures established and demonstration effects from the project  
 
The estimated cost of carbon emissions reduction (total investment cost/expected lifetime emission reductions  tCO 2 eq), assuming 
project lifetime to be 20 years are the following:  
- USD 106 million /tCO 2 for GCF contribution = 8.2  USD  /tCO 2 
- USD 550 million / tCO 2 for total Programme  cost = 42.8 USD  / tCO 2 
 
This compares well to the estimations for social cost of CO 2 emissions.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
 
The Programme will support the development and construction of renewable energy projects totaling USD 550 million (i.e. estimated 
total investment cost under this framework). The projects are expected to have a minimum equity of 25% and be financed with a 
maximum leverage of 75%, co rresponding to maximum total debt financing needs of USD 413 million. The GCF aggregate 
contributions of USD 106 million for subprojects financing will account for ca. 19% of the total projects costs . The EBRD will provide 
co-financing of USD 214 million f rom its own resources, representing up to c.3 9% of the project costs. Other co -financers are 
expected to contribute  with loans representing up to 17% of the total project s cost.  
 
The programme will enable the GCF to leverage a significant amount of co -financing, approximately USD 444 million compared to 
USD 106 million requested from the GCF (the co -financing ratio - total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
programme – equals 4.2x). Regarding the technical assistance component, the total estimated budget for the various assignments is 
USD 7 million , of which the GCF is expected to contribute USD 4 million  and USD 3 million will be contributed by EBRD  and/ or its 
donors.   
 
The impact the GCF’s contribution goes beyond supporting crucial infrastructure investment needs and mobilises technical assi stance 
programmes with a transformative impact on the Kazakhstan’s energy sector through promoting development of  renewable energy 
resources.


---
*Page 32*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
 
 
The Programme  will enable the development of a scaled -up and viable RES market in Kazakhstan. By demonstrating the commercial 
viability of the RES projects it will encourage commercial lending in the future. The Facility will provide a highly visible demonstration 
to ot her potential developers that projects can be successfully implemented in this market. By supporting the development of RES 
projects in accordance with best international practices, the Programme  will help establish standards that can be replicated and wil l 
further encourage other developers to enter the market. The significant renewable energy resource conditions in Kazakhstan an d the 
continued decrease in technology cost should ensure financial viability of investments once the sectorial and general inves tment 
challenges are overcome. The exit strategy for development finance is through repayment of the EBRD/GCF loan at maturity.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
The proposed programme will bring the best international practices as well as well -adjusted technologies to the renewable energy 
sector in Kazakhstan. The sub-project c ompany will hire a reputable international advisor  who will complete the necessary 
measurement s, energy yield assessment and financial  feasibility studies.   Also the EBRD may provide a T echnical Cooperation  
assignment under a cost sharing arrangement with the company in order to assist both the company and the EBRD in project 
preparation and confirm technical as well as technological appropriateness, thus ensuring that the best avai lable technologies are 
applied.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions (mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total Programme  financing  USD 550 million  
(b) Requested  GCF amount  USD 10 6 million  
(c) Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  12.86 mtCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  USD 42.8 / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  USD 8.2 / tCO 2eq 
 
It is assumed that total RES capacity to be developed will be ca. 330 MW in total consisting mainly of wind, PV and small 
hydro. Based on EBRD’s in -house methodology,  the estimated electricity production is 762,120 MWh, corresponding to 
643,229 tons CO 2 per annum. The total CO 2 emissions reduction over lifetime of the sub-projects of 20 years is 
estimated at 1 2.86 mtCO 2eq. The detailed methodology is presented in Section E1.2.  
 
The Programme’s investment costs and the mitigation costs ( USD per ton CO 2 mitigated over 20 years) are in line with 
those of the similar RES projects in other countries of the EBRD’s operation such as Ukraine and Russia.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the Fund’s  financing, 
disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
Expected total leverage: at least USD 444 million, of which:  
- EBRD: EUR 200 million  (ca. USD 214 million  equivalent ); 
- Sub-project sponsors/ equity investors:  USD 137 million ; 
- Other co -lenders (commercial banks and other IFIs): at least  USD 93 million.  
 
The EBRD amount of EUR 200 million is based on the EBRD’s Board approved Framework for renewables in Kazakhstan.


---
*Page 33*
---

PUBLIC  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  E 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)  N/a


---
*Page 34*
---

PUBLIC  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  F 
Section F: APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
A detailed economic and financial analysis will be conducted at project level  for investments that meet the F ramework’s 
eligibility criteria. The financial analysis of a typical project to be financed under this Framework  has been provided to the GCF 
Secretariat. A sector, as well as a regulatory  and market analysis , has also been p rovided to the GCF Secretariat.  
As mentioned throughout this funding proposal, there are currently financial barriers hampering the mobilization and scaling up 
of renewable energy in Kazakhstan . These barriers manifest themselves either in non -availability of finance or in inflexible loan 
tenors that are not adapted to the charac teristics of such investments.   
A comparison has been provided to the GCF Secretariat  between several  financing scenarios for the finan cing of a typical 
project under the FiT Scheme, which is the focus of the Framework. Such analysis has showed that there is currently no  
commercial lending  available at terms which  would ensure  the bankability of the projects and attract private investors . The 
analysis also highlighted  the importance of the GCF funding to unlock the financial feasibility of the first wave of private sector 
renewable energy projects through the blending of concessional financing with financing from EBRD and other internation al 
and development financial institutions.   
The demonstration effect of the feasibility of the first wave of private renewable energy projects in Kazakhstan  will show the 
viability of the sector which will then attract new private investors, local and inte rnational commercial banks which will be able 
to propose adequate long -term financing  with no concessionality needs.  
Further economic benefits can also be added as de scribed earlier in the document, such as benefits from the GHG emissions 
avoided  and the s uccessful implementation of the FiT Scheme , which would set the basis for further renewable energy support 
mechanism s, namely through the launch of competitive tenders (that this Framework will also support  via Component 2) . 
Overall, t hrough this Framework , GCF and EBRD financing will demonstrate and scale up commercially viable renewable energy 
projects in Kazakhstan  while catalysing a paradigm shift not only within the electricity sector in the country  but also within the 
local and international financial markets.  
 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
The technical evaluation will be analysed at the sub -project level.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
The SER findings are summarized in Annex 4.  The SER resulted in developing an assessment kit for developers, bankers, and 
environmental professionals working on RES projects in Kazakhstan. This includes customized templates for all RES 
technologies, based on the identified potential significant environmental and social impacts, for the ESAP, NTS, and SEP for RES 
projects in Ukraine.  
 
Environmental  
In 2014 t he EBRD has already undertaken a SER (modelled after the EU practice of Strategic Environmental Assessment, SEA). 
The SER included two rounds of public consultations; reports are available at:  http://kazreff -ser.com/index.html  The results are 
to our best knowledge still valid.  
 
The Framework could consider financing Category A sub -projects. Therefore, the Framework’s overall environmental and social 
risk category is I1, defined by the GCF as, “When an intermediary’s existing or proposed portfolio includes, or is expected t o 
inclu de, substantial financial exposure to activities with potential significant adverse environmental and/or social risks and/or


---
*Page 35*
---

PUBLIC  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  F 
impacts that are diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented.” All sub -projects under the Framework will be implemented in 
compliance w ith the Bank’s stringent Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework.  
 
Categorisation  
EBRD categorises each project to determine the nature and level of environmental and social investigations, information 
disclosure and stakeholder engagement required. This will be commensurate with the nature, location, sensitivity and scale of 
the project, and the significance of its potential adverse future environmental and social impacts. Past and present 
environmental and social issues and risks associate d with project -related existing facilities will be subject to environmental and 
social appraisal regardless of the categorisation.  
 
A project is categorised as:  
- A when it could result in potentially significant adverse future environmental and/or social impacts which, at the time of 
categorisation, cannot readily  be identified or assessed, and which, therefore, require a formalised and participatory 
environmental and social impact assessment process.  
- B when its potential adverse future environmental and/or social impacts are typically site -specific, and/or readily identified 
and addressed through mitigation measures. Environmental and social appraisal requirements may vary depending on the 
project and will be determined by EBRD on a case -by-case basis . 
- C when it is likely to have minimal or no potential adverse future environmental and/or social impacts, and can readily be 
addressed through limited environmental and social appraisal.  
 
Initial Environmental and Social Examinations are carried out wher e insufficient information is available at the time of 
categorisation to determine the appropriate category and scope of appraisal.  
 
Category A Projects  
Within the Kazakhstan Renewables Framework, sub-projects which may be categorised as A include: medium size wind farms  
and small hydropower,  which typically are category B projects, but may be categorised as A, if they are located in a sensitive 
location.  
 
Sub-projects categorised as A will adhere to a multi -tiered approval process within the EBRD, require  120-day disclosure and 
consultation period prior to consideration of EBRD ’s Board of Directors and will be required to meet EBRD’s Performance 
Requirements.  
 
Category B and C Projects  
Sub-projects categorised as B or C will be approved through  the EBRD’s established processes and implemented in compliance 
with the Bank’s stringent Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework and will be required to meet the Bank’s 
Performance Requirements.  
 
Some sub -projects may involve resettlement or economic displacement of communities; however, typically land is leased or 
acquired on a voluntary basis through negotiated contracts. Most if not all projects are expected to be developed and 
implemented by private sec tor companies and public expropriation procedures cannot be applied to the land acquisition 
arrangements.  
 
The Bank  require s Resettlement Policy Framework  or Livelihood Restoration Framework  for a sub -project if environmental and 
social  due diligence identifies it could have resettlement or economic displacement impacts.  
 
There will be no impact on indigenous people’s  communities (as there are no indigenous peoples groups in Kazakhstan).  
 
A stakeholder engagement plan will be required for all sub -proje cts to be developed in compliance with EBRD Performance 
Requirement 10 on Information Disclosure and Stakeholder Engagement. PR 10 sets out a framework for good international 
practice relating to stakeholder engagement recognises the importance of an open and transparent engagement between the


---
*Page 36*
---

PUBLIC  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  F 
client, its workers, local communities directly affected by the project and, where appropriate, other stakeholders. The EBRD 
requires stakeholder engagement as an on -going process which involves (i) public disclosure of appropriate information, (ii) 
meaningful consultation with stakeholders, and (iii) an effective procedure or mechanism by which people can make comments 
or raise grievances. The process of stakeholder engagement should begin at the earliest stage of pro ject planning and continue 
throughout the life of the project. It is an integral part of the assessment, management and monitoring of environmental and 
social impacts and issues of the project.  
 
Gender  
The Programme will ensure that all consultations with stakeholders will be designed in a gender responsive way and women 
will be equally consulted and participate in all discussions related to the Program me. This approach will be incremental and 
would set a proper bench mark for other projects to follow.  
 
The Programme is accompanied by a Gender Action Plan template for subprojects.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Financial  resources from  the GCF will be managed according to the general provisions of the AMA between the GCF and the 
EBRD. The EBRD has establish ed the GCF Special Fund internally, through which all payments from the GCF and repayments to 
the GCF will pass.  
In using the resources of the GCF  (‘Special Fund resources’) for this Programme, the EBRD will apply the same internal financial 
management policies and procedures as are applied when administering technical assistance or making a loan, from its ordinary  
capital resources. The EBRD will e xercise the same amount of care and diligence to ‘Special Fund resources’ as for its own 
capital resources. Compliance to the EBRD policies and requirements will be monitored and reported by the EBRD Office of the 
Chief Compliance Officer (OCCO).  
PROCUREME NT 
1. EBRD’s Procurement Policies and Rules ( “PP&R ”) 
The EBRD aims to help create reliable and stable markets for climate technologies in its regions and thus puts strong emphasi s 
on procurement of relevant goods and services.  
The EBRD's Procurement Policies and Rules  are designed to promote efficiency and effectiveness and to minimise credit risk in 
the implementation of the EBRD's lending an d investment operations.  
Among the EBRD’s PP&R6, three are of particular relevance to this Programme.  
Relevant PP&R with regards to the Programme are as follows:  
- 3. Procurement Rules for Public Sector Operations  
- 4. Procurement in the Private Sector  
- 5. Procurement Rules for Consultant Services  
 
2. Event of violation of procurement policies and EBRD Enforcement Policy and Procedures  
The EBRD requires that clients, including beneficiaries of Bank -financed operations, as well as tenderers, suppliers, contractors, 
concessionaires and consultants under EBRD -financed contracts, observe the highest standard of transparency and integrity 
during the procurement, execution and implementation of such contracts. In pursuance of this policy, The EBRD defines 
prohibited practices, namely coercive practice, collusive practice, corrupt practice, fraudulent practice and theft (PP&R Sec tion 
                                                             
6 http://www.ebrd.com/news/publications/policies/procurement -policies -and-rules.html


---
*Page 37*
---

PUBLIC  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  F 
2.9).  
Any occurrence, or suspected occurrence, of a Prohibited Practice in the procurement, award, or implementation of a Bank -
financed contract in the context of a sub-project shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the EBRD’s 
Enforcement Policy as  defined in the EBRD’s Enforcement Policy and Procedures.


---
*Page 38*
---

PUBLIC  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 34 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  G 
SECTION G: RISK  ASSESSMENT  AND  MANAGEMENT  
 
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
The Programme is exposed to several risks that can have a considerable impact on the success of the sub-projects. The 
identified two main risks are regulatory and project implementation. The EBRD’s experience in the country mitigates risks 
related to the implementation. The regulatory risks are mitigated through sub -projects’ structure. The occurrence of  
environmental and social risks is covered and mitigated by the application of the EBRD’s rigorous environmental and social 
standards as set out in its 2014 Environmental and Social Policy linked below:  
http://www.ebrd.com/news/publications/policies/environmental -and-social -policy -esp.html   
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Regulatory risk/reliance on feed -in tariff  Other  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk is mitigated by the strong institutional commitment to renewable energy . The Government expects that t he cost of 
renewable energy projects would continue to decrease  further , that in turn would lead to reduced tariff levels for new 
projects, while at the same time the cost of thermal generation will continue to increase with inflation and thus the gap 
betw een renewable tariff and thermal would  become smaller.  Conversely, renewables plays favourably for the country in the 
context of global carbon reduction efforts and especially in the light of the emissions reduction target set by the climate 
change discuss ions in Paris.   
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Completion risk and cost overruns  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Completion risk and cost overruns is expected to be mitigated through an EPC contract with a reputable company for each 
sub-project. In addition the sponsors are expected to provide completion and cost -overrun guarantees for each sub -project.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Forex risk  - GCF financing will be provided in USD while the 
sub-projects tariffs are set in KZT.  
 
 Financial  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Recently the Government of Kazakhstan  approved  the rules for the determination of the FiT  which stipulate the partial  (30%)  
indexation of the FiT  for USD/KZT fluctuations  in the case a local currency depreciates by more than 25% per year  against USD, 
whereas the remaining 70% of the FiT is adjusted for CPI . In the absence of more than  25% depreciation per year against USD , 
the FiT is adjusted only for annual CPI.  This risk is expected to be mitigated by additional credit enhancement instr uments,


---
*Page 39*
---

PUBLIC  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 35 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  G 
such as a DSRA account, to be structured in each sub -project subject to financial  due diligence results.  The EBRD  will conduct 
a sensitivity analysis to assess magnitude of the risk for each sub -project individually.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Creditworthiness of the off -taker  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The renewables legal framework sets a 15 -day gap between due dates for payments to the off -taker and by the off -taker , thus , 
mitigating the cash gaps risk. The new amendments to the Renewable Energy Law stipulates an establishment of reserve fund 
in the amount of 3% of the FSC’s annual RES payments that cover the FSC liquidity issues.  The reserve fund is accumulated  and 
replenished from the additionally surcharge s to the electricity consumers  (the obligated purchasers)  and is subject to 
adjustment on a monthly basis.  KEGOC is the national transmission grid operator of Kazakhstan owned 90% by SWF Samruk -
Kazyna, the sovereign wealth fund.  KEGOC is rated ВВ (negative), Baa3 (negative), BBB - (stable) by S&P, Moody’s and Fitch 
respectively.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Interest Rate risk  Financial  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The EBRD financing will be provided under floating rate which is volatile and may increase in the future. The Bank will conduct 
a sensitivity analysis in order to assess the magnitude of the risk for each sub -project.  
Selected Risk Factor 6   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Operation/technology risk Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
For each sub -project the irradiation/ wind/ hydro/ bioenergy resources may be insufficient to service the debt and the 
technology employed may fail to deliver the expected electricity generation. This will be mitigated by reviewing the 
assumptions and technology chosen by independent consultants during the technical due diligence for each sub -project.  
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Connection & curtailment risk Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Connection & curtailment might be a risk due to lack of technical regulations and standards for renewable sources as well as 
the aged grid infrastructure. Each sub -project’s grid authorization  (including a connection agreement with a network 
company)  as well as load -flow of the network will be reviewed as part of the technical due dilig ence for each sub -project.  
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring


---
*Page 40*
---

PUBLIC  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 36 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  G 
Environmental & Social risk  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The programme is submitted with an ESMS as required by the GCF rules. The sub-projects will be assessed according to EBRD 
policies. A comprehensive Environmental and Social Action Plan (“ESAP”) will be developed during the preparation of each 
sub-project capitalising on the outcomes of the Strategic Environmental Review implement ed by the Bank for the RES projects 
in Kazakhstan in 2012 – 2014. The project -level ESAP will be an integral part of the financing agreements between the EBRD 
and project developers.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Specific emerging or idiosyncratic  risks will be identified on a sub -project basis.


---
*Page 41*
---

PUBLIC  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 37 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  H 
Section H: RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under the Results 
Management F ramework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level7 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  The fundamental purpose of the Framework  is to support  the efforts towards low -carbon growth 
in Kazakhstan through achieving sustainability of the RES market by creating a large pool of 
projects and project sponsor s interest; and providing international integration of the RES market 
development and enabling ca rbon market access , thus enabling the scale necessary to bring the 
energy  sector, and so the economy as a whole, onto a lower -carbon development path .   
 
The paradigm shift objectives are therefore the following:  
• To provide a transformational impact at a sector/country level  by a number of capacity 
building initiatives that would address caveats in institutional capacity  in managing grid 
balancing, integrating RES projects into the domestic emissions trading system, reviewing 
and further develop ing the cal culation mechanism for the FiT; and t o address barriers 
restricting women’s access to employment and skills in the high -value energy sector  
• To support clarity and eliminate policy ambiguity and regulatory uncertainty, which in turn 
deters private sector involvement in the RES projects, and  address perceived high risk of 
the RES projects  
• To shar e knowledge and best practices to improve  first movers experience  by bringing in 
best practice in  project management, tender processes, and environmental and social  
practices  
• To help finance and bring to financial close a critical number of first projects  in RES to 
demonstrate the sector’s viability and success stories to improve investments 
attractiveness and potentially make the RES projects attractive to local financiers  
 
The multi -level approach to encouraging the development of a private sector -led in vestment 
market  of RES projects  in Kazakhstan will provide durable context for the country to continue 
decarbonizing its power sector over the long -term. Directly, the impact indicator for the 
Framework contribution to this development is represented by th e estimated emission reductions 
to be achieved via the generation of clean energy throughout the lifetime of the assets. This will be 
around 12.8 million tonnes of CO 2 (with the expected project lifetime  of 20 years).  
 
Finally, by serving as a successful and practical example of low -carbon development approach, the 
Framework has the potential to influence planning in other countries in Central Asia and 
elsewhere.  
 
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
M1.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy access and 
power generation   M1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided   
 
EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports and if  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
12.8mt  
No projects 
implemented at 
present under this 
framework.  
                                                             
7 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 42*
---

PUBLIC  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 38 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  H 
applicable 
independently 
verified MRV 
reports for 
domestic 
carbon credits.  
 
 
 N/a 4 – 5 mt 
CO 2e CO 2e Over the first five 
years , monitoring  will 
be conducted against 
an average CO 2 
reduction number of 
643ktCO eq/year, 
taking into account:  
i) the 
investment period,  
ii) the final 
amount of MW 
installed; and  
iii) relevant 
climatic changes; and  
iv) other factors 
beyond the 
reasonable control of 
the AE/EE


---
*Page 43*
---

PUBLIC  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 39 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if 
applicable
)  Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased number of 
small, medium and large low -
emission power suppliers  6.1 Proportion of low -
emission power supply 
in a jurisdiction or 
market.  EBRD board 
document, 
reports from 
the recipients   
 
Low 
emission 
power  
supplies 
represent 
less than  
1% of 
electricity 
supply   
 
 
N/a  
 
3%  
national 
target 
for 2020.  The Government is 
ready to accept EBRD 
advice; political 
environment is 
favourable towards 
improvement of 
regulatory framework 
for RES development; 
market forces  such as 
fossil fuel prices and 
equipment/technologi
es prices a re 
conducive for RES 
development in 
Kazakhstan.  
Current share of about 
1% new renewables, 
monitoring over the 
first five years against 
target of 330 MW 
taking  into account:  
i) the investment 
period;  
ii) financing 
conditions in the 
market;  
iii) the final amount 
of MW installed; 
and/or  
iv) other factors 
beyond the 
reasonable 
control  
 
M6.0 Increased number of 
small, medium and large low -
emission power suppliers  6.3 MWs of low -
emission energy  
capacity installed,  
generated and/or  
rehabilitated as a  
result of GCF support  EBRD board 
document, 
reports from 
the recipients   
0  
 
Monitoring 
over the 
first three 
years 
against 
target of 
330 MW 
taking into 
account: 
the 
investment  
 
330MW


---
*Page 44*
---

PUBLIC  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 40 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  H 
period; 
financing 
conditions 
in the 
market; the 
final 
amount of 
MW 
installed; 
and/or 
other 
factors 
beyond the 
AE/EE’s 
reasonable 
control  
P10.0 Jobs  
created by  
projects  supported by  
Programme  10.1 Women and  
men employed in  
construction and  
installation,  
and operation and  
maintenance  
in the projects  Reports from 
the recipients   
0  
n/a 
  
3,000 
short -
term 
jobs 
(during 
construc
tion) and  
150 
long -
term 
jobs 
(during 
operatio
n)  Data  related to gender 
to be collected where 
feasible  
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs  that contribute to outcomes  
1.Commercially viable 
renewables projects are 
identified, financed and 
implemented  Number of p rojects 
(depending on project 
size)  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports, in 
particular at the 
end of the 
investment 
period.   
no projects  
implement
ed under 
the 
Framework 
currently   
4-5  
8-11 
  
 Volume of financing    
no projects 
implement
ed under 
the 
Framework 
currently   
N/A; 
proportional 
to the above 
number of 
the projects;   
Up to 
USD 550 
million  
2.Capacity building for 
public institutions on RE S 
project implementation 
support, MRV system, 
vocational training and 
promote gender equality  Number of capacity 
building workshop 
held; number of 
attendants  
 EBRD monitoring 
report, 
consultant 
report   
N/A  
N/A  
To be 
provided 
before 
first 
disburse
ment   
with the


---
*Page 45*
---

PUBLIC  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 41 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  H 
 
  procurem
ent plan  
 
3. Policy dialogue activities 
on the introduction of 
auction -based system, 
review of FiT system and 
strategies for carbon 
market  tbc EBRD monitoring 
report, 
consultant 
report   
N/A  
N/A  
To be 
provided 
before 
first 
disburse
ment   
with the 
procurem
ent plan   
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Regarding output 1 • Conduct technical, financial, 
environmental and social due 
diligence  
• Assist throughout the procurement 
and implementation of technologies  
• Ensure the procurement processes 
are in line with EBRD and the GCF 
policies and rules  
• Monitor the performance of 
technologies post implementation  
 Financial resources  and 
technical expertise 
deployed  to develop, 
assess, finance  and report 
on projects  
 
 Specific plans to be prepared , 
capitalizing  on the EBRD 
experience with Ukraine 
Sustainable Energy lensing Facility 
(operational),  and Egypt RES 
Framework (under development)  
Regarding output 2 • Provide t raining  to relevant  
authorities  on R ES project 
implementation support  for auction 
and tenders, project preparation for 
public entities.  
• Promote vocational training in RE S 
industry.  
• Promote gender equality in the 
employment in RE S industry   
• Provide training to relevant 
authorities on MRV   and telemetry 
requirements/rules.  Expertise and skills transfer  
 Specific plans to be prepared ; 
capacity building programs will be 
designed to cover needs 
assessment, methodology 
identification, trainings curricula 
development, capacity building 
monitori ng system design; and 
guidances and other 
methodological documents 
developed to ensure 
multiplication effect  
Regarding output 3  • Design and introduction of the 
auction based system  
• Further review of FiT system, 
elaboration of the mechanism of FiT 
calculation  
• Develop Strategies for carbon 
market  Expertise and skills transfer  
 Specific plans to be prepared ; 
subject to the relevant regulatory 
development. Activities under 
this category will only be 
designed with consideration of 
the projects of other  IFIs and 
donor organization, acting in the 
field of RE S in Kazakhstan; this 
will build on the EBRD experience 
of donor coordination in policy 
filed, to achieve synergy and 
avoid duplication


---
*Page 46*
---

PUBLIC  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 42 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  H 
 
 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
 
I. MONITORING  
Monitoring, arrangements will comply with the relevant GCF policies (MAF, AMA, etc)  
Implementation of each project under this Framework will be managed and monitored at project and Framework level by EBRD’s 
in-house staff and procured consultants. The EBRD has dedicated staff in its sectors  team, risk departments and regional offices 
that will conduct due diligence and monitor project risks and prepare mitigation measures throughout the Framework lifecycle.  
II. REPORTING  
Reporting and evaluation arrangements will comply with  the relevant GCF policies (MAF, AMA, etc)  
As specified in Loan Agreements between project companies and EBRD, project companies are obliged to report on the use of 
proceeds of the Programme and the enviro nmental and social performance of the project to the EBRD on annual basis.   
The implementation consultants of Comp onent 2 will officially report progress on a periodic basis to EBRD staff throughout the 
Framework lifetime.  The subprojects of Component 1  will be required to provide financial  and the environmental and social 
reporting, among other .   
Reporting of EBRD to the GCF  
The EBRD will provide to the GCF a) semi -annual activity performance reports on the status of GCF funded activities throughout 
the relevant reporting period, and b) final evaluation reports at the end of the implementation period of the Framewor k:   
a. Semi -annual Performance Reports, including the disbursements made during the relevant period, the implementation status 
of the Funded Activity and the monitoring of results and impacts of such Funded Activity.  
b. Upon completion, projects will be subject  to the EBRD formal evaluation process. A final report prepared by the independent 
Evaluation Department (EvD) sets out the results and impacts achieved, as well as their sustainability, scalability and lesso ns 
learned, during the relevant period.   
The monitoring and reporting procedure guiding the Programme will be agreed between the GCF Secretariat and GCF prior to 
signing the financing contract for the first sub -project. The monitoring and reporting report will be submitted to the GCF  on an 
annua l basis.  
III. EVALUATION  
Evaluation arrangements will comply with the relevant GCF policies (MAF, AMA, etc)  
1. According to the GCF requirements, both an independent mid -term and final evaluation will be carried out.  
 
2. Project evaluation by EBRD in -hous e staff   and its independent advisors  
Throughout the Framework lifecycle, the EBRD in -house staff its independent advisors  (such as technical and environmental and 
social advisors  will evaluate the success and risks of projects. A final report of each project will include review and evaluation of 
the financial and technical performance of projects, capacity building results, climate mitigation and adaptation impact, as well as 
donor  visibility and marketing outreach. Final report will be prepared by the EBRD in -house staff.  
3. Project or Framework level evaluation by the independent EBRD Evaluation department  
The independent Evaluation Department evaluates the performance of the EBRD’s completed projects and Framework . The 
Evaluation Department  is a department independent of the EBRD’s vari ous banking divisions (and hence of the developers and 
managers of the projects they evaluate); therefore, EvD reports solely to the Board of Directors (i.e. to the representations  of the 
shareholding governments). The EvD evaluates the effectiveness, rele vance and input efficiency of projects and provides the Board 
with important insights  into the implementation of projects, impacts, success stories and lessons learnt. Under the EBRD’s Public 
Information Policy, EvD publishes summaries of its independent p roject evaluations.


---
*Page 47*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEXES  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Section I: ANNEXES  
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 
 
  I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Market study ( based on publicly available information)  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (If applicable)  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 (If applicable)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation  
☒ Gender Annex  
 
EBRD case study for Kazakhstan Renewable Energy Engagement  
EBRD project case study – Burnoye  SPP


---
*Page 48*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEXES  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Annex 1: UKRAINE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY LENDING FACILITY   (www.uself.com.ua )  
In 2009, the EBRD launched a financing facility, initially called the Ukraine Renewable Energy Direct Lending Facility and 
later renamed as the Ukraine Sustainable Energy Lending Facility ( “USELF ”). 
 
USELF accelerated the development of the renewable energy sector in Ukraine, through an innovative combination of 
EBRD commercial financing, dedicated technical assistance support , and concessional grant co -financing (climate 
finance).  USELF was initially approved in 2009 for up to EUR 100 million.   The Facility consisted of EUR  50 million in 
EBRD commercial financing, EUR 20 million in climate finance from the Clean Technology Fund ( “CTF”) and  EUR 30 
million of sponsor equity.   This was supported by technical assistance of US D 8.45 million ( EUR 6.62 million equivalent) 
from the Global Environment Facility ( “GEF”).  USELF has combined effective policy dialogue and financing supp ort for 
the nascent renewable energy sector in Ukraine, supporting the efforts of the Ukrainian government to reduce the 
country’s dependence on imported fossil fuels.  
 
In the context of Ukraine’s critical need for increased renewable energy production, US ELF was designed to:  
- provide financing and technical assistance for renewable energy projects to demonstrate the benefits of such 
investments ; 
- encourage and support policy dialogue and institutional capacity building that foster a favourable environment 
for the development of renewable energy ; 
- build capacity among project developers and encourage a vibrant private sector for renewable energy 
investment.  
 
Through USELF, the EBRD aimed to provide non -recourse debt financing directly to domestic enterprises to fund small 
and medium -sized renewable energy projects, including solar, wind, small hydro and biogas.  
 
To ensure effective implementation of the Facility, the EBRD applied its proven business model for sustainable energy 
businesses, which combines inves tment with technical assistance and policy dialogue.  
 
A grant of US D 8.45 million provided by the GEF for technical assistance was used to support work on:  
- addressing regulatory issues ; 
- conducting environmental assessments ; 
- delivering capacity building and  project support.  
 
The Facility marked the first implementation of non -recourse finance or project finance in Ukraine for smaller -scale 
renewable energy projects, further supported in a fully -integrated package by policy dialogue, institutional capacity 
building, and project preparation.  These support activities were essential to the success of USELF and would not have 
been possible without generous contributions from the CTF and GEF.  Through these activities USELF has strengthened 
the business environmen t for private sector renewable energy, and fostered the development of related projects.  
 
After a slow start,  due to the under -developed nature of the country’s renewable energy sector, the Facility signed first 
seven renewable energy projects by the end o f 2013.   These use biogas, small hydro, wind, or solar energy to generate 
heat and power. USELF fully committed its initial allocation, and was replenished with another USD 50 million in 2014.   
With a robust project pipeline remaining, and ongoing weakness in the commercial financing sector for renewable 
energy, Phase II replenishment is now well developed. Using further leverage from this replenishment, USELF continues 
strengthening the long -term sustainability of the sector. Second replenishment is under consideration potentially for 
2017.  
  Table 2: USELF in figures   
Total CO 2eq emission reductions as a result of the use of renewable electricity  5.2 million tons (over 20 year lifetimes)  
Total  electricity generated from renewables  216 GWh annually  
Investment facilitated into renewable energy projects reached  USD 120 million  
New renewable power generation capacity installed  60.45 MW


---
*Page 49*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEXES  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
 
Annex  2: BURNOYE SPP PROJECT  
 
 The financing was extended to Burnoye Solar -1 LLP, a project company founded by a joint Kazakh -UK venture, Samruk -
Kazyna United Green LLP.  The EBRD len t KZT 14.06 billion ( USD  75 million equivalent), and the CTF len t EUR 13.8 million  
(USD 14.8 million equivalent)  to the project which is pioneering the use of a non -recourse project finance structure.  
   
The venture is owned by UK -based United Green Energy Limited and Samruk Kazyna Invest LLP, the investment arm of 
Kazakhstan’s sovereign wealth fund.  
  
Work on the B urnoye Solar project started following the adoption in 2014 of the Renewables Law on which the EBRD 
cooperated closely with the Kazakh government.   Burnoye Solar is located in the energy -deficit Zhambyl region in south 
Kazakhstan, in an area close to Weste rn Europe -Western China highway.  The project was implemented jointly by local 
and European contractors, with the advantage of ensuring a transfer of technology into the country. Taxes from the 
plant will be paid into the local budget.  
  
Graph: MAP INDICATING THE L OCATION OF BURNOE PROJECT


---
*Page 50*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 3: GENDER ANNEX  
A. Kazakhstan Country Gender Profile  
Purpose and scope : This is a short summary of a gender profile prepared in 2015 for  the EBRD and updated in 
2016, using publicly available sources. It is not intended to be an exhaustive overview of all gender -related issues 
in this country.  
Key points  The population of the Republic of Kazakhstan is highly diverse, comprised of over 100 ethnic 
groups.  
There is a supportive legal framework for gender equality, although in practice women’s 
access to finance, employment and services remains influenced by t raditional norms and 
stereotypes regarding gender roles, according to which women are expected to retain 
primary responsibility for family care and unpaid domestic work.  
Women in southern Kazakhstan and rural areas tend to face greater obstacles in acquir ing 
land and property or in accessing public services compared to their urban counterparts.  
Access to services  Rural/urban divide  
Kazakhstan’s economic growth has not translated into a better socio -economic situation for 
women and men outside Almaty and A stana. As such, the rural/urban divide is a major 
determinant of living standards and access to services. Women in rural areas contend with 
fewer opportunities for paid employment, a greater burden of domestic work and a lack of 
infrastructure and access t o services. Poverty incidence is twice as high in rural areas, 
although it is also particularly high in households with large numbers of children, and 
increasing in female -headed households.  
Transport  
Women tend to use public transport more than men in Ka zakhstan, and they travel more 
often with children (ADB, 2012).  Access to transport is more difficult in rural areas compared 
to urban areas, where some municipal governments – including Almaty – have started 
investing in more robust systems of public tran sport. Nevertheless, urban infrastructure still 
suffers from the after -effects of underinvestment for more than 20 years. Field research for 
one of the EBRD -supported projects revealed no issues regarding sexual harassment on 
public transport amongst passe ngers or drivers; however, sexual harassment is a difficult 
issue to broach in Kazakhstan or elsewhere and requires further research.  
Water and sanitation  
According to ADB (2012) study, access to water is a particularly acute problem in rural areas, 
where  households have far less access to piped water and collecting water for household 
use is predominantly a female responsibility. Same study found that women in rural areas 
spend a significant amount of time transporting and treating water (i.e. for cleanin g, 
bathing, cooking, drinking and livestock). This was particularly the case in remote areas, 
where access to water is most limited.  
Energy  
Women tend to be the ‘frontline users’ of electricity (given that they are more bear primary 
responsibility for hous ehold chores and child care and therefore spend more time in the 
home), but men are most often responsible for paying the bills (ADB, 2012). In rural areas, 
women tend to be responsible for – and spend a significant amount of time on – fuel 
collection (i.e . wood or dried animal dung).  
Kazakhstan’s district heating systems are considered inefficient and outdated , resulting in up 
to 30% heat loss annually (UNDP, 2012). In urban areas, experts estimate that 65% of the 
total municipal heating system is in need of replacement or repair, and those residential 
buildings, in particular, experience considerable heat loss  (ADB, 2012). This is true of old and


---
*Page 51*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
new buildings: women have raised concerns that new housing is built quickly and cheaply, 
resulting in heating deficiencies.   
A gender assessment of three district heating projects in Kazakhstan (Grontmij 2014) found 
that there are important differences between men and women in terms of their heating 
priorities and choices. For example, women tend to place a higher priority on safety issues 
(and therefore tend to prefer district heating rather than gas) and are also mor e likely to 
submit complaints regarding heating issues (as a consequence of the fact that women tend 
to be more affected by heating issues).  
Waste management  
Kazakhstan is in the process of implementing a number of projects for processing solid 
waste in A lmaty, Aktau, Astana, Zhambyl, Karaganda, Shymkent, Petropavlovsk and Ust -
Kamenogorsk (Babkina, 2012). There was no information available about gendered patterns 
of household waste management in Kazakhstan.  
Education  
Primary and secondary enrolment rates are the same for boys and girls. Strong gender 
patterns persist in tertiary education that contribute to labour market segregation: women 
remain concentrated in traditionally “female” fields of study (humanities, education, health) 
and are less likely than  men to study in technical fields that would lead to higher wages 
(energy, transport, construction).  
 
Health  
Women generally make their own decisions about health care, but some women, especially 
adolescent girls, face obstacles in access to sexual and rep roductive health services. Older 
women, women with disabilities and rural women have more limited access to health care. 
Men’s health is significantly poorer than women’s.  
 
Childcare  
During the Soviet period, childcare services were widely available in the  form of public 
kindergartens, crèches and nurseries. Today, there are fewer childcare services in operation 
and they have become more expensive, making it increasingly difficult for working women 
to combine their paid work and domestic responsibilities. T his ‘double burden’ is considered 
a barrier to advancement at work. According to ILO (2013), most women prefer to return to 
work after their children reach 1 to 3 years of age.  
Access to 
employment  Labour force participation  
Women’s labour force participation reaches 68%, compared to 78% for men, which is higher 
compared to the regional average for Europe and Central Asia (World Bank Gender 
Indicators). The gap between women and men’s labour force participation narrowed slightly 
over the 2000s. Un til now, lower levels of participation for women have been partly 
accounted for by a lower retirement age for women. As such, recent reforms to introduce 
equalised retirement ages for women and men could result in slightly higher rates of labour 
force part icipation for women (ADB, 2013).  
Horizontal segregation  
Women remain concentrated in lower -paid sectors and occupations. To some extent, 
women are excluded from working in a number of occupations in traditionally male -
dominated sectors (e.g. extractives, construction, and transport) as a result of the long list of 
jobs that are prohibited for women by legislation (women are prohibited from working in 
299 occupations , including in mining, construction, metalworking and the booming oil and 
gas sector ). Most working women are concentrated in services, such as, education and 
health care, many of which are public sector jobs and typically offer lower salaries than 
male -dominated occupations in extractives, construction and industry.   
Vertical segregation


---
*Page 52*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Women remain disadvantaged when it comes to seeking promotion in the workplace. In 
2013, only 18.8% of Kazakh firms had a woman as a top manager (WB World Development 
Indicators). Traditional beliefs and stereotypes about men and women’s abilities often 
hamper w omen’s access to higher hierarchical positions in the workplace. Men are generally 
perceived as being more ‘natural’ leaders than women (ADB, 2012).  
Informal employment  
 
Informal employment is heavily concentrated in agriculture. In non -agricultural secto rs, men 
and women are equally likely to be informally employed (Rutkowski, 2011), but women are 
more likely to be informally employed in agriculture. In 2009, the proportion of women 
among rural informal workers reached 59% (ADB, 2012).  
 
Wages  
Women earn on average 69.5% of men’s wages (KAS, 2013). This gap can partly be explained 
by the horizontal segregation of the labour force (women are more prominently 
represented in the fields of education, health care, social services, hotels and restaura nts), 
as well as forms of direct and indirect discrimination against women.  
Access to 
finance/property  
 Access to credit  
Women enjoy equal access to finance in terms of legal rights and loan procedures; however, 
in practice, women’s access to credit is more limited than men’s. One of the main issues is 
the fact that most banks require collateral as a condition for loans, whi ch is more likely to 
present difficulties for women, who are less likely to own property or assets than men (ADB, 
2012).  
Ownership of land and other assets  
Women have equal rights under law to own, use and administer property. In practice, 
however, women are less likely than men to own land and other assets. Property acquired 
during marriage is often registered in the name of the husband or male head of household, 
especially in rural areas. This can act as a barrier to finance. As a result, only 9% of the total 
number of farms is registered in women’s names (ADB, 2013).  
A lack of business literacy, skills and experience can also present a barrier. Reasons cited by 
women for not seeking bank loans include the difficulty, time, and cost involved in drawing 
up and notarising documents necessary for loan applications. Also, women generally have 
limited experience in developing the business plans required for business loan applications 
(ADB, 2012).  
Decision -making  Representation in national parliaments  
There a re no voluntary or obligatory quotas for women’s representation in Parliament. 
Share of women in national parliament is currently 23.8% (KAS 2012).  
Patriarchal norms and values related to the sexual division of labour  
A 2012 survey indicated that 53.6% o f Kazakhs believe that the husband / father should be 
the family’s primary income -earner, and 36.3% believe that the husband / father should be 
the “leader, defender and protector” of the family. Respondents from the city of Almaty 
tended to give more gend er-equal responses than respondents from other areas 
(Tengrinews, 2012).  
Nevertheless, as noted by ILO (2013), these ideas are out of step with the reality in many 
homes in Kazakhstan, where women and men often share income -earning responsibilities, 
as reflected by high levels of women’s labour market participation.


---
*Page 53*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Key indicators: Women and men in the economy  
 Female  Male  Female & 
Male  
Labour force  Labour force participation  
(% of women, men and total population aged 15 -64 who 
are economically active) World Bank 2014  68 78 73 
Self-employment  
(% of female, male and combined employed population 
who are self -employed) WB World Development 
Indicators, 2012  31.6  31.8  31.7  
Unpaid family workers amongst the self -employed  
(% of self -employed workers who are unpaid family 
workers) Estimates by UN Women based on 2011 data 
from KAS  2.5 2.4 2.5 
Informal employment  
(% of workers who do not contribute to a pension 
scheme and do not have an employment contract) 
Rutkowski 2011, using 2009 figures  N/A N/A 33.28 
Unemployment rate (15+ years)  
(% of female, male and combined population aged 15+ 
years who are unemployed) KAS, 2013  6.5 4.1 5.3 
Public sector employment  
(% of workforce that is employed by government) LFS 
(2010 data) via ILOSTAT  13.8  9.5 23.3  
Child labour  
(% of girls & boys that are child labourers – i.e. those 
aged 5 -17 working in contravention of ILO C138 or 182) 
UNICEF database, 2012  2.1 2.4 2.2 
Gender pay gap  
(Women’s average monthly earnings as a % of men’s) 
KAS, 2013  69.5  
Business  
 Firms with female participation in ownership  
(% of all firms) WB World Development Indicators, 2013  28.3  
Bank account at formal financial institution  
(% female and male population aged 15+) WB Gender 
Statistics, 2011  43.7  40.2  N/A 
Loans in the past year from  a financial institution  
(% female and male population aged 15+)  WB Gender 
Statistics, 2011  14.4  11.5  N/A 
Government  Representation in national parliaments (% of seats in a 
lower chamber held by women/men) KAS, 2012  23.8  76.2  [100]


---
*Page 54*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
References  
Statistics  
• ILOSTAT, Kazakhstan  : www.ilo.org/ilostat/faces/home/statisticaldata/data_by_country/c ountry -
details?_adf.ctrl -state=10u2gojsez_167&_afrLoop=1908314462958296   
• Kazakhstan Agency of Statistics (KAS):  
o “Dynamics of gender equality for the years 2000 – 2012, by oblast/sex/type”: 
www.stat.gov.kz/faces/wcnav_externalId/homeGenderInd6?_afrLoop=277901986494054#%40%3F_afr
Loop%3D277901986494054%26_adf.ctrl -state%3D6712ta6z1_246   
o “Gender Equality in the Economy”, 2012: 
www.stat.gov.kz/faces/wcnav_externalId/homeG enderInd3?_afrLoop=277398782856249#%40%3F_afr
Loop%3D277398782856249%26_adf.ctrl -state%3D6712ta6z1_183   
o “Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women”: 
www.stat.gov.kz/faces/wcnav_externalId/homeGenderCel3?_afrLoop=277038329504826#%40%3F_afrL
oop%3D277038329504826%26_adf.ctrl -state%3D6712ta6z1_120   
o Women and men in Kazakhstan 2008 -2012, 2013: 
www.stat.gov.kz/faces/wcnav_externalId/publicationsCompilations?_afrLoop=129413339330892#%40
%3F_afrLoop%3D129413339330892%26_adf.ctrl -state%3D5g2gbf9v9_98   
o Kazakhstan in figures , 2014: 
www.stat.gov.kz/faces/wcnav_externalId/publicationsCompilations?_adf.ctrl -
state=5g2gbf9v9_98&_afrLoop=98351413078219#% 40%3F_afrLoop%3D98351413078219%26_adf.ctrl -
state%3D2u3khoewo_4   
• OECD SIGI Index 2012, Kazakhstan: http://genderindex.org/country/kazakhstan    
• UNDP, Human Development Report 2013: http://hdr.undp.org/en/2013 -report  
• UNECE Statistical Database: http://w3.unece.org/pxweb/   
• UNESCO Institute for Statistics database, Kazakhstan: http://www.uis.unesco.org/DataCentre/Pages/country -
profile.aspx?code=KAZ&regioncode=40505   
• UNICEF Statistical Database, Kazakhstan: http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/kazakhstan_statistics.html   
• World Bank, Gender Statistics Database: 
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/views/variableselection/selectvariables.aspx?source=gender -statistics   
• World Bank, Women, Business and the Law – Kazakhstan, 2014: 
http://wbl.worldbank.org/data/exploreeconomies/kazakhstan/2013   
 
• World Bank, World Development Indicators Database: http://data.worldbank.org/country/kazakhstan   
• World Economic Forum (WEF) Global  Gender Gap Report 2013: http://reports.weforum.org/global -gender -
gap-report -2013/   
• Asian Development Bank (ADB), Kazakhstan: Country Gender Assessment , 2012: 
www.adb.org/sites/default/files/projdocs/2012/44067 -012-reg-tacr.pdf  
Reports, Articles, books, websites  
• Asian Development Bank (ADB), Gender equality and the labor  market: Cambodia, Kazakhstan and the 
Philippines , 2013: www.adb.org/sites/default/files/pub/2013/gender -equality -cambodia -philippines -
kazak hstan.pdf   
• Babkina, Alexandra, “Kazakhstan implements waste -management pilot projects”, Central Asia Online , 17 April 
2012: http://centralasiaonline.com/en _GB/articles/caii/features/main/2012/04/17/feature -01.   
• Grontmij, 2014, Gender Assessment of District Heating Projects in Kazakhstan financed by the Clean 
Technology Fund (CTF): not available online  
• International Labour Organisation (ILO), Work and Family  Responsibilities: The Republic of Kazakhstan, 2013: 
www.ilo.org/public/english/region/eurpro/moscow/info/publ/waf_resp_kaz_en.pdf   
• Rutkowski, Jan, Promoti ng Formal Employment in Kazakhstan , working paper for the World Bank, 2011: 
www.iza.org/conference_files/InfoETE2011/rutkowski_j1928.pdf .


---
*Page 55*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
• Tengrinews, “Almaty citizens wish  to be gender equal more than other Kazakhstan residents”, 2012: 
http://en.tengrinews.kz/people/Almaty -citizens -wish -to-be-gender-equal -more -than -other -Kazakhstan -
residents -9702/   
• Tengrinews, “Almaty citizens wish to be gender equal more than other Kazakhstan residents”, 2012: 
http://en.tengrinews.kz/people/Almaty -citizens -wish -to-be-gender -equal -more -than -other -Kazakhstan -
residents -9702/


---
*Page 56*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Disclaimer: This summary was prepared, using publicly available sources. EBRD does not guarantee the accuracy or  
completeness of the information provided in the Briefing. The text is copyrighted, and to the extent that it reflects 
opinions, they are the opinions of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the EBRD, its 
staff or Directors. N othing in this summary should be taken as legal advice.  No part of the text may be copied, 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without the prior written consent of EBRD.   
 
B. Gender Action Plan on Strengthening Equal opportunities in Projec ts 
 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsible 
organisations 
(excluding the FP)  
Impact: Increased number of low carbon investors and RES developers promoting women’s economic 
empowerment   
Outcome : Improved access to energy efficiency and renewable energy skills and employment by women and men.  
Means of verification: Gender disaggregated data assessed against appropriate indicator s to measure enhanced 
access for women to energy efficiency and rene wable energy skills and employment  
Output 1: 75% of loan clients fund -wide contribute to strengthening women’s access to energy efficiency and 
renewable energy employment  
• Measures to 
increase workforce diversity 
by strengthening RES 
develop Equal Opportunities 
(EO) polic ies and practice s  
• Measures to 
increase workforce diversity 
by reducing legal and 
regulatory barriers and 
promoting women’s equal 
access to employment via 
focused policy dialogue  
• Implement 
knowledge -sharing practices 
with RES devel opers and 
local women’s Economic 
empowerment NGOs  
• Develop EO policies 
and practices to sign up to 
the UN Women’s 
Empowerment Principles 
(WEPs)  
• Establish gender 
equity in local supply -chain 
talent identification and 
recruitment  Data of Res developer IEs 
disaggregated by gender 
and classified as 
strengthening Equal 
Opportunities based 
upon achieving one of 
the three  
criteria below:  
1. At least 30% women 
on RES developer 
company board or in 
senior management 
positions  
2. At leas t 30% of RES 
developer employees are 
women  
3. At least 3 0% of RES 
interns/ on -the-job 
trainees are women  
 
b. Contribute with 
employers’ or industry  
organisations (eg., 
Kazenergy ; National 
Chamber of 
Entrepreneurs) to the 
development of policy 
brief or guidance note to 
Ministry of Labour, 
Mining Association and 
high level stakeholders to 
remove discriminatory a. Gender ratio 
achieved by third 
year of 
programme 
operation and 
until programme 
completion  
b. By end 2020  
 
c. By end 2020  
 
d. By end 2020  
 
e. e. By end 2020  
 IE reporting


---
*Page 57*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsible 
organisations 
(excluding the FP)  
clause from Labour code, 
Article 16 as they pertain 
to prohibitions on 
women working in 
Energy  
 
c. Number of knowledge 
products produced by 
RES of own research & 
lessons learned  
to reducing existing 
knowledge gaps on 
reducing  
formal and informal 
barriers faced by women 
and men as economic 
actors in renewable 
energy sector  
 
d. Number of RES s igned 
up to the UN Women’s 
Empowerment Principles 
(WEPs)  
 
e. Number of RES 
adopting contracting 
requirement/ 
procurement policy 
mandating  primary 
contractor to adopt EO 
policy and practices  
  
 
Output 2: Promote gender equality in energy efficiency and renewable energy vocational training  skills and 
accreditation  
• Develop outreach 
programmes targeted at 
women to promote 
vocational training system in 
partnership with technical 
and vocational education • Data on 
potential technical and 
vocational education and 
training (TVET) inquiries 
disaggregated by sex  
• Aim for 35% of Throughout the 
programme operation  
 IE HR departments


---
*Page 58*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsible 
organisations 
(excluding the FP)  
and training (TVET) 
institutions and Kasipkor 
Holding (public authority 
responsible for th e quality 
assurance of colleges and 
universities)  
• Support for women 
workers to move from semi -
skilled to skilled and 
managerial/leadership 
positions through 
development of targeted 
training/ reskilling, 
mentoring, ‘buddy systems’ 
etc 
• Undertake targeted 
advertising in women 
employment forums and 
organisations.  
• Undertake 
knowledge -sharing with local 
women’s economic 
empowerment NGOs.  
• Spread awareness 
on the gender diversity 
dimensions of the RES sector 
through marketing and 
publicity strategies  
 internship/ on -the-job 
training inquiries from 
women  
 
 
Output 3: Households and individuals (males and females) with improved  access to low ‐emission energy 
sources  
• Undertake gender 
sensitive public 
consultations to assess 
women’s willingness to pay 
for improved  access to 
low‐emission  energy 
sources  
 • Number of 
households, and 
individuals (males and 
females) with  
improved access to  
low‐emission  energy  
sources  
•              Percentage of 
sub-projects that have 
applied gender -equitable 
stakeholder 
consultations  
•    (Female -headed) 
household expenses on Throughout the programme 
operation  Consultant, AEs; 
Assumes that it will 
typically not be possible 
to measure improved 
access from large‐grid 
systems; therefore,  the 
data will be linked to 
off‐grid access (e.g., 
solar panels) and 
mini‐grid systems.


---
*Page 59*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsible 
organisations 
(excluding the FP)  
energy (electricity) / 
percentage change in 
expenditure for 
household energy needs 
by women.  
 
 
Output 4: Knowledge management products and gender awareness workshops highlighting equal gender access 
to RES skills and employment  to be prepared and disseminated  
• Highlight gender 
goal achievement status and 
report on gender 
disaggregated statistics in 
progress report  
• Publish case studies 
to represent gender diversity 
of the programme and 
disseminate these on public 
forums  
• Conduct workshops 
highlighting equal gender 
access to climate finance 
programmes  One time each year  of programme operation  
 AEs


---
*Page 60*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
ANNEX 4: STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW FOR KAZAKHSTAN RENEWABLE 
ENERGY SOURCES (SUMMARY) http://kazreff -ser.com/index.html   
The EBRD commissioned a Strategic Environmental Review focusing on renewable energy technologies in optimal 
areas of Kazakhstan.  The renewable energy technologies specifically reviewed in this SER include hydropower, on -
shore wind, solar, biogas and geothermal technologies.  The SER complies with the EBRD’s Environmental and 
Social Policy and its Public Information Policy.   
The purpose of the SER process was to review the key environmental issues associated with the impl ementation of 
specific renewable energy development on a national basis.  When specific projects are proposed to the Bank, a 
project -level environmental review is still required. The outcomes of the SER help to focus the scope and provide 
relevant guidance  for subsequent environmental reviews of specific renewable energy projects within Kazakhstan. 
A subsequent project -level environmental review conducted by the EBRD team for each specific project proposal 
uses the information in the SER report to identify mitigation strategies and adapt them for implementation at the 
project level.   
The EBRD’s environmental and social policy requires compliance with both European Union (EU) directives and 
national law for projects and programmes funded through EBRD.  Therefore, the SER was guided by the EU 
Directive 2001/42/EC on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment 
(usually known as the SEA Directive).  The SER provides a high level overview of potential environmental effect s 
along with recommendations and guidance for renewable energy development in Kazakhstan.  The key stages of 
the SER were as follows:  
- Stage A (Scoping)  - Setting the context and objectives, establishing the bas eline, and deciding the scope;  
- Stage B: Devel oping and refining alternatives and assessing effects;  
- Stage C: Preparing the SER report; and  
- Stage D: Consulting on the draft SER report.  
 
Renewable Energy Scenarios   
Areas with good potential for renewable energy development in Kazakhstan have been identified at the scoping 
stage. The renewable energy technologies specifically reviewed in this SER include hydropower, on -shore wind, 
solar, biogas and geothermal technolo gies.  Further analysis of potential locations, technologies and operating 
conditions of the renewable energy resource scenarios have been undertaken as part of the SER and detailed in 
the environmental and/or social high sensitivity areas are discussed in  detail in the SER report. Environmental and 
social factors that could significantly impact the effectiveness, economic feasibility, and therefore, the siting of 
these facilities are addressed in technical reports (RPERs) for each technology.   
Stakeholder  Engagement  
The SER was developed in compliance with the EBRD’s Environmental and Social Policy and its Public Information 
Policy as well as being guided by the EU SEA Directive.   Stakeholder consultation were been on -going during 
scoping, and continued t hroughout the SER process.  In line with EBRD requirements, a Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan (SEP) was being developed and implemented, setting the scope and timescales for consultation throughout 
the SER and beyond.  
 
SER resulted in:  
- Assessment instruments for specific investment projects and their appraisal and permitting. This has two 
components: the first one is an annotated list of areas/locations most suitable for development of mini -
hydro, wind, solar, biogas and geothermal facilities (to provide an in dication for future development). The 
second one is a recommendation for a focused environmental and social due diligence process for 
individual projects which takes account of the findings and recommendations of the SER and the 
requirements of the Bank’s Environmental and Social Policy and associated Performance Requirements.  
- Identification and (where possible, determined in consultation with the Bank) quantification of 
environmental, social or technical obstacles to be encountered or benefits arising whe n developing the 
indicated facilities.  
- Capacity building for consultants and developers in environmental and social compliance with the Bank 
Environmental, Social, and Public Information Policy; and for  regulators in SEA procedures and processes


---
*Page 61*
---

PUBLIC  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 57 
 
PUBLIC  I 
ANNEX 5: THEORY OF CHANGE MODEL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities  
1. Concessional finance  
• Investment in building  generation capacity from 
renewable energy source  and modernising 
transmissions network.  
2.1 Technical assistance and capacity building  
• Provide project -level assistan ce to public entities.  
• Support the development of MRV system, the 
introduction of the auction -based system for RES 
projects, and the development of telemetry 
requirements  for remote monitoring of RES 
projects.   
2.2 Policy dialogue  
• Support regulatory reforms to address  market 
barriers for RES investment.  
• Review and further develop the domestic carbon 
market to integrate RES projects.  
Results  
•Enhance access to 
finance for RES -related 
projects.  
•Build at least 330MW 
RES capacity 
contributing to at least 
18% of the national RES 
target by 2020.  
•Modernise 
transmission network 
to facilitate higher 
penetration of 
renewables in the grid 
and reduce network 
losses.  
Impacts  
•Demonstrate new 
replicable RES projects 
and instigate appetite  for 
investment in the 
industry resulting in an 
increased share of RES in 
the country’s energy mix.  
•Strengthen institutional 
and regulatory system for 
RES projects resulting in 
competitive entry of RES.  
•Reduce  carbon 
emissions of 12.86mt 
CO2e over the pro ject 
lifetime (GHG emissions 
reduction due to network 
loss is not included).  
Assumptions  
• RES projects are not financially viable in the absence of the programmes components; given access to finance, 
potential investors will invest in RES projects.  
• Dome stic RES project developers lack the capacity to initiate and develop RES investment; given technical support, 
potential investors will improve the ability to identify, evaluate and implement RES projects.  
• Given support in policy dialogue, an enabling and  lasting regulatory environment will be created for RES projects.


---
*Page 62*
---

Page 58


---
*Page 63*
---

Page 59 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  GCF – EBRD Kazakhstan Renewables Energy Framework  
Accredited entity  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category A  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2017 -03-06 
Language(s) of  disclosure  English and Russian  
Link to disclosure  Strategic Environmental Review (SER)  Report  
Renewable Project Environmental Review Report – Wind  
Appendix A – Receptor ‘value’, ‘vulnerability’ and ‘sensitivity’  
Website:  http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/get/knowledge -
hub.html        
The SER and the related  documents are equivalent to the ESIA.  
Other link(s)  http://  
Environmental and Social Management Plan  (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2017 -03-06 
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Kazakh and Russian  
Link to disclosure  Environmental and Social Management Framework and System 
(ESMFS)  
Website: http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/get/knowledge -
hub.html     
The ESMFS is equivalent to the ESMP.  
Other link(s)  http://  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Not Applicable  
________