=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20170314095926+09'00'
/Creator: Microsoft® Word 2013
/ModDate: D:20170314105426+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2013
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP04 4 GCF/B.16/0 7/Add.07 
14 March 201 7 Meeting of the Board  
4 – 6 April 2017  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem  11(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ Tina River Hydropower Development Project ” submitted
by the World Bank ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents  are presented as sub mitted by the accredited entity,  and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 7 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme Title:  Tina River Hydropower Development Project  
Country/Region:  Solomon Islands  
Accredited Entity:  The World Bank  
Date of Submission : 30 September 2016


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
 Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can eith er directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 58 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Tina River Hydropower Development Project  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Solomon Islands  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Disaster 
Management and Meteorology (MECDM)  
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  The World Bank  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  Ministry of Finance and Treasury  (MOFT)  
Beneficiary:  Ministry of Mines, Energy and Rural 
Electrification (MMERE)  and the Project Company  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☒  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  30 September 2016  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Takafumi Kadono, Senior Energy Specialist  
Erik Johnson, Senior Social Development Specialist  
Organization  The World Bank  
Email address  tkadono@worldbank.org  
ejohnson1@worldbank.org  
Telephone number  +65-6517 -1240  
Mailing  address  World Bank Singapore Office, 10 Marina Boulevard, Marina 
Bay Financial Centre Tower 2 #34 -02, Singapore 018983  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation   
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport   
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 58 
 
 
 A 
 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives  and primary measurable benefits (see investment 
criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
The objective of the Tina River Hydropower Development Project (TRHDP;  the “Project”) is to lower the system 
average cost of electricity supply and diversify generation  capacity in favor of clean, renewable sources . As the main 
alternatives to diesel generation are renewable energy such as hydropower and solar photovoltaics (PV), diversification 
will lead to significant reduc tions in  greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in a power system which is almost entirely reliant 
on diesel generation . The combined share of renewable energy generation sources (hydro and solar) on the Honiara 
grid is expected to shift from 3 % in 2017  to 67% at the time of expected TRHDP  commissioning in 2022.  This shift away 
from diesel generation will also lead to more stable, lower electr icity tariff to Solomon Islands Electricity Authority ( SIEA , 
operating as ‘Solomon Power’)  customers, with the final magnitude of savings to be assessed at the time of power 
purchase agreement ( PPA) signing between SIEA and the Project Company.   
A request  is made for the Green Climate Fund ( GCF ) to provide $70 million of 0% loan over 40 years including 10 -year 
grace to finance a portion of the debt of the Project Company to develop the Tina River Hydropower Plant (Component 
1), and a grant of  $16 million as co -financing for the access road (Component 2) with the Government of Australia . This 
is part of a concessional funding package sought from several organizations described below. Since the sharp drop in 
oil prices since 2015, the cost of diesel generati on has dropped significantly – in order to ensure that the Project is 
competitive with the current diesel generation cost, and to incentivize SIEA to transition to renewable energy at this 
scale, concessional finance is required to fund all of the Project’ s debt . 
Significant ly reduce  GHG emissions . The Project is a 15 MW hydropower plant which will annually generate 78.35  
gigawatt -hours ( GWh ) (65% of the 120 GWh demand projected in Honiara in 2022 ) with a net  GHG emission  reduction 
of 49,500  tCO 2eq/year  and a total of 2.48 million tCO 2eq over the 50 year life of the Project.  The annual GHG emission 
reduction potential of the Project is more than two and a half  times higher than Solomon Islands Government ’s (SIG) 
commitment in the Intended Nationally Dete rmined Contribution (INDC) to reduce emissions by 18,800 tCO 2eq/ year by 
2025 , and 60% higher tha n the target reduction of  31,125 tCO 2eq/year by 2030 with appropriate international 
assistance.  The Project has by far  the largest GHG emission reduction potential  in the Solomon Islands . The Ministry of 
Environment, Climate Change, Disaster Management and Meteorology ( MECDM ), the National Designated  Authority  
(NDA) , has issued its No Objection and is fully supportive of the Project.  
Shift from nearly 100%  diesel to majority renewable energy . The Project  is the first utility -scale hydropower plant 
and will also be the first privately -invested build -own-operate -transfer (BOOT)  project in Solomon Islands.  It is also the 
first sizeable renewable energy development in a 97% diesel generated system, with reservoir capacity that will provide  
flexibility to the power system to enable higher penetration  of PV power without the need for large and expensive 
energy storage or diesel generator s running at low efficiencies  to respond to the intermitten t PV output.  This dramatic  
transition from diesel to renewable energy and from public investment to private investment can be replicated in other 
small island nations with similar constraints.  
Reduce the cost and volatility of a diesel -driven electricity tariff to stimulate househo ld and business savings 
and investment . Retail electricity tariff in Solomon Islands is one of the highest in the world at US¢82/kWh  for 
residential customers  due to the high cost of diesel . The Project is expected to contribute to lowering the tariff so that 
the significant cost burden to households and businesses can be eased , and to enable SIEA to invest more in  
increasing  the grid-connected  electrification rate of 12%. Global oil prices are currently at hi storic lows, but t he Project 
will enable SIEA to lock -in to a favorable PPA price  for the 30 -year concession period which will significantly limit its 
exposure to global oil price fluctuations. As the Project is to be developed by a private investor as a BOOT  scheme, 
SIG wi ll be handed over the Project at no cost at the end of the concession period. This will not only drastically reduce 
the generation cost for SIEA, but will significantly save SIG’s foreign currency denominated expenditures on energy.  
Economic efficiency. Assuming total Project development cost of $ 233.98  million, the emissions reduction per unit of 
investment over the project life of 50 years is 10.6 kgCO 2eq/$. In terms of the impact of the requested GCF financing of 
$86 million ( $70 million  loan plus $16  million grant) , the impact delivered is 28.8 kgCO 2eq/GCF $. 
Financial viability. The Project is designed to satisfy the financial viability of the (i) private investor, and (ii) SIEA which 
is the off -taker. The concessional funds from GCF and other co -financiers will enable the private investor’s return on 
equity to be met while keeping the PPA tariff at levels that would incentivize  SIEA  to enter into a PPA and take a 
monumental step towards a renewable energy dominant power system. Concessional funds from GCF  and other


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 58 
 
 
 A 
sources are critical to reduce the financing cost to strengthen the Project’s financial  viability and to support SIEA’s 
transition from diesel power to renewable hydropower.   
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if applicable)  30/05/2017  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  30/06/2017  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/07 /2017  
End:  30/06/2022 
Project/programme lifespan  50 years


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 58 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
Please provide:  
 an integrated financial model in Section I  (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from financial closing through final 
maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a sensitivity analysis of critical elemen ts of the 
project/programme  
 
 a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, and leverage public and/or 
private finance  
The Tina River Hydropower Plant  (Component 1) is a dam -tunnel type hydropower scheme of 15 MW which is 
expected to be developed by a Project Company with majority shareholding by a private developer on a BOOT 
basis. SIEA will be the off -taker  through a PPA . Concessional loan financing of $70 million from the GCF is 
being requested to partially finance the debt requirem ent of the Project Company while other concessional 
financiers such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB)1 and the Economic Development Cooperation Fund of 
the Government of South Korea (EDCF) have provided commitment letters indicating their interest to co -
finance the debt tranche. The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) /Abu Dhabi Fund for 
Development (ADFD) Project Facility  has advised SIG that it will provide a concessional loan in the amount of 
$15 million towards the Project. The World Bank ( Accredited Entity ) is committed, pending its Board approval, 
to finance  the equity share of the Project Company to be owned by SIG.  
The access road (Component 2)  is required to gain access to various sites during construction and for the 
operation of the Hyd ropower Plant during operations. While the Plant (e.g. dam, tunnel and powerhouse) is a 
revenue generating asset , the road is a public investment which does not generate revenue in itself. As such, 
Government of Australia  (GoA) is considering  providing up to AUD17 million (approx.  USD9  million  for the road 
and USD2 million for technical assistance ; and the balance for World Bank management fees ) in grant 
financing. GCF grant financing of USD16 million is sought to fill a gap in the required financing for  the road  
which is estimated at USD25 million. A mix of grant and loan financing from GCF would be consistent with 
World Bank and ADB financing for Solomon Islands which is also a mix of loan and grant financing, reflecting 
the country ’s status as both a l east developed country and small island developing state . The difficulty of 
attracting private sector financing for a large -scale investment project in a small island state such as Solomon 
Islands is also significant, and the financing of critical enabling  infrastructure such as the access road is an 
important element of the package to make such an investment attractive. To avoid the interface risk of a 
separate road contractor not being able to complete the road by when the engineering -procurement -
construc tion ( EPC) contractor is to commence construction of the main Hydropower Plant, the access road will 
be included in the EPC contract. However, the fixed cost of the access road will be ring -fenced and  grant 
funded so that its cost will not increase the PPA  tariff to levels which are too high for SIEA to accept . 
The transmission line (Component 3) will be developed by SIEA, outside  the BOOT scheme , also in order to 
reduce the cost of Component 1 . World Bank  loan and grant as well as IRENA /ADFD  loan will co-finance its 
construction , while SIEA will also provide counterpart financing.   
Finally, the World Bank  and Australian  grant s will finance the technical assistance (Component 4) to support 
the activities of SIG during implementation of the Project.  
For Comp onent 1, SIG and the project’s private developer have substantially agreed to an EPC cost for the 
Hydropower Plant of $144.2 million  (inclusive of tax; exclusive of the access road or transmission line ). For the 
project to be viable including the financing cost and to  incentivize  SIEA  to accept the PPA , the financing mix 
needs to result in a 30 -year levelized tariff of no more than US¢22/kWh . As indicated below, GCF concessional 
debt finance of $70 million  (and grant financing of $16 million for the access roads) is needed to reach that 
level.  It should be noted that the PPA payments will be made for the available capacity of the Hydropower Plant 
rather on a n energy  basis. An estimation of the levelized tariff, based on estimated avera ge annual generation 
over 30 years and project costs,  is needed for SIEA to decide whether Hydropower Plant is less expensive than 
the unit cost of diesel -generated electricity.     
                                                             
1 SIG has requested ADB assign funding from the ADB country allocation to the project and ADB is 
currently undertaking due diligence .


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 58 
 
 B 
GoA confirmation/approval of funding is expected by end -March 2017; GCF confirmation/approval of funding 
expected April 6, 2017; EDCF confirmation /approval of funding  expected end -April 2017; ADB 
confirmation /approval of funding is  expected April or May 2017; and IDA confirmation /approval of funding  
expected May 30, 2017.  KW f inancing has already been approved by its Board.     
Financing agreements for all financiers are expected to be signed by end -June 2017 , with some delays 
possible, particularly given the practice of preparing GCF legal documents after approval . It should be  noted 
that until all financing terms have been negotiated and approved by the various financiers, the final project cost 
will not be confirmed. In the case of multiple financiers, such staggered of approvals are to be expected.  
   
The attached Integrated Financial Model Annex  for Component 1 calculates the total ann ual revenue 
requirement of the Project C ompany in order to meet its operation and maintenance expenditure, debt service, 
required equity return and tax obligations for a n operational  period of 40 years. The annual revenue 
requirement is divided by the estimated average energy generated of 78.35  GWh to yield an annual generation 
tariff. A levelized tariff is derived for the PPA operating period of 30 years.  
 
The model makes certain sim plifications – for example, it is assumed that there will be no “trapped cash” and 
that the project company can distribute all free cash for equity as dividends. The model also assumes that 
depreciation will be equal to debt service and does not compute an y depreciation tax shield. Since the Solomon 
Islands tax laws require payment of income tax or dividend tax (but not both), this simplification is appropriate.  
All assumptions on capital and operating costs, debt and equity costs, taxation and construction  period are 
included in the worksheet “Assumptions” in blue font.  
The base case assumes zero commercial debt – in order to derive the amount of commercial debt required if 
GCF debt is reduc ed, the base case figure of $70 million  loan from  GCF can be reduce d and a goal -seek or 
Solver function performed to solve for the amount of required commercial debt.  
Sensitivity Analysis. Sensitivity analysis around the volume of GCF loan is provided in section F.1 to 
demonstrate the minimum concessionality required for the Project to be viable. Assuming that the requested 
GCF funding is made available, sensitivity analy sis was conducted around other critical elements including: (i) 
15% increase in EPC cost requiring additional IRENA/ADFD  financing  of $5.73 million; and (ii) no EDCF 
financing requiring additional IRENA/ADFD  financing of $10.73 million plus commercial debt of $24.72 million . 
As IRENA/ADFD  funds are needed to finance Component 3, any application of these funds for Component 1 
debt financing wi ll have to be off -set by an additional request by SIG for IDA financing under the next IDA cycle 
(IDA18 ).  The sensitivity analysis results are shown below.  
  Base Case    EPC cost over -
run +15% (5% 
over 
contingency); 
funded with 
IRENA/ADFD  
debt   No EDCF 
financing; 
commercial & 
IRENA/ADFD  
financing 
instead  
EPC (incl. Tax)  144,200,000   151,410,000   144,200,000  
Contingency Used  15,000,000   15,000,000   15,000,000  
Development costs*  15,000,000   15,000,000   15,000,000  
MIGA premium & insurance during  
construction  3,500,000   3,500,000   3,500,000  
 177,700,000   184,910,000   177,700,000  
Interest during construction  3,460,452   3,867,284   8,587,064  
Total project cost  181,160,452   188,777,284   186,287,064  
      
Debt (75%)       
GCF  70,000,000   70,000,000             
70,000,000


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 58 
 
 B 
EDCF  31,600,000   31,600,000                            
-    
ADB - loan 18,000,000  
 18,000,000  
           
18,000,000  
ADB - grant         
12,000,000                 
12,000,000             
12,000,000  
IRENA/ADFD           
4,270,000   10,000,000   15,000,000  
Commercial                        
-                                  
-     24,720,000  
Total debt  135,870,000   141,600,000   139,720,000  
Equity (25%)       
Sponsors (KW & HEC)  25,290,452   27,177,284   26,567,064  
SIG (via WB)  20,000,000    20,000,000    20,000,000  
Total equity  45,290,452   47,177,284   46,567,064  
      
30-year Levelized Tariff (including O&M) 
in US¢/kWh  21.09  
 22.19  
 24.17  
 
* Contingenc y is to secure up -front funding for unforeseen cost increases or schedule delays   
** Development costs include technical, financial, insurance and legal advisors  and sponsors’ costs . A breakdown of specific costs is 
not available at this time as these costs are still under negotiation between SIG and K -Water.   
 
As de scribed in section F.1, the maximum  PPA price acceptable to SIEA is US¢22 /kWh. The first sensitivity 
analysis case with 1 5% EPC cost increase requiring $ 5.73 million of IRENA/ADFD  loan will increase the 
levelized tariff to US¢ 22.19  which exceeds the maximum PPA price . Although the EPC contract is a fixed -price 
contract, a n increase in EPC cost is a possibility as there are exclusions related to certain adverse geological 
risks in the reservoir area which the EPC contractor is not in  a position to take .  
The second sensitivity analysis case with no EDCF financing is included as this is the least firm co -financing 
source compared to the World Bank ’s IDA resources ADB’s Asian Development Fund resources . A decision by 
EDCF not to finance  is, however, unlikely since  (i) EDCF has recently concluded a Co -financing Framework 
Agreement with the World Bank , and (ii) EDCF has expressed its strong interest to co -finance with GCF. 
Nonetheless, the analysis demonstrates that under this scenario the  levelized tariff increases to above US¢24  
as a larger volume of IRENA/ADFD  and commercial debt become necessary. Given that the World Bank ’s IDA 
resources and ADB’s  Asian Development Fund resources cannot be increased further  due to country allocation 
ceilings , the Project can only attain a levelized tariff of US¢22/kWh with a GCF loan of $8 6 million  if EDCF 
financing is unavailable.  
 a breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub -component in local and foreign currency and a currency 
hedging mechanism:  For example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal exploration project, sub -components would 
include civil engineering works, drilling services, drilling equipment and inspect ion test.  
 
Component  Amount  
(for entire 
project)  Currency  Amount  
(for entire 
project)  Local 
currency  GCF 
funding 
amount  Currency of 
disbursement to 
recipient  
Component 1 : Hydropower Plant  
(EPC contract, financing charges, 
contingencies)  (Co-financed by 
World Bank  at USD20 m , EDCF  
at USD31.6 m , ADB at USD30 m, 
IRENA/ADFD  at 4.27 m  and 
Private sector developer  at 
USD 25.29 m.)  181.1 6* million 
USD ($)  0.00 million SBD  70.00 million USD ($)


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 58 
 
 B 
Component 2 : Access Road    
(Co-financed with GoA at USD9  
m, and constructed by EPC 
contractor .) 25.00 million 
USD ($)  0.00 million SBD  16.00 million USD ($)  
Component 3: Transmission Line  
(Supply and install contract to be 
financed by WB at $10.6 m and 
IRENA/ADFD  at $10.73 m . 
Design being funded by SIEA)  22.82  million 
USD ($)  0.00 million SBD  0.00 million USD ($)  
Component 4: Technical 
Assistance  (Various activities **; 
to be financed by WB at USD 3 
m, and GoA  at USD2 m ) 4.5 million 
USD ($)  4.00 million SBD  0.00 million USD ($)  
Total  project financing  233.48  million 
USD ($)  4.0*** million SBD  86.0 million USD ($)  
 
* Component 1 cost includes debt and equity financing for the EPC contract  for the Hydropower Plant , 
contingency, d evelopment costs , Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) premium  and other costs , 
and interest during construction  (IDC). IDC includes the capitalized interest related to interest payments to the 
concessional financiers on loan amounts drawn during construction.   
 
** Includes supporting SIG’s Project Office’s day -to-day activities, recruiting experts of the Dam Safety Advisory 
Panel and the Environmental and Social Panel, contracting independent bodies to monitor the implementation 
of the Environmental and Social Mana gement Plan and the Land Acquisition and Livelihood Restoration Plan, 
etc. 
 
*** SBD4.0 million estimated to be USD0.5 million at exchange rate of USD1.00 = SBD8.00.  
 
 a breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type ( project staff and consultants, travel, goods , works,  services,  etc.) and disbursement 
schedule in project/programme confirmation (term sheet) as included in section I, Annexes.  
 
For Component 1, t he Project Company will finance the $ 181.16  million project cost through 75% debt ($135.87  
million) and 25% equity  ($45.29  million) . The private sector investor’s cost of (return on) equity is targeted at 
13%.  The breakdown of the Component 1 cost is provided below.  
 
 
The drawdown schedule for Component 1  (Tina River Hydropower Plant) , which is relevant to the GCF funds,  
is as follows.  
 
 
 
 Component 1 – Items Amount ($ million)  
A. EPC Cost  (including taxes)   144.20  
B. Contingency   15.00  
C. Development Cost   15.00 
D. MIGA and Other Costs2  3.50 
E. Interest during Construction   3.46 
Total   181.16  
                                                             
2 A MIGA PRI has been requested by the project sponsor. Discussions are ongoing between K -water and MIGA.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 58 
 
 B 
 
Year  Percentage  Equity  Debt – Total  Debt – GCF Only  
2018   40%  18.11   54.36  28.00  
2019   20%  9.06  27.17  14.00  
2020   20%  9.06  27.17  14.00  
2021   20%  9.06  27.17   14.00  
Total   100%   45.29   135.87   70.00 
 
The drawdown schedule  for Component 2 (access road), which is relevant to the GCF funds, is as follows.  
Year  Percentage  GoA GCF  
2017   50%  4.50  8.00 
2018   50%  4.50  8.00 
Total   100%   9.00  16.0 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  233.98  million USD ($)   
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  70.00 million USD ($)  40  years  0 %  
(ii) Subordinated Loans   Options    
(iii) Equity   Options    
(iv) Guarantees   Options    
(v) Reimbursable grants *   Options    
(vi) Grants *  16.00 million USD ($)    
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to provide, 
particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and that of accredited  
entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspon d to the level of the project/programme’s expected 
performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  86.00 million USD ($)   
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor * Pricing  Seniority  
Equity  25.29  million USD ($)  Private investor  34 yrs 16.00% **  
Equity  20.00 million USD ($)  SIG (using IDA  
credit ) 34 yrs 2.00-
4.00%  
Senior Loans  13.60 million USD ($)  IDA*** 40 yrs  0.75%  junior  
Senior Loans  30.00 million USD ($)  ADB*** 32 yrs 1.50% pari passu  
Senior Loans  31.60 million USD ($)  EDCF  40 yrs  0.05%  pari passu  
Senior Loans  15.00  million USD ($)  IRENA/ADFD  15 yrs  2.00%  pari passu  
Grant  11.00 million USD ($)  GoA**** n/a n/a  
Counterpart Finance  1.49 million USD ($)  SIEA  n/a n/a  
Lead financing institution: World Bank 
* Financing provided with a tenure beyond the 34-year PPA will be repaid through an escrow account held by the 
Project Company  
** This is the proposed ROE that will provide the private sponsor with an IRR of 13%.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 58 
 
 B 
*** IDA includes $8.9 million grant and ADB i ncludes $12.0 million of grant.  
**** GoA funds will be provided to World Bank denominated in Australian Dollars when entrusted to the World Bank , 
but will be denominated US Dollars in the financing agreement between the World Bank  and SIG.  GoA has 
indicated interest to provide up to AUD17 million which is equivalent to approximately USD12.7 million. However, 
this includes World Bank management fees, and the available amount for the project is USD11 million.  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
Letters have been provided by GoA, KEXIM/EDCF, KW and ADB.  IRENA/ADFD  has already announced 
its decision to provide US$15.0 million to SIG.  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing passes  
directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itse lf, in the proposed financial instrument and 
terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
 As stated in the Term Sheet, t he requested Accredited Entity Fee is eight per cent (8%) of the total GCF 
Proceeds, subject to finalization of the AMA and FAA. The GCF interim policy on fees indicates the cap 
is eight per cent (8%) of the GCF funding for medium scale public sector proje cts/program s. It should 
also be noted that the A ccredited Entity  fee is not included in the project budget in section (b) above.  
B.3. Financial Market s Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non -concessional) determined?  
The private sponsor has stated that their required Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is 13% over the entire life of the PPA, 
including the construction period. This IRR equates broadly to a Return on Equity of around 16%. The regulated equity 
return for  independent power producers (IPPs)  in countries with more IPP experience, such as Indonesia and Pakistan , 
can be  15% to 17% , therefore, the 13% return required by  the private sponsor is judged to be favorable . 
Please provide an overview of the s ize of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which could be tapped to finance the 
proposed project/programme . 
The Project requires maximum concessionality for it to be financially viable largely due to high cost of investment and the 
low cost of the diesel alternative forecasted for the project life which has been adjusted downwards due to the recent low 
oil price s.  
Nonetheless, c ommercial banks were consulted, but, even with partial risk guarantee ( PRG ) cover, their appetite for 
project s in Solomon Islan ds (on project finance basis) was  limited due to lack of precedent.  
In case concessional financing is not suffi cient to fully finance the debt tranche, commercial loans from multilateral 
financial institutions such as the International Finance Corporation (IFC), ADB Private Sector Operation Department  
and/or European Investment Bank (EIB) may be considered, but eve n their terms would increase the PPA tariff above 
levels acceptable to SIEA as demonstrated in section B.1.  
Equity and debt capital markets are not expected to participate in the project as it would be the first large scale private 
power project in Solomon  Islands.  
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1 -year T -Bill, 5 -year government bond, 5 -year corporate bond (specify credit rating) and 5 -year 
syndicate loan.  
Indicative loan pricing provided by multilateral financial institutions (on project f inance basis) was LIBOR plus a margin of  
500 - 800 bps. 
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.   
There is a lack of comparable projects in the Pacific region that have achieved financial close. The margin on loans for 
first in country projects in Myanmar and sub -Saharan Africa is 400 to 500 bps.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 58 
 
 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub -national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to contextualize the proposal, including 
existing national and sector policies and  strategies.  
Country Context. The Solomon Islands is a small island state that is recovering from many years of intermittent 
political turmoil and civil strife. The civil strife during 1998 -2003 disrupted the functioning of state and social institutions 
which resulted in a 40 percent GDP decline. With the support of its neighbors led by Australia, SIG restored law and 
order and other basic state functions, particularly in finance, through the deployment of the Regional Assistance 
Mission to the Solomon Is lands (RAMSI). In 2005, the Solomon Islands benefited greatly from substantial debt 
forgiveness, arrears clearance and complementary domestic debt restructuring under the Honiara Club Agreement 
(HCA) with traditional development partners, including Austral ia, New Zealand, the European Investment Bank (EIB) 
and the European Union (EU).  
 
The Solomon Islands economy has rebounded since the civil unrest, but remains vulnerable to external shocks. The 
economy recovered relatively strongly based on export of comm odities such as logging and mining.  However, the 
global financial crisis in 2009 hit the Solomon Islands hard, resulting in a sharp contraction in output, a budget crunch 
and a depletion of foreign currency reserves. SIG recognized the need for significan t reductions in its current spending 
levels, especially those with significant impa ct on the balance of payments. The oil price spike of 2008 when oil price 
reached $150/barrel  increased Solomon Islands’ vulnerability to oil price volatility, and the country’s balance of 
payments came under severe pressure as fossil fuel makes up a significant portion of all imports. To mitigate the 
impact of high cost diesel fuel  which the econ omy has suffered particularly during 2011 -2014 when oil prices fluctuated 
around $100/barrel , the Government took the initiative in considering options for development of domestic sources of 
energy, particularly hydro and other r enewables. At the same time , while the country had benefited from the HCA, the 
arrangement had also placed a moratorium on new loans, which made public financing of larger infrastructure projects 
very difficult. While this moratorium has since been lifted, it gave an initial impetus  to the drive for private sector 
participation in infrastructure development, financing and operation - a policy  that was later embedded in SIG’s National 
Development Strategy ( NDS) 2011 -2020.   
 
NDS  and the Power Sector. Universal supply of reliable grid -connected electricity is a great  challenge in Solomon 
Islands where  its population is scattered across 90 inhabited islands. The national electrification rate is reported to be 
45%, but many of those are only supplied by small PV panels typically of 20 Wp. The percentage of households 
supplied by SIEA, the state -owned power utility, is merely 12% nationally . SIG recognizes the importance of providing 
equitable access to basic servi ces including electricity to alleviate pov erty and to develop the  economy, and t he NDS  
2016-2035 (April 2016 ) views the  energy sector as a key enabling factor to support its poverty alleviation  effort, 
accelerate access to better health care and education services, and improve the standard of living and livelihoods of  
rural and urban communities.  While the NDS emphasizes the need to accelerate rural electrificatio n, it places equal 
importance on  ensuring  “reliable and affordable power supply in all urban  centers  by promoting use of renewable 
energy, opening the  market to IPP s, appropriate prepaid  tariff structures and ensuring SIEA has sound technical  and 
managerial expertise for an efficient and effective  SOE  [state -owned enterprise] .” The Project, which is an IPP using 
renewable energy with a public -private partnership ( PPP) approach whereby SIEA and SIG are actively involved in the 
formulation of the project, is ful ly consistent with this strategy.  
 
Solomon Islands National Energy Pol icy (SINEP; 2014)  was formulated with a vision to “u nlocking the development 
potential of Solomon Islands’ economic base through a dynamic and effective energy sector ”. Appreciating the low 
electrification rate, SINEP sets ambitious targets to i ncrease access to electricity in urban areas to 100% by 2020, and 
to 35% by 2020 in the rural areas. In line with the SINEP, the Ministry of Mines, Energy and Rural Electrification 
(MMERE) has recently launched an initiative to double the number of househo lds supplied by SIEA from 15,500 to 
30,000 by 202 1, and SIEA has started to develop solar -diesel -battery hybrid mini -grids in the outer islands to serve the 
remote rural populations. This is in line with NDS’s other energy strategy to “p rovide reliable and  affordable electricity in 
rural areas,  vigorously promoting assessment of potential renewable  energy resources and development of those which 
are technically sound and can be made financially viable. ”  
Under the renewable energy thematic area, the SINEP establishes a target to “i ncrease the use of renewable energy 
sources for power generatio n in urban and rural areas to 50% by 202 0.” This is also an ambitious goal given that 
SIEA’s main power grid in the capital city of Honiara with an available capacity of 30.7 MW is 97% diesel generators. 
While a 1 MW grid -connected solar , grant -funded jointly by the governments of the United Arab Emirates and New 
Zealand, has recently been  commissioned  its installed capacity is insignificant compared the SINEP target. This solar 
farm is only treated as a pilot project, and the SINEP instead prioritizes the development of the Tina River Hydropower


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 58 
 
 C 
Development Project. The Project’s 15 MW installed capaci ty will generate 78.35 GWh per annum which is 65% of the 
120 GWh demand projected for Honiara in 2022 when the Project is scheduled to come on line.  
 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC).  Details of the INDC can be found in section C.2 below . 
 
Project Background . Recognizing the need for SIEA to increase its generation capacity, while reducing its 
dependency on expensive imported fuel with volatile  prices, and reducing its GHG emissions, the Bank commissioned 
the Guadalcanal Renewable Development Concept Study  (2006) which was  completed in February 2006. The study 
investigated three major catchments in Guadalcanal – Tina River of Ngalimbiu catchment, Mbalasuna River of the Nuhu 
catchment, and Ngheunaha and Kolokumah a Rivers of the Choha  catchment – and concluded that the Tina River has  
the best hydropower potential  to serve the  future  load in Honiara. The scheme conceptualized in this study was a two -
stage cascade development: the first stage involving  a weir and a tunnel utilizing 152 m  of head, discharge of 13 -17 
m3/s with an installed capacity of 16 -21 MW to generate 99 -130 GWh/ year; and t he second stage involving  a 60 m dam 
with a powerhouse at its toe with a head of 85 m, discharge of 12 -15 m3/s with an installed capacity of 15 -21 MW  to 
generate 69 -91 GWh/year.  
 
Subsequently in 2007 , the Solomon Sustainable Energy Projects – Hydropower Component – Pre-Feasibility Study  
(pre-FS) was conducted.  This pre -FS first reconfirmed that the Tina River of the Ngalimbiu catchment is the most 
favorable  river for hydropower development and assessed three options based on site visits, 1:50,000 scale digital 
topographical maps with 20 m contours, and hydrological data from Lungga River as well as  rainfall data from Honiara 
and Henderson  stations . The pre -FS recommended the first of the three options which involve s a 10 m weir just 
downstream of the confluence of the Tina River and the Mbeambea Rivers  and a n 8.7 km tunnel creating a net head of  
180.5 m . With a design  discharge of 20 m3/s and install ed capacity of 32 MW , the scheme was simulated to annually 
generate 126 GWh.  
 
From  2010 to 2015, with the support of the World Bank , EIB and Australian Government , the Tina River Hydropower 
Development Feasibility Study (FS) was prepared in three phases . It involved  hydrological analysis, geotechnical 
investigation, and optimization of the hydropower scheme  through economic analysis of various technical options.  
While the FS progressively assessed several options, the final recommendation was a scheme consist ing of a 64 m 
roller -compacted concrete (RCC) dam, power intake, 3. 3 km headrace tunnel, powerhouse housing 3 units of 5 MW 
turbine -generators, and a tailrace channel. The dam will create a 2.8k km long reservoir with total storage volume of 6.9 
million m3 and a surface area of 305,000 m2 at full supply level of 175 m . Design discharge is 18 m3/s and the 15 MW 
plant will generate 78.35  GWh a year.  
 
During the FS preparation,  both public financing and private sector financing were considered.  
(i) Public or mostly public sector financed . It was clear from the World Bank 's assessment that SIG did not have 
the funds to fully or partially finance a project of this scale. WB allocation was small and no other concessional 
funds were stated to be available at the time. Further, public borrowing was limited by the terms of the Honiara Club 
Agreement in effect in 2009 -11 when the project structure was conceived. In addition, a pu blicly funded project 
would have to have construction supervised by, and be operated by SIEA which does  not have the hydro power  
expertise to either supervise construction or operate the Project.  
(ii) Private sector financed . In power generation projects, the co mmon implementation modes are BOO (build own 
operate), BOOT, BLT (build lease transfer) and variations around these modes. In BLT, the lease period is typically 
short compared to BOOT or BOO, and thus annual payments are expensive.  Between BOOT and BOO, th e former 
was selected because the estimated tariff in a BOO is only marginally less than that in a BOOT because the equity 
returns post 30 years are very small in present value terms. Once the project is transferred after 30 years of 
operation, SIG/SIEA ca n benefit from very low cost electricity for the remainder of the plant's useful life as capital 
costs would have been amortized, leaving only O&M costs which are small in comparison.  At the end of the 30 -year 
period, SIEA will have been trained by the Pro ject Company how to operate the facility so that it will have the full 
capacity to do so.  
 
Based on the above assessment, i t was decided that the Tina River Hydropower Project  will be developed on a BOOT 
basis by a Project Company under a 34-year concession (including a 4-year design and construction period) .


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 58 
 
 C 
All the electricity generated by the Project will be sold to SIEA, the offtaker, who will pay a capacity -based tariff in 
accordance with the PPA to be entered between the Project Company and SIEA. SIG will guarantee certain obligations 
such as foreign exchange convertibility and transferability as will be stipulated in the Government Guarantee 
Agreement and in the Implementation Agreement to be co nclude d between the Project Company and SIG. At the  end 
of the concession period, the Project  will be handed over to SIG at no cost as will be stipulated in the PPA.  
 
The declining cost of diesel since the FS was contracted in 2010, has put additional pres sure on project costs and the 
resulting tariff, prompting SIG to make an effort to minimize or eliminate the need for commercial borrowing by pursuing 
as much concessional financing as possible. SIG is also seeking to enable the project through the provisi on of an 
access road entirely funded through grant financing. GoA has expressed an interest in providing a grant in AUD 
equivalent to USD9 million, leaving a gap of $16 million to cover the full estimated cost of USD25  million. Grant 
financing for the access road from GCF is further justified by (a) the non -revenue generating nature of the road as a 
public investment, enabling infrastructure asset; (b) aligning with the combined grant/loan approach of ADB and WB 
which r eflects the country’s status  as both a least developed country and small island developing state ; (c) the need to 
further enhance the viability of the project and incentivize SIEA to transition to renewable energy by limiting the cost of 
the PPA and result ing tariff.        
 
It may be noted that SIG’s Debt Management Framework sets a limit on the stock of debt at 30% of the GDP. Currently, 
the debt to GDP is approximately only 8%, and SIG is capable and willing to take on the concessional loans and 
guarante e the obligations of SIEA under the Project.  
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline , key barriers, challenges and /or policies) and the  outcomes and 
the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline scenario.  
According to the INDC, GHG  emission  from Solomon Islands in 2015 is approximately 700,000  tCO 2eq per year. The 
business -as-usual (BAU) scenario up to 2030 is derived by extrapolating fossil fuel consumption data for the 1994 -2010 
period. While the INDC does not provide  a figure for the BAU emission  in future years, the Solomon Islands’ conditional 
contribution with international assistance is the reductio n of GHG emission  by 18,800 tCO 2eq per year by 2025 and by 
31,125 tCO 2eq per year by 2030.  The Project will annually generate 78.35  GWh of electricity and displace existing and 
future diesel generation of the same amount , equivalent to net GHG emission  reduction of 49,500  tCO 2eq each year 
(assuming grid emission factor of 650 tCO 2eq/GWh).  The Project, therefore, has the potential to double the emissions 
reductions envisaged in the INDC.  
 
In terms of climate vulnerability, Solomon Islands, as a small island develop ing state, is extremely susceptible to climate 
change, particularly threatened by rising sea levels, severe drought and increased intensity o f tropical cyclones.  While 
the main benef its of the Project are related to the mitigation of climate change effects through GHG emission reduction, 
it also has the climate adaptation benefit of regulating  the natural flow of the Tina River behind its dam for enhanced 
management of downstream flow s during times of droughts and floods . In particular, the dam reservoir is designed with 
Full Supply Level (FSL) at EL 175m and Normal Operating Level at EL 172 m providing about 1 million m3 of storage 
capacity for flood control.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its components .  
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme intends to achieve. The 
objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic framework in section H.  
Objective.  The objective of the Tina River Hydropower Development Project (TRHDP;  the “Project”) is to lower the cost 
of electricity supply and to reduce GHG emission  by displacing a large share of diesel -generated energy with clean 
hydropower.  
 
Fund -level impact: reduced emissions through increased low -emission energy access and ener gy generation.  
 
Project outcome: increased number of small, medium and large low -emission power suppliers.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 58 
 
 C 
Project outputs. The Project comprises four Components (with different financing sources and structures), each with 
its own output as follows:  
 
Component 1: Tina River Hydropower Plant . Output is that Tina River Hydropower Plant  is commissioned.  
Component 1  will consist of  the construction of a roller -compacted  concrete (RCC) dam 72 m in height (from assumed 
foundation) , power intake, 3.3  km headrace tunnel, powerhouse housing 3 units of 5 MW turbine -generators,  and 
tailrace channel. The dam will create a 2.8  km long reserv oir with storage volume of 6.9 million m3 and a surface area 
of 30 hectares  at FSL 175 m. Design discharge is 18 m3/s and the plant will generate 78.35 GWh a year  after deducting 
station auxiliary use and transformer losses . The Tina River Hydropower Plant will be developed on a BOOT  basis by 
the Project Company (a Special Purp ose Veh icle, SPV) under a 34-year concession (including  a 4-year design and 
construction period).  The Project Company is expected to be established by the main sponsor ( Korea Water Resources 
Corporation: K-Water) and SIG. K -Water will hold 51% of the shares while SIG will hold the balance of 49% through its 
state -owned investment vehicle – Investment Corporation of the Solomon Islands (ICSI). At the end of the concession 
period, the Project Company (K -Water owning a majority stake) will transfer its  shares to SIG and thus the ownership of 
the power plant. A Shareholder Agreement is being drafted  and will be finalized in form and substance satisfactory to 
the World Bank by the time of project appraisal . 
 
Activities  towards achieving the output are: (i)  preparation of a tender design by the Project Company; (ii) procurement 
of an EPC Contractor by the Project Company; (iii) execution of the contract (i.e. construction of the Project) by the 
EPC Contractor; and (iv) testing and commissioning by the Project Company and certification by SIEA.  
 
Component 2: Access Road . Output is that the access road , designed to withstand extreme precipitation caused by 
climate change,  is completed. The access road will be run from Kukum Highway to the P roject site divided into two lots.  
Lot 1 is the upgrading of the 13.2 km existing gravel road from Kukum Highway to Managakiki  Village. Lot 2 is the 
construction of a new 5.5 km access road from Managakiki Village to the powerhouse and dam sites.  The design life of 
the road is 20 years (normal for gravel pavement in high rainfall areas), but with satisfactory maintenance, this could 
extend to 30+ years. Lot 1 would be maintained by SIG as an asset in the national road netw ork to enhance the mobility 
and well -being of the local communities , while Lot 2 would be maintained by the Project Company as part of the 
operations of the hydropower plant. Maintenance costs are estimated as 3 -4% of construction cost, annually.  
 
Activit ies towards achieving the output are: (i)  construction of the access road by the EPC contractor ; ii) supervision of 
construction by Independent Engineer . 
  
Component 3: Transmission Line . Output is  that the transmission line is commissioned.  SIEA’s routing  and design 
study of November 2016 identified that the transmission voltage should be increased from the previously envisaged 33 
kV to 66 kV to reduce losses. SIEA has also decided that the transmission line (23 km) should have a physical 
contingency by er ecting two parallel single -circuit transmission lines rather than a double -circuit line. As a result, 
additional works at higher voltage has become necessary at the connection point –the existing Lungga Power Station .  
 
Activities  towards achieving the out put are: (i) preparation of transmission line detailed design by SIEA; (ii) procurement 
of a supply and install contractor by SIEA; (iii) procurement of construction supervision consultants by SIEA; (iv) 
construction of the transmission line by the supply and install contractor; and (v) testing and commissioning by the 
contractor and certification by SIEA.  
 
Component 4: Technical Assistance . Output is that project management capacity is strengthened  through expertise 
provided by the panel of experts : (i) Dam Safety Advisory Panel (DSAP) comprising experts on dam, geology, 
seismology and hydrology /sedimentology; and (ii) Environment and Social Panel (E&S Panel) comprising experts on 
environment and soc iology; as well as (iii) an independent monitoring  agent  on the implementation of the environmental 
monitoring and management plan, and the gender action plan;  and (iv) an independent monitoring agent  on the 
implementation of the land acquisition and livelihood restoration plan. Component 4 will also supp ort the day -to-day 
project management of the MMERE Project Office , and the annual audits.   
 
Main activities  towards the achievement of the output  is (i) recruitment of DSAP and E&S Panel by the MMERE Project 
Office; (ii) mobilization of D SAP and E& S Panel semi -annually during construction, at the time of testing and


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 58 
 
 C 
commissioning, and annually during the first three  years of operation; (iii) recruitment of independent monitoring agents 
by the MMERE Project Office; (iv) mobilization of the independen t monitoring agents semi -annually during construction, 
at the time of testing and commissioning, and annually during th e first five years of operation; and (v) recruitment of the 
access road tendering and supervision consultants.  
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and f inancial profile of the Sponsor ( Executing Entity ) and how it will support the 
project/programme in terms of equity  investment , management, operations, production and marketing.  
The consortium of Korea Water Resources Corporation (K -Water or KW) and Hyundai Engineering Company (HEC; 
collectively KW -HEC) has been selected  by SIG as the preferred bidder through a competitive investo r selection 
process facilitated by IFC as the transaction advisor. The selection process started with a request for expressions of 
interest published in 2011 and re -published in May 2014. Sixteen firms expressed interest in 2011 and 17 firms in 2014. 
On Ju ly 25, 2014, request for qualification was published which was purchased by 10 firms, but only two submissions 
were received by the submission deadline on November 21, 2014.  Both bidders were prequalified based on stringent 
criteria including:  
 The Lead Member or its Affiliate must have equity ownership interest in at least 200 MW of power generation 
capacity;  
 The Lead Member or its Affiliate must own, based on its own percentage of equity stake, at least 50 MW of power 
generation capacity;  
 Details of at least one IPP that has achieved financial close in the last ten years, in respect of which the Lead 
Member or its Affiliate invested equity of at least $15 million;  
 Details of at least one IPP that has achieved financial close in the last ten years, in res pect of which the Lead 
Member o r its Affiliate raised debt of at least $100 million on Project Finance basis; and  
 Lead Member to demonstrate a net worth in excess of $500 million in aggregate for each of the past two fiscal 
years.  
 
However, one bidder withdrew before the final proposal submission deadline. The Government nevertheless decided to 
proceed with the sole remaining bidder through a negotiated contract, and granted an exclusive development right to 
KW-HEC to prepare the P roject and sign the PPA by 31 October 2017. KW is the state -owned enterprise in Korea 
responsible for bulk  water supply and distribution, as well as hydropower generation. The company has  extensive 
experience in developing, financing and  operating  hydropower  plants in Korea (1074 MW), with 61% market share in 
the country. Overseas, KW owns and operates the 218 MW Angat hydropower project in the Philippines.  A list of 
overseas IPP/BOOT  hydropower projects under construction or development is shown below together with financiers 
involved.  
 
Name of Project  Capacity  Status / lenders  
Patrind Hydro in Pakistan  150MW  Construction stage / ADB, IFC, IsDB, K -exim  
Nenskra Hydro in Georgia  280MW  Financing stage / EBRD  
Upper Karnali Hydro in Nepal  900MW  Development stage / ADB, IFC  
Pursat Hydro in Cambodia  80MW  Development  
Peusangan 4 Hydro in Indonesia  85MW  early stage development  
Bongka Hydro in Indonesia  201MW  early stage development  
Middle Paung Laung Hydro in 
Myanmar  155MW  early stage development  
 
 
 
 
KW and SIG have agreed that KW will be the controlling shareholder with  51%, whereas SIG will hold 49%. SIG intends 
to utilize  the concessional loan to be provided by the World Bank  for its equity contribution, requiring only a minimum 
return on equity to service its debt and to  cover its administration costs. As a result,  the cost of equi ty can be lowered


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 58 
 
 C 
significantly compared to the initial arrangement in which KW -HEC consortium was to inject 81% of the equity.  Part of 
this 81% was to be held b y the expected EPC contractor, HEC, but HEC will no longer retain an equity stake in the 
Project Company. KW and HEC are unrelated entities. Given the importanc e of the P roject, the  Bank has mobi lized $20 
million of additional World Bank financing  (beyond the normal Solomon Islands country allocation) for this purpose.  
 
Under the 34-year concession (including 4-year design and construction period), KW -HEC will construct the 
hydropower facility (EPC contractor is expected to be HEC), and operate the facility for 30 years. As detailed in section 
E.5.2, KW particularly has international  experience  in developing, managing and operating hydropower projects. It also 
has a strong financial position, and its board has already approved equity participation of  up to  $25 million.  
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  
SIEA is a state -owned power utility wit h a monopoly on generation, transmission, distribution and retail sale of 
electricity. SIEA will be the sole off -taker of the energy generated by the Project under a PPA. In the aftermath of civil 
unrest which ended in 2003 and poor management, SIEA was in financial crisi s until 2012. Its financials were turned 
around in 2013 owing to the strong intervention of SIG and support provided through the World Bank -financed  
Sustainable Energy Project (SISEP) launched in 2008. With such a history, the SIEA’s customer base has only  
increased modestly from about 11,500 in 2009 to 15,500 in 2015 (the population of Solomon Islands is around 
600,000), while nationwide (including the Honiara grid and provincial outstations) energy generation has also increased 
modestly from under 83.5 GW h in 2009 to 87 GWh in 2015.  
 
The average electricity tariff is approximately US¢85/kWh – the highest in the Pacific and one of the highest in the 
world. This is due to the high cost of diesel generation, but also due to the tariff methodology which passes on the cost 
of fuel when costs are high, but does not adequately passes on the benefit of lower cost of fuel. MMERE and SIEA  are 
in the process of amending the tariff methodology so that the lower generation cost of SIEA  (including the PPA tariff) 
will be appropriate reflected in a lower retail tariff.  
 
Many of the households consume less than 50 kWh/month due to the high t ariff, and are expected to be able to afford 
more if the tariff is reduced through lower generation cost and revision to the tariff methodology. It may be noted that 
the majority of the households use prepaid meters through which one can control expenditur e on electricity.  
Data on disposable income is unavailable, but some data is available from the Solomon Islands 2012/13 Household 
Income and Expenditure Survey (published October 2015). While the report recognizes the discrepancy between 
income data and ex penditure data (where there is net surplus when comparing average income -expenditures, and net 
deficit when comparing median income -expenditure), the following table provides an indication of household income -
expenditure situation.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 58 
 
 C 
 
 
During this time, SIEA managed to strengthen its financial and technical capacities , and has begun to apply its 
enhanced profits to embark on an ambitious program of investments aiming to double the number of customers to 
30,000 by 202 1, at which point electricity demand is  forecast to  reach 110 GWh . Peak load is also projected to increase  
from 14 .4 MW in 2015 to 2 1.1 MW by 2020, spurred by an increased customer base, commercial developments 
connected to the Honiara grid, and demand which has been suppressed in the past due to SIEA’s insufficient capacity 
to generate, transmit and distribute electricity.   
 
Today, SIEA’ s total installed capacity ( all diesel generators except for th e 1 MW of PV commissioned in late -2016 ) is 
32.6 MW, but its available (de -rated) capacity is 30.7  MW. Many of the diesel units are also old and inefficient while 
others are effectively non -operational or have  reduced output , and are scheduled for decommissioning. SIEA plans to 
retire 7 MW in 2024, 3 MW in 2037 and 10  MW in 2039 . In the absence of the Project, and without new units, the 
available capacity in 2039 will be around 13.7 MW when also considering lower output of operating units due to 
superannuation.  By this time, peak demand is forecast to be almost 50 MW, and SIEA’s business -as-usual investment 
plan involves installing new diesel generators to serve the growing demand and to maintain a sufficient reserve margin.   
 
Describe the competitive environment including the list of  competitors with market shares and customer base  and key differentiating factors  (if 
applicable).  
The Electricity Act  also gives SIEA the authority to issue licens es to third parties to generate and/or distribute power.  
Due to the high cost of electricity and system unreliability, several businesses operate their own off -grid, diesel 
generation systems, but none are se lling electricity to consumers. Only Solomon Tropic al Products sell to the Honiara 
grid when requested by SIEA under what is understood to be a loose contract.  
Apart from the Project, there are no other IPPs being planned in Solomon Islands. A potential geothermal project of 10 -
20 MW on the Savo Island h ad once been explored, but the investor has expressed that it will exi t its interest from the 
project. The geothermal resource availability had not been confirmed and the risk of laying a submarine cable in the 
deep ocean trench between Guadalcanal Island (where Honiara is located ) and Savo Island had always been a 
concern, especially if two cables were to be installed to ensure N -1 redundancy.  
 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any).  
While the Pr oject sponsor was selected through a competitive process, only two bidders were pre -qualified and one of 
the bidders withdrew  due to its own corporate reasons before proceeding to the full bidding stage . Therefore, the


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 58 
 
 C 
Project cost and financing are now being negotiated between the Sponsor and the MMERE Project Office on behalf of 
SIG. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) is supporting the negotiations in order to ensure that the levelized 
cost of energy from the Project is at a level acceptable to SIEA . SIG will not provide direct subsidies, but will enter into a 
Government Guarantee Agreement and Implementation Agreement to undertake certain obligations such as the 
provision of land and facilitation of Project Company registration and operation. SI G is also willing to accept low returns 
on equity shares and accept the risk of on -lending concessional financing to the Project Company in an effort  to bring 
down the cost of the P roject as much as possible. Once the project agreements have been negotiate d between SIG, 
SIEA and the Sponsor, the Bank will appraise the substantially agreed docu ments to ensure that they are in compliance 
with the Bank’s requirements .   
 
The World Bank’s Procurement Regulations (July 2016) indicates that “The Bank may finance the cost of a project or a 
contract procured under PPP arrangements, such as build -own-operate (BOO), build -operate -transfer (BOT), and build -
own-operate -transfer (BOOT) concessions or similar types of private sector arrangements, if the selection: (a) is 
consistent with the Bank’s Core Procurement Principles; (b) reflects the application of the Bank’s Anti -Corruption 
Guidelines; and (c) is consistent, as appropriate, with the requirements set out in these Procurement Regulations” and 
that “The private part ner selected in accordance with Annex XIV, Public -Private Partnerships, then procures the Goods, 
Works, Non -consulting Services, and/or Consulting Services required for the facility from eligible sources, using its own 
procedures.” The Bank is in the proce ss of confirming that the selection of project sponsor satisfies this requirement. 
Preliminary findings indicate that it has.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
Provide  details of government licenses  or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the issuing authority, and the date 
of issue or expected date of issue.  
The Electricity Act of the Solomon Islands stipulates that SIEA, a body corporate set up under MMERE, is the authority 
to issue license to third parties to generate and/or distribute power. The legal due diligence executed by IFC on behalf 
of Government (and therefore, confidential) has concluded that there is no legal impediment to the proposed BOOT 
arrangement,  and that the Project Company “could produce and sell the electricity it generates to SIEA under a power 
purchase agreement”. This position has been confirmed by the Solomon Islands Attorney General’s Chambers. The 
Environment Act of 1998 and the Environme nt Regulation of 2008 require development consent for Project activities to 
be obtained from MECDM. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been undertaken and 
submission for development consent will be undertaken by K -Water. MECDM is regu larly briefed on the status of the 
Project and has not specified any concerns that would affect the granting of development consent.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations.  
The Project will likely  be eligible for tax exemption subject to application by the Project Company and evaluation by 
SIG’s Tax Exemption Committee. Under SIG’s obligations under the Implementation Agr eement , it will facilitate 
approvals upon application by the Project Company  to allow the Project Company to convert to US Dollars any and all 
Solomon Islands Dollars for the purposes of implementing the Project; and also permit the free transfer of all funds and 
financial settlements by the Project Company from the Solomon Islands necessary to implement the Project.  The 
Project Company is expected to be established by end -March to allow representatives to participate in World Bank 
negotiations in April 2017.  
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  
The PPA and the Implementation Agreement will require the Project Company to insure the Project in a prudent and 
proper manner in accordance with good industry practices. In addition, it is expected that the Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will provide four-point political risk cover (war, expropriation, currency inconvertibility and 
breach of contract coverage ) for the Project.  ‘Builders all risk’ insurance during construction is included in the project  
costs. The project will maintain operational insurance against physical damage and business interruption – this cost is 
included in the O&M cost estimate. Both MIGA  costs  and insurance  premium  will be covered by the PPA tariff.  
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementat ion Arrangement s


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 58 
 
 C 
Please describe in detail the governance  structure  of the project/programme, including but not limited to the  organization  structure, roles and 
responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities and so on , as well as the flow of funds structure .  
Also describe which of these structures are already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the 
requirements to establish them.  
As detailed in section C.3, the Project comprises four components, each with separate implementation arrangements.  
The Contractual Arrangements diagram attached as an annex to this Proposal illustrates the mapping of 
accountabilities for the Project. The P roject Office in MMERE will have overall responsibility for ensuring effective 
project implementation across the components. In addition, SIG will form a Steering Committee comprising Ministry of 
Finance and Treasury ( MOFT ), MMERE, MECDM and the Ministry o f Infrastructure Development (MID) ; and the donors  
will form a Donor Coordination Committee to collectively ensure adequate implementation and fiduciary control, as well 
as to streamline reporting requirements by SIG.  
 
Component 1: Tina River Hydropower Pl ant. The Project Company will be implementing agency which will develop 
the Tina River Hydropower Plant by contracting an EPC contractor. The Project Company will enter into a 34-year PPA 
with the SIEA, under which it will own and operate the hydropower plant and  sell the generated electricity to SIEA over 
the 30 -year operation period. The Project Company will also enter into a Government Guarantee Agreement and an 
Implementation Agreement with SIG. The Project Company will be established once SIG confirm s its equity 
participation into the Project Company. The likely shareholding structure is 51% K -Water and 49% SIG . At the request 
of the MOFT , the World Bank  has earmarked $20 million loan for SIG for this purpose.  
 
Debt financing totaling $ 135.87  million is proposed to be provided by concessional financiers including ADB  ($18 million 
loan and $12 million grant) , EDCF  ($31.6 million) , IRENA/ADFD  ($4.27 million)  and GCF  ($70 million) . It is expected 
that all loans will be lent to SIG , individually under separate loan agreements.  SIG will then on-lend to the Project 
Company  through respective subsidiary loan agreements,  while passing on the financing sources’ concessionality as 
much as possible.  
 
Component 2: Access Road.  The Project Company will also be the implementing agency for this Component. The 
access road is proposed to be funded by  GoA grant (up to approx. $ 9.0 million) and GCF grant ($16 .0 million ).  
Inclusion of the access road into the EPC contract for Component 1 is being  agreed between SIG  and K -Water. The 
decision was made to integrate the access road in the EPC contract in order to avoid the integration risk between the 
two contracts, whereby the road contract may not complete in time for the EPC contractor’s mobilization. The access 
road, however, is categorized as a separate component because its fixed cost will be ring -fenced and will be grant -
funded so that its cost will not drive the PPA levelized cost to levels beyond what is acceptable to SIEA. Subject to 
GoA’s financial approval processes and bu dget availability, t he anticipated grant funds from GoA would be transferred 
to a trust fund  administered by the World Bank  and would be managed together with its own resources. The trust fund 
has already been established within the World Bank  as GoA’s contribution for Project preparation is being executed by 
the World Bank  in the same manner.  
 
Component 3: Transmission Line. SIEA will be the executing agency which will develop the transmission lines by 
contracting a supply and install contractor, and own and operate it. Financing for the transmission line is expected to be 
sourced from the World Bank ’s allocation  ($4.7 million  of loan and $ 5.9 million of grant ) and IRENA/ADFD  ($10.73 
million), as well as counterpart financing by SIEA ($1.49 million).  The World Bank  and IRENA/ADFD  will, respectively,  
enter into a loan agreement with SIG which will on -lend the resources to SIEA under subsidiary loan agreement s. This 
implementation arrangement and fund flow is the same as the ongoing SISEP  financed by the World Bank . 
 
Component 4: Technical Assistance.  MMERE, represented by its Project Office, will be the executing agency to 
benef it from the technical assistance. It is proposed to be funded by a WB grant ($3 million) and GoA grant (up to $2 
million) . Subject to GoA’s financial approval processes and budget availability, the anticipated grant funds from GoA 
would be transferred to the same trust fund as the access road grant funds, administered by the World Bank  and 
managed together with its own resou rces.  The World Bank  will provide  the grant funds  to SIG under a financing 
agreement, and SIG will make budgetary allocations to MMERE to implement the various agreed technical assistance 
activities.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 58 
 
 C 
 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements.  
For Component 1, the Project Company and the EPC contractor will enter into a fixed -price  turnkey contract, and the 
works (Components 1 and 2) will be supervised by the Proj ect Company. In addition, the Project Office  will also  
supervise the construction to ensure that the laws and regulations of SIG are adhered to. In addition, the Independent 
Engineer, to be recruited and financed jointly by the Project Company and SIEA, will ensure that the provisions of the 
PPA are met. Furt hermore, DSAP, recruited by the Project Office under Component 4, will review the detailed design 
and construction to ensure the integrity and safety of the hydropower plant with a particular focus on the dam.  
 
The transmission line (Component 3) will be s upervised by SIEA with the assistance of a consulting firm which SIEA 
maintains on a retainer basis.  
 
The independent monitoring agents and the E& S Panel, recruited by the Project Office under Component 4 will ensure 
the enforcement of measures stipulated in the Environmental and Social Management Plan and the Land Acquisition 
and Livelihood Restoration Plan.  
 
See Annex: Contractual Arrangements  for a diagram of various legal agreements that will likely be executed as a 
part of each component of the project , as well as the monitoring and coordination mechanism.  
 
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completi on of construction.  If applicable, provide the credit analysis 
of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural mitigants to cover the counterparty risks.  
Under the BOOT arrangement, the Project Company will operate the Plant  for a concession period of 30 years. During 
this time, under the Implementation Agreement, the Project Company is required to provide training to SIEA personnel 
in preparation for handing over of the project to SIEA or other entities designated by SIG. SI EA will also engage 
financial and technical experts to determine whether the Project Company is meeting the terms of the PPA, including 
the commissioning of the hydropower facility.


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 58 
 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme  Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme  implementation  timetable  in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table  format below  is used, please refer to the act ivities 
as numbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be completed.  
 2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  
TASK Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20 Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24 
Output 1. Tina 
River Hydropower 
Plant                          
Activity  1.1. Sign 
PPA  ▼                       
Activity  1.2. 
Financial close      ▼                      
Activity 1.3. 
Procurement of EPC 
Contractor    ▼                      
Activity 1.4. Execute 
EPC contract ( major 
design  items )                         
Activity 1.5. Execute 
EPC contract 
(construction)                          
Activity 1.6 . 
Commissioning                     ▼     
Output 2. Access 
Road                          
Activity  2.1. Detailed 
design                          
Activity  2.2. 
Procurement of 
contractor                            
Activity  2.3. Execute 
works contract                           
Activity 2.4. Hand -
over        ▼                 
Output 3. 
Transmission Line                          
Activity 3 .1. Detailed 
design  IN 2016           COST 
UPDATE


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 58 
 
 C 
 2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  
TASK Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20 Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24 
Activity 3 .2. 
Procurement of 
contractor                            
Activity 3 .3. Execute 
contract                           
Activity 3.4. Hand -
over                   ▼      
Output 4. 
Technical 
Assistance                          
Activity 4 .1. Project 
Office S upport 
(contracting)                          
Activity 4.2 . Project 
Office Support 
(implementation)                          
Activity 4.3. Access 
Road Supervision 
Consultants 
(contracting)                          
Activity 4.4. Access 
Road Supervision 
Consultants 
(implementation)                          
Activity 4.5 . Expert 
Panels (contracting)                          
Activity 4.6 . Expert 
Panels 
(implementation)    ▼  ▼ ▼  ▼  ▼    ▼    ▼  ▼  ▼   
Activity 4.7.  
Independent 
Monitoring Agents 
(contracting)                          
Activity 4.8 . 
Independent 
Monitoring Agents 
(implementation)     ▼  ▼  ▼  ▼  ▼  ▼  ▼  ▼  ▼  ▼


---
*Page 26*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 58 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme , in consideration of  other alternatives . 
Component 1. GCF’s concessional financing (40 year tenor including grace period of 10 years with 0% interest) of 
$70 million is critical to reduce the financing cost  for the country’s first utility -scale hydropower plant to be developed 
and operated by the private sector. The Project costs are high since it will be located in a remote island with seismic 
and geotechnical challenges as well as the need to import virtua lly all construction materials, equipment and skilled 
personnel. Being the first BOOT project  in a remote island without precedents , with high perceived risks and little 
potential for expended market access, there is limited private investor interest, and the cost could not be reduced 
through competition. Without GCF’s concessional financing , the levelized cost of energy  per kWh of the Project will be 
higher than the levels acceptable for SIEA, especially given the current low level of global oil price s. GCF ’s 
concessional financing  will be instrumental in changing SIEA’s business model, displacing a significant portion of it s 
GHG -emitting diesel generators , and enabling the transformational step -change  to a predominantly renewable 
generation mix with the  progressive integration of grid -connected solar PV farms.  
 
Other alternative sources of concessional financing have been duly considered  for Component 1 . For private sources, 
as described above, there was little commercial bank appetite even with IDA partial risk guarantee (PRG) and with 
MIGA insurance. Regarding public sources of finance, various development partners were considered. Apart from the 
Accre diting Entity’s own IDA resources, the following financiers are considering support for  this transformational 
Project: ADB (Asian Development Fund resources) , EDCF of the Government of South Korea , and IRENA/ADFD . 
EDCF in particular has manifested its strong  interest to co -finance the Project with GCF.  
 
Component 2.  Access to the Tina River Hydropower Plant site is a challenge  given the difficult terrain and dense 
vegetation of the mountains of the Solomon Islands.  This is particularly true for the Project, since the site has been 
selected in the upstream stretches of the Tina River to avoid any physical relocation. The cost is further increased by 
the need to design the access road to withstand high intensity precipitation expected due to climate ch ange. While 
GoA is considering to provide $ 9 million grant for the access roa d construction, GCF grant of $16  million is also critical 
as no other sources of funds could be identified.  
  
D.2. Exit Strategy   
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability  will be ensured  in the long run, after the project/programme is implemented with support  
from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long -term financial viability demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description 
of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets (if applicable) . 
Once the Project is commissioned, the Project will generate stable revenue for the Project Company through available 
capacity payment by SIEA which w ill be sufficient to cover  the cost of construction , annual operation and maintenance 
(O&M) cost, periodic overhaul of electro -mechanical equipment typically at 10 year intervals , as well as the remaining 
SIG debt service beyond the 34-year concession period  (including 4 -year design and construction) . If the levelized 
cost of the energy of the Project can be lowered through the provision of GCF’s concessional financing , SIEA will be 
able to lower its cost -of-services and improve its financial position w hile also reducing the level of retail tariff to 
improve the welfare of the population and boost the country’s industry. Upon transfer of the facility to SIEA at the end 
of the 30 -year operation  period , the cost of electricity generated from the hydropower  facility will drop dramatically as it 
will only comprise O&M  costs  and residual debt service and equity costs  for an additional 7 years, in the case of 40 -
year repayment periods for GCF, EDCF, and IDA .


---
*Page 27*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the proposed  project/programme 
against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub-criteria and indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s 
Investment Framework , should be addressed where relevant and appl icable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in 
section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub -criteria and assessment factors in th e Fund’s 
investment framework .  
The Tina River Hydropower Development Project is a 15 MW hydropower project which will annually generate 78.35 
GWh of clean renewable energy to displace equivalent amount of energy generated by current and future diesel 
generators. Assuming grid emission factor of 650 tCO 2eq/GWh for a 100% diesel system, the net GHG emission  
reduction potential of the Project is 49,500 tCO 2eq per year  after deducting potential emissions during construction , 
land clearing, and the reservoir  following the World Bank’s “ Guidance Note: Greenhouse Gas Accounting for Energy 
Investment Operations ” (June 2013).  The GHG emissions reduction potential is higher than SIG’s commitment in the 
INDC to reduce emissions by 18,800 tCO 2eq per year by 2025 and by 31,125 tCO 2eq per year by 2030 with 
appropriate international assistance.  
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock -in of long -lived, high emission or cl imate -vulnerable 
infrastructure.  
A hydropower plant can typically have a life of over 50 years, even up to 100 years. T he Project will be developed on 
a BOOT basis with a conce ssion period of 30 years (plus 4 -year of design and construction) after which the facility 
will be handed -over to SIEA. The Project will be a free -source of clea n energy for SIEA  (except for nominal 
emissions during construction and from the reservoir) , and will dissuade SIEA to introduce new diesel units with high 
operating costs  and high GHG emissions . The Project’s dam has been designed to pro vide a dead storage volume of 
3.2 million m3 which is e xpected to only fill up after 65  years  under a base case  sediment inflow projection . The 
active storage volume will provide spinning reserves and load following capacity  which will  enable further penetration 
of intermittent renewables such as PV.  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  49,500  tCO 2 eq 
Lifetime  2.48 million  tCO 2 eq (over 50 years , 
noting that the life of the plant is likely to 
significantly exceed this period ) 
 Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries , disaggregated by gender  
(reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population , disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  180,000 individual members of SIEA 
customer households nation -wide will 
benefit from access to low -emission 
energy, reduced cost of electricity  and 
improved air quality  (in Honiara) ; of 
which 87,300 are women.  
Percentage 
(%) 27% of total population


---
*Page 28*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Examples include:  
 Expected increase in the number of households with access to low -emission energy  
 Expected increase in the number of small, medium and large low -emission power suppliers, and installed effective 
capacity  
 Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision -making  
 Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks  
 
Increase in generated renewable energy from  0.073 GWh (by SIEA’s  50 kW pilot PV) in 2015 to 
78.35 GWh by 2022 by the Project. The percentage of renewable energy generated will increase from 
0% (total system generation of 86.8 GWh) in 2015 to 6 5% (total projected demand of 120 GWh)  at the 
time of com missioning of the Project . 
  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided  
Energy generated by Project.  Average a nnual energy of 78.35 GWh generated by the Project has been calculated in 
detail in the feasibility study based on 30 years of observed and synthesized  hydrological data of the Tina River. 
Observed river discharge data for the Tina River is only available for 4 years from June 2010 to June 2014. Synthetic 
discharge data was produced by a runoff model using observed rainfall data from Henderson rain gauging station 
and Chupukarma rain gauging  station. The 30 -year synthetic discharge data produced through the hydrological 
analysis was used for the energy generation simulation model. The FS Hydrological Analysis Annex has been 
submitted as a part of this proposal.   The Project design has been op timized as a 15 MW (5 MW x 3 units) to achieve 
the highest net present value ( NPV). Details can be found in the feasibility study report (Phase 3 Report and Phase 3 
Addendum Report).  
 
GHG reduction by Project . The Honiara grid system is currently supplied 97% by diesel generators. SIEA’s 
investment plan, in the absence of the Project being developed as a BOOT scheme by a private investor, comprises 
only diesel generation. The energy generated by the Project, therefore, fully displaces current and future diesel 
generation of the same amount (i.e. 78.35  GWh per year). There is no official grid emission factor for the Honiara 
grid reported by MECDM, and is assumed to be 650 tCO 2e/GWh  using World B ank’s default emission factor for 
diesel generators . The gross GHG emissions reduction is, therefore, calculated to be 650 tCO 2eq/GWh  x 78.35 GWh 
= 50,900  tCO 2eq per year , or 2.55 million tCO 2eq for the Project life . 
 
GHG emissions from Project.  Potential GHG emissions from the Project comprises (i) emission from the reservoir ; (ii) 
land clearing,  and ( iii) those emitted during construction. Potential GHG emissions fr om the reservoir is calculated 
based on emission s factor of  4.5 tCO 2eq/GWh for a reservoir in a “tropical – wet” climate and with a power density of 
50 W/m2 and a plant factor of 60% . Power density is calculated by dividing the installed capacity (15 MW = 
15,000,000 W) by the reservoir surface area (305,000 m2). This emissions factor multiplied by the annual energy of 
78.35  GWh gives  annual emission s of 352.6 tCO 2eq. While the project life is assumed to be 50 years, the dam is 
conservatively assumed to be existe nt for 100 years, giving a life cycle GHG emission  of 35,26 0 tCO 2eq. 
 
Potential GHG emissions from land clearance  is calculated using the biomass density emission factor of 264 
tCO 2eq/ha for a “moist deciduous forest ”. The land expected to be cleared by the Project is 110 hectares (ha) 
including 30 ha of reservoir and land needed for the access road and transmission lines. Therefore, GHG emission is 
29,040 tCO 2eq. 
 
Potential GHG emission from construction activities is calculated by applying the construction emission factor of 1 
tCO 2eq/GWh. For 78.35 GWh production for 50 ye ars, the lifecycle GHG emission from construction is 3,900  
tCO 2eq.


---
*Page 29*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
 
Net GHG emission reduction.  The sum of potential GHG emission from the Project is calculated to be 68,20 0 tCO 2eq 
for the life of the Project . From the above, t he net life cycle GHG emissio ns reduction of the Project is 2.55 million – 
(35,260  + 29,040 + 3,900 ) = 2.48 million tCO 2eq, or 49,500  tCO 2eq per year  for the Project’s life of 50 years . 
 
 
Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender  
Number of beneficiaries. The number of beneficiaries have been derived from the number of households SIEA plans 
to connect by 2021 multiplied by the average size of households. SIEA has reported its current number of customers 
to be 15,500, and has embarke d on an ambitious electrification plan to increase the number of customers to 30,000. 
According to the Solomon Islands 2012/13 Household Income and Expenditure Survey  (published in October 2015), 
the average household size is 6.5 persons per household in H oniara. However, the national average household size 
of 6.0 persons per household to be conservative.  
 
Proportion of women.  According to the same survey, of the total population of 610,077, 295,929 are women 
equivalent to 48.5% of the total. The percentage  is 48.3% in Honiara, but the national data is used to be consistent 
with the household size used above. Therefore, the number of women benefiting from the Project is derived to be  
87,300.  
 
There would be more limited indirect beneficiaries compared to dir ect beneficiaries. Approximately 3,000 people 
(based on 2009 Census figures for the villages included in the benefit share area) of the Bahomea tribal area are 
expected to indirectly benefit from the project through the proposed benefit -sharing mechanism w hich will provide 
funds for community development investments.  
 
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator values for a similar 
project/programme in a comparable context).  
Comparable hydropower plants (in terms of capacity and RCC design) in nearby locations would include Nadarivatu 
in Fiji (40  MW) and Gazelle in Papua New Guinea (10  MW) compared to the proposed Project.  GHG emissions 
values are not available for these projec ts, but would b e expected to be very similar given similar climate and 
geographic conditions in the Melanesian region.  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity  can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication  (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s  expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate -resilient development pathways could 
be scaled -up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish it.  
Hydropower can leverage increased solar penetration to s cale up renewables on the Honiara grid. The cost of 
solar panels, inverters and energy storage systems have reduced drastically in recent years, but higher penetration 
of intermittent solar power requires a  firm generation source to balance the intermittent ou tput of solar farms. A 
hydropower plant with regulation capacity can respond quickly to variable  solar outputs and facilitate higher 
penetration of grid -connected solar power in the future. Diesel generators can also function as a backup, but it will 
requi re the units to be running at low outputs so that they can be ramped up instantly when solar outputs drop. This 
means that the generators will be running at low efficiencies which will, not only increase SIEA ’s cost of supply, but 
increase GHG emissions.  
 
The Project, therefore, is instrumental in transforming SIEA ’s Honiara grid from being almost 100% dependent on 
diesel generation to being a system with high penetration of hydropower and solar power . If the Project can facilitate 
the integration of 30 MWp of solar power into the Honiara grid, it will be able to annually displace approximately 45 
GWh of diesel -based electricity according to a  calculation using NREL PVWatts assuming solar insolation of 5.75


---
*Page 30*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
kWh/m2/day. Using the default emission factor of di esel of 650 tCO 2-eq/GWh, the emi ssions reduction potential is 
29,200 tCO 2eq/year on top of the 49,500  tCO 2eq/year expected from the Project.  
 
Overcoming barriers to development on customary  land. One of the most significant barriers to development in 
Solomon Islands is the securing of land for large scale investments due to the predominance of customary land in 
the country and the difficulty of reaching durable agreements on the use of such land.  If the innovative land 
acquisition process that the Project  has developed is sustainable, it will provide an instructive model for future 
investment projects in Solomon Islands and elsewhere in Melanesia, where similar challenges with customary land 
exist. In addition to introducing innovations into Solomon Islands statutory land acquisition process, the introduction 
of a benefit sharing mechanism , to ensure that communities in the project area receive direc t benefits from the 
Project , will further add to the lessons that can be drawn for improving the prospects of attracting foreign investment  
in the Pacific .    
  
Paving the way for more hydropower in Guadalcanal. Successful completion and operation of the Tina River 
Hydro facility would provide SIEA  with valuable experience in hydropower operation and build confidence in the 
prospects of investing in future hydropower project in Guadalcanal and elsewhere in Solomon Islands. The pre -
feasibility study for Tina Hydro identified sites further up in the T ina River catchment which would become more 
feasible with the Tina River facility in place. In addition to feeding the Honiara grid, an additional hydropower facility 
could offer lower cost electricity to the nearby  Gold R idge gold mine which is currently not operational due to high 
operational costs, including electricity. Other projects which have been developed in the past, but never realized, 
such as the 8 MW Komarindi hydropower project in Guadalcanal could also be revisited to displace further diesel and 
increase the proportion of renewable energy on the Honiara grid.     
 
Replicating hydropower BOOT in the Pacific. The “ Second Pacific Energy Investors Forum – Final Report ” 
prepared by the Pacific Power Association in August 2016 with funding from the Asian Development Bank  suggests 
that more governments in the Pacific are turning to IPPs to meet electricity demand. The report expects IPP installed 
capacity across the Pacific (including Papua New Guinea) to increase 7 -fold from 112 MW in 2016 to 745 MW in 
2021 of which most are renewable energy projects. The volume of investments is estimated to be over $2 billion, and 
the report emphasizes the need to overcome barriers such as (i) high cost environment due to remoteness and size; 
(ii) land rights issues ; (iii) difficulty in obtaining financing; (iv) capacity of governments/utilities to negotiate and 
undertake PPAs; and (v) current low diesel prices. These barriers are what the Project has been experiencing and 
overcoming. The experience and the business model created by the Project are expected to be replicated in the 
other small island development states (SIDS) of the Pacific who all face similar constraints.  
 
Replicating the hydro -PV hybrid model in the Pacific.  SIDS  of the Pacific also have low electr ification rates and 
high tariffs due to  heavy dependence on diesel oil. The average tariff for residential customers in the Pacific is 
reported to be ¢ 45/kWh and has hindered economic growth.3 Moreover, reliance on imported fuel poses an energy 
security threat, and also depletes limited foreign currency reserves.  All Pacific SIDS have abundant solar resources 
and the respective governments are keen to harness them.  The Project can be replicated in such Pacific nations to 
accelerat e the scaling up of solar power through provision of hydropower as the firm capacity to regulate the 
frequency to balance the variable output of solar.      
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the  creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning processes, or institutions.  
Knowledge and learning through Project preparation. The Project is the first utility -scale power plant in the 
Solomon Islands to be developed on a BOOT  arrangement. ID A, with financial support from the Government of 
Australia,  has been supporting SIG and the Project Office under MMERE to identify and develop a bankable 
feasibility study since 2007 to attract investor interest, and the IFC has been the transaction advisor to SIG providing 
support in the competitive selecti on of the investor and in negotiating  on the commercial terms of the BOOT scheme . 
Developing  large infrastructure and simultaneously introducing public -private partnership s in SIDS have  unique 
                                                             
3 2015. Pacific Power Association, Performance Benchmarking Report for Pacific Power Utilities , 2012 Fiscal Year


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
challenges, and all stakeholders have been exposed for the first time to planning and design of utility -scale 
hydropower project, optimization of the power system with generation sources other than diesel units, transparent 
and competitive selection of investo rs, commercial terms of the Project, government guarantees and undertakings, 
negotiation with private investors, financial structuring, environmental and social safeguards, benefit -sharing 
mechanism, gender action plan , etc. SIG has significantly buil t their capacities in all these areas with the support of 
global experts in hydropower planning and design, environmental safeguards, migratory fish, land acquisition, 
gender, climate change resilience, benefit -sharing, power system planning, finance, legal and  PPP. SIG is also 
benef iting from the continuous professional advice provided by the Dam Safety Advisory Panel and the 
Environmental and Social Panel to ensure that the Project is designed based on international best practice.  
  
Knowledge and learning during Project Operation. Pursuant to the Implementation Agreement and the PPA, the 
Project Company will operate the Project for 30 years. During this time, as per the requirement to be stipulated in the 
PPA, SIEA  personnel will  be trained to learn the O&M  of a hydropower plant. Since SIEA  does not have any 
experience operating a hydropower plant, the training program is critical for SIEA  to build its O&M capacity of the 
plant which will be handed -over to them at the end of the conces sion period. Such training will not only be on daily 
O&M of the plant, but also on optimization of reservoir operations including flood control functions of the dam, 
sediment management and flushing/sluicing, monitoring and management of environmental impa cts, periodic 
maintenance of major equipment, and replacement of electro -mechanical equipment after about 10-15 years.  
 
Since the Honiara grid has historically been supplied only by diesel generators, SIEA  will also have the opportunity to 
learn about hyd ro-thermal dispatch to optimize the system operation. The system will also initially include low 
penetration of grid -connected solar (currently 1 MWp) which is expected to increase significantly once SIEA  obtains 
experience in effectively using the Project ’s frequency regulation function to absorb the intermittency of the solar 
outputs.  
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of private and public sector 
actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the program.  
The Project is the first ever utility -scale power plant to be developed and operated by a private investor under a 
BOOT arrangement , and perhaps the largest development project in the country’s history . At 2015 GDP of $1.1 
billion, the $216.1 million project would represent 19% of GDP. The successful completion of the project would be a 
significant boost to investor confidence in the country. The Project is also a flagship public -private partnership (PPP) 
project where the hydropower facility would be built and operated by the private se ctor and access road and the 
transmission line are developed respectively by public sector agencies , MMERE and SIEA . MMERE has been 
instrumental in preparing a bankable feasibility study report, and MOFT is the champion for obtaining concessional 
financing  to bridge the financing gap between the expected return by the private investor and the acceptable level of 
PPA price expected  by SIEA  as the offtaker. The experience and knowledge obtained through this Project will equip 
SIG and SIEA  to attract interest of investors to invest in the Solomon Islands power sector. Given the high profile of 
the Project, its success is critical to send a positive message to prospective investors that SIG and SIEA  are serious 
and reliable partners for IPP/ BOOT projects. It is expected that the Project will pave the way for further private sector 
investment in the power sector, particularly in grid -connected solar power, in which SIEA  is already showing great 
interest.  As mentioned in section E.2.1, the Proj ect’s success is expected to boost investor confidence across the 
Pacific where there is growing interest in prospective renewable IPPs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically drive investment in low -
emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies, and/or improve climate -responsive planning and 
development.  
Legal due di ligence executed by IFC found that there are no legal and regulatory barriers for the development of the 
Project by a private investor, and t he preparation of the Project has so far not required reform of the legal and 
regulatory framework. However, discus sions on the implementation arrangements, government guarantee and 
undertakings, and the power purchase agreement have drastically developed the understanding of SIG and SIEA  to 
negotiate fairly and transparently with the private investor while also enhanc ing its understanding of appropriate risk 
allocation between the public and private players. Successful international tendering, negotiation, contracting and 
execution of a 30 -year PPA with an IPP for the purchase of clean, renewable energy will demonstrate the potential of 
future PPP activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits,  including gender -sensitive development impact  
Environmental co -benefits  
(a) Reducing a ir pollution. The nearly 100% diesel generation based system not only emits carbon dioxide, but 
cause s local air pollution through the emission of nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxides, hydrocarbons and particulate 
matters. While measurement data is unavailable, it is believed that emissions from the diesel generators have 
adverse impact on the ambient air qua lity of Hon iara. In particular, t he Lungga Power Station includes three 
generators with low efficiencies. Wind data from  Honiara’s Henderson Airport indicate  that the winds predominantly 
occur  from the east – northeast direction, so the emissions are belie ved to directly affect the population of Honiara. 
The Honiara Power Station (3.0 MW) has newer units commissioned in 2013, but  are located in the center of the city. 
There are also several establishments in Honiara which run their own captive diesel genera tors due to the high cost 
of SIEA’s retail tariff. The Project will displace SIEA’s diesel generation, and, by reducing the retail tariff, it will also  
reduce self -generation by diesel generators, thereby improving the air quality of Honiara.  
(b) Reducing noise pollution, and soil and water contamination. These diesel generators also cause noise 
pollution, and also have risks of contaminating the soil and water through spillage during transportation, storage and 
operation. Reduction of diesel generation res ulting from the Project will also reduce such risks.  
(c) Watershed management. Solomon Islands has abundant pristine forests, but they are being destroyed rapidly 
due to uncontrolled logging. The Project has prompted active discussions on protecting the upstream reaches of the 
Tina River watershed, because the natural water retention capacity of the watershed is dependent on preserving the  
forest , and rich vegetation prevents soil erosion and landslides which may increase inflow of sediments into the 
Project’s reservoir.  The benefit -sharing mechanism detailed  below is expected to include  activities conducive  to 
preserving the watershed, thereby conserving the natural habitat and its biodiversity.  
 
Social co -benefits  
(a) Stable and more affordable electricity retail tariff.  The tariff methodology of SIEA obliges SIEA to pass on the 
variable fuel cost to the consumers. While global crude oil prices are relatively low compared to its peak during 2011 -
2014, the customers in the So lomon Islands are expo sed to this  volatility. The fixed PPA price  will provide customers 
with a more stable , low tariff throughout the concession period. When the hydropower facility is handed over at no 
cost to SIG at the end of the concession period, the generation cost from the Project will be free , apart from minimal 
O&M costs , which will further lower the retail tariff. This would enable households to enhance their income earning 
capacity through use of power for productive and social purposes. Lower costs of power would al so reduce the costs 
of doing business for small and medium enterprises  (one of the most significant obstacles to private sector


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
development in the country) , thus increasing profits and stimulating investment and job creation leading to increased 
prosperity  for lower income households .  
(b) Lower cost of water supply. The Solomon Islands Water Authority (SIWA) is SIEA’s largest customer, and 
since its water tariff is linked to the electricity tariff, the reduction in the latter will benefit the population in  Honiara 
also with reduced water tariff.  
(c) Community development . A unique benefit -sharing fund will be established which directs a por tion of the net 
benefit of the P roject to the Tina River communities, providing them with direct management responsibility for the 
funds and the ability to invest according to the evolving needs of the communities. Japan Social Development Fund, 
administered by the World Bank  is expected  to provide seed -money to prepare the communities to manage the 
funds , and also to implement benefit -sharing activities prior to the generat ion of revenue from the Project, including 
job training,  electrification and rural water supply projects as requeste d by the communities.  
(d) Improved cultural and natural preservation.  The benefit -sharing mechanism designed to be implemented in 
conjunction with the Project will finance community -driven initiatives throughout the life of the Project to promote eco -
tourism, sustainable development through cultural preservation and appreciation of natural resources.  
 
Economic co -benefits  
(a) Creation of jobs and income opportunities. Unlike diesel generators or solar farms, construction of a 
hydropower plant requires greater number of laborers and subcontractors. The Project is expected to create more 
than 300  local jobs and benefit the local construction industry.  Under the Implementation Agreement, job seekers 
local to the Tina River locale will receive first prefere nce for these positions and will also be provided with pre -
employment and job skills training under a separate benefit -sharing scheme to be designed and piloted with funding 
from the Japan Social Development Fund.  
(b) Lower tariff promoting economic develo pment. In its National Development St rategy (NDS) for 2016 -2035 , 
SIG recognizes the need to provide affordable electricity in order to achieve increases in industrial productivity, as an 
essential element of the sustaina ble and inclusive growth goal. The lower retail tariff is expected to spur economic 
activities, create job opportunities and contribute to socio -economic development of the Solomon Islands . 
(c) Balance of Payments. SIG is extremely supportive of the Project since the import of diesel fuel m akes up a 
considerable portion of all imports. The oil price shock in 2008 and the high prices during 2011 -2014 have severely 
eroded the country’s balance of payments.  With the Project providing electricity US¢4.5/kWh lower (on a levelized 
cost basis)  than SIEA’s diesel production costs, it will help improve the balance of payments during the concession 
period, even though  payment of the PPA price  will continue to be made in foreign currency . After the concession 
period, SIG will be able to significantly im prove its balance of payment when the hydropower facility is handed over 
at no cost to SIG.  
(d) Disaster risk management . Honiara is located in the pathways of tropical cyclones and is frequently impacted 
by flooding. The devastating floods  of April 2014 impacted 52,000 people and left more than 10,000 people in 
evacuation shelters. Flooding caused widespread destruction of businesses, houses, and public infrastructure. Total 
damage and losses from the flooding are estimated  at $108 million or 9.2 percent of the gross domestic product. 
Although Tina River is only one of the rivers flowing into the Iron Bottom Sound, the regulation capacity of the 
Project’s dam will be able to control floodwaters. The dam can also protect the riparian communit ies from the 
frequent flash floods that are reported to occur in the Tina River basin.  
 
Gender -sensitive economic impact  
(a) Mainstreaming gender through  Land Acquisition and Livelihood Restoration Plan (LALRP).  Given that men 
are traditionally dominant in decision -making, the Project Office has held separate smaller consultation meetings for 
women and youth to empower them to speak their minds. From such meetings, specific livelihood restoration 
activities that b enefit women were formulated. As a key component of these consultations the Project Office has 
facilitated individual bank accounts for all tribal members, including women and children, to ensure land payments 
are received equally. Payments to children und er the age of 18 years are held in trust accounts exclusively for the


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
payment of school fees. Women representatives have reserved roles in the executive committees of the co -operative 
corporate entities established for each tribe to manage ongoing investme nt funds and 50% ownership in the core 
land management company.  Women are also engaged as community liaison officers with ongoing roles in 
facilitating community consultations, and have participated in the first round of business training provided to 
landowning tribes.  
(b) Employment opportunities and equal pay.  The LALRP and the Gender Action Plan (GAP) ensures that 
women are provided with job training and opportunities created by the Project, and that women receive equal pay for 
equal work.  The implement ation of the LALRP and GAP will be independently monitored by consultants 
commissioned by the Project Office under Component 4 of the project.  
(c) Small -scale community infrastructure. Through public consultations including consultations for the preparation 
of the GAP, it was found that affected women prioritized access to water supplies and job training. In particular, the 
supply of clean water was the priority of many women since they currently spend a significant amount of time to fetch 
water f rom the streams. The pilot benefit -sharing mechanism JSDF project intends to invest in developing community 
water supply systems to reli eve women from this drudgery as well as providing jobs training and working with SIEA 
to extend its distribution network .  
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the ben eficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the project/ programme addresses the 
issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for be neficiary country and groups , overall income level, etc ). 
As indicated above, Honiara is prone to floods as witnessed in the devastating event  of April 2014 which impacted 
52,000 people and left more than 10,000 people in evacuation shelters.  The access road (Component 2), therefore, 
must be designed to withstand high intensity precipitation expected to be caused by climate change. This entails 
constructing higher embankments with increased thickness of top course and base course, larger capac ity drains, 
and larger diameter of culverts for rainwater to flow underneath the road from one side to the other without washing 
away the road. Such climate -proof design considerations cause the construction cost to be extremely expensive and 
requires gran t funding.  
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
 Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population  
 Absence of altern ative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from addressing the needs of the 
country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
 Need  for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
Economic a nd social development level and affected population. Solomon Islands is a small island state with a 
population of 615,800  dispersed across more than 300 inhabited islands, and with a per capita GD P of $1,940 in 
2015. It has among the lowest population densities (19 persons/km2) and urban populations  (19%) in the world, with 
roughly 81  percent of the population living  in rural areas. The population of Honiara is 68,650 and the number of 
households is 10,630.  The economy has been growing at approximately 5% per annum on average since 2003 . 
 
The civil strife from 1998 to  2003, and briefly again in 2006, disrupted the functioning of state and social institutions 
resulting in a 40 percent decline in GDP. W ith the support of its neighboring countries  led by the Government of 
Australia, SIG restored law and order and other basic state functions, particularly in finance. In 2005, the Solomon 
Islands benefited greatly from substantial debt forgiveness, arrears clearance and complementary domestic debt 
restructur ing under the Honiara Club Agreement (HCA) . The economy rebounded based on commoditi es such as 
logging and mining, but the global financial crisis in 2009 hit the Solomon Islands hard resulting in a sharp 
contraction in output, a budget crunch and a deplet ion of foreign currency reserves.  The oil price spike of 2008 also 
added to Solomon Islands’ vulnerability as the country’s balance of payments came under severe pressure, because 
fossil fuel imports make up a signi ficant portion of all imports. Since powe r generation is  a major consumer of diesel 
fuel SIG started to consider options for development of domestic sources of energy, particular ly hydro and other


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
renewables. The National Energy Policy (2014) stresses the importance of renewable energy developmen t, and 
places high priority on the Tina River Hydropower Dev elopment Project .  
 
Absence of alternative sources of financing. While  the country had benefited from the HCA, the arrangement had 
also placed a moratorium on new loans, which made public financing of larger infrastructure projects difficult. While 
this moratorium has since been lifted, it gave an initial impetus to the driv e for private sector participation in 
infrastructure development, financing and operation - a policy that was later embedded in the National Dev elopment 
Strategy (2011 -2020). Thus, in 2008 , SIG requested the World Bank ’s support for development of the Proj ect on a 
BOOT basis . In line with the NDS, the National Energy Policy (2014) also promotes generation projects to be 
developed through private sector participation and specifically mentions the Project as its priority project to 
spearhead public -private pa rtnership.  
 
The Project was initially to be financed by the Project Company’s private equity and commercial loans. However, the 
capital investment costs could not be driven down through the competitive investor selection process due to lack of 
private sector interest. The high development  costs are the result of the need to import nearly all construction 
materials and skilled labor, high contingencies due to unfamiliar and potentially unpredictable working environment, 
challenging geological and seismic  environment that requires conserv ative design, as well as the perceived offtaker 
risk and government risk since this is the first large BOOT project in the history of the Solomon Islands.  
 
While the Project Office has endeavored to negotiate with the spo nsors to reduce the base  cost (i.e. the EPC cost), it 
was determined that it is unlikely to significantly reduce further  due to the lack of precedent in the Solomon Islands, 
the challenging geological, topographical and seismological conditions, and the sp onsors ready to accept a relatively 
low return on equity . Therefore, in order to lower the total projec t cost to levels that translate  into a levelized cost of 
energy that is low enough for SIEA  to offtake the energy, the collective efforts of SIG, the World Bank  and IFC turned 
to mobilizing concessional funds to lower the financing costs. The World Bank  and the Asian Development Bank 
have  committed, in principle, $33.6 million and $30.0 million, respectively, but further financing from these two 
sources  is not possible due to the ir respective country allocation ceilings and their need to support activities in the 
other sectors  in the country . SIG has reached out to the Government of South Korea’s EDCF which is the 
concessional arm of the Korean Export -Import Bank  (KEXIM) which is keen to support the project with concessional 
financing of up to $ 31.6 million, particularly if there is GCF co -financing.  In addition, the Government of Australia 
intends to finance part of the cost of the access road to be developed by SIG, and a portion of the World Bank ’s 
financing will be directed to the development of the transmission line to be constructed  by SIEA. In addition, 
IRENA/ADFD  announced in January 2017 that it will provide a  concessional loan of $15.0 to SIG for the Project.  
 
Despite such efforts, additional concessional financing is required especially due to the recent low cost of diesel. 
While SIEA  understands that the Project will protect itself from volatility of future  oil prices and potentially oil price 
spikes that it experienced not so long ago in 2008 (Brent spot price reached $138/barrel) , recent low oil price levels 
have promoted unfounded expectations that oil prices will remain low. Diesel generation is also wit hin SIEA ’s comfort 
zone as it has been operating it for decades, and a departure from near -100% reliance on diesel generation will need 
a strong financial advantage over its standard practice. It is of critical importance to reduce the financing cost, and 
therefore the total project cost  of the Project , so that the Project ’s levelized cost becomes  sufficiently  lower.   
 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  As mentioned in sections E2.2 and E2.3, the 
Project is the first utility -scale hydropower project and is also the first BOOT project . Areas requiring institutional 
strengthening are as follows:  
(i) MMERE Project Office has been instrumental in preparing a bankable feasibility study, selecting sponsors 
through a transparent and competitive process, negotiating with the sponsor on technical and commercial 
aspects of the Project, preparing safeguards documents, implementing  land acquisition including numerous 
rounds of consultations, outreach programs and gender mainstreaming efforts, assisting the Ministry of 
Infrastructure Development in the design of the access road, and, most importantly, being the champion of the 
Projec t. Over the years, with the support of the Bank (with financing from various development partners 
particularly the Government of Australia) and IFC, the Project Office has significantly developed its capacity. 
Their capacity on project preparation will con tinue to be strengthened as the Project enters the final stages of 
negotiation with the sponsor and financial close. However, it will need to build its capacity on implementation


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
including project management, monitoring and management of environmental and social impacts, watershed 
management, further community outreach and managing the requests (and potential complaints) as the Project 
becomes a reality for the affected people, implementation of the livelihood restoration programs and the benefit -
sharing me chanism, etc. A portion of the World Bank ’s IDA allocation and the GoA grant is expected to support 
the Project Office to execute these activities and to re tain necessary experts under Component 4.  
(ii) SIEA , as the off -taker of the Project, has been the entity  representing SIG in granting the exclusive development 
right to the prospective sponsor, and has developed its  capacity significantly on commercial and technical terms 
of the PPA. SIEA  has also advanced its understanding on utility -scale hydropower planni ng, design and 
operation, as well as on system planning involving more than just diesel generators. Going forward, it will need 
to develop its capacity on optimized dispatch of a thermal -hydro system and familiarize itself with reservoir 
operations since c apacity payment to the Project Company means that, while the Project assets are owned and 
operated by the Project Company, SIEA  will instruct its operation as if it were its own. At the moment, financial 
support has not been requested, but the World Bank  will consider providing assistance if requested. In the 
longer -term, the Project Company is responsible under the PPA to train SIEA  personnel on the operation of the 
hydropower plant as the assets  will be handed over to SIG at the end of the concession pe riod.  
(iii) MOFT  has been engaged in the Project discussion as the ministry representing SIG on the Government 
Guarantee Agreement and the Implementation Agreement. It has since significantly stepped up its involvemen t 
as concessional financing beca me necessary  for the Project.  MOFT is taking the lead on attracting  concessional 
financing, and is leading the discussions with the World Bank , Government of Australia, ADB, EDCF, and  was 
the initial point of contact for discussions with the GCF Secretariat. It has also reached out to prospective 
financiers including the European Investment Bank, IFC Investment and IRENA/ADFD , and has successfully 
secured a concessional loan of $15 mil lion from IRENA/ADFD  Through this experience, MOFT has drastically 
strengthened its literacy on project finance and on its function to onlend such funds to the Project Company.  
Furthermore, in an effort to reduce the Project’s financing cost, MOFT has agr eed in principle for SIG to hold 
49% of the Project Company’s shares using the World Bank ’s IDA loan while expecting a nominal return on 
equity which will only be sufficient to administer and service the loan. MOFT expects SIG to hold interest in the 
Proje ct Company through its public investment vehicle called ICSI which manages government’s stake in the 
state -owned enterprises. However, as it will be their fi rst experience to hold shares in  a private special pur pose 
company, institutional strengthening is required. Once the arrangement is decided, the World Bank  will perform 
a financial management assessment and will consider providing support in ensuring adequate fiduciary control 
and governance.  
(iv) MMERE  has been a strong supporter of the Project and has prioritized the Project in the  NEP. It is expected that 
the success of the Project will open up to more renewable energy development, and promote further private 
sector investment as SIEA  will be seen as a credible offtaker. MMERE’s responsibility is to institutionalize the 
Project’s experience so that the lessons learned are fully reflected in its effort to create an enabling 
environment. It may be noted that the Project, with the support of the World Ban k and partner s such as the 
Government of Australia, had been able to accommodate a long gestation period, but future renewable energy 
projects which are expected to be of a smaller scale  will not be able to endure long lead times involving 
negotiation on numerous issues. MMERE will have to facilitate the creation of a favorable environment 
conducive to private sector investment in renewable energy.  
(v) MECDM  has been instrumental , as the National Designated Authority for GCF , in interfacing with the  GCF 
Secretariat and spearheading  the Project’s access to GCF financing.  As the Project becomes firm, MECDM will 
need to update the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) since GHG reduction potential of this 
Project – which is b y far the larg est contributor in  curbing GHG emissions – needs to reflect the detailed 
calculation conducted by the World Bank . MECDM will also need to build its capacity in monitoring and 
evaluation of actual GHG reductions, as well as ensure that the environmental imp acts of the Project and future 
renewable energy projects are adequately managed by the developer.  In addition, since the Nationally 
Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) have not been prepared, MECDM may require assistance to formulate 
it. 
 
E.5.  Country  Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate -resilient development, and 
the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
The relevant climate polices and strategies, and the coherence of the Project is as follows:  
Solomon Islands National Climate Change Policy (N CCP). As a small island development state which emits 
relatively small volumes of GHG , and is at the receiving end of the impacts of climate change, particularly the rising 
sea level, the NCCP for 2012 -2017 places greater focus on country’s adaptation policy. However, it does stress its 
commitment to s trengthen the capacity of the g overnmen t, private sector and other relevant  institutions to develop 
and implement renewable energy strategies . It also stresses that SIG will need new technology for mitigation, and 
further articulates that t echnology  transferred for use in Solomon Islands should  be proven and adaptable,  
environmentally friendly, appropriate to user, culturally friendly, and can be  managed on a sustainable basis.  The 
hydropower technology adopted by the Project is in alignment  with the needs of SIG.  
 
INDC. SIG has committed in its  Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to reduce emissions by 45% 
below 2015 levels (approximately 700,000 tCO 2eq per year ) by 2030 with appropriate international assistance. It is 
reported that 95% of the national emissions inventory derives from fossil fuels, with carbon dioxide being the only gas 
targeted for emission reduction as it comprised 95% of the inventory.  
Solomon Islands’ conditional contribution (with international assis tance) aims to  reduce emissions by 18,800 tCO 2e 
annually by 2025  below 2015 level , and by 31,125 tCO 2e annually by 2030 , of which 39% of the reduction will be 
from the power sector. Starting from y ear 2020, this equates to a total reduction of 218,500 tCO 2eq by 2030. The 
INDC lists the Project as the one with by far the largest mitigation option with a potential to reduce 319,355 tCO 2eq 
by 2030, which is 150% of the total reduction target. The Project is not included in the total reduction since the 
contribution to the Project is “conditional on adequate and timely international assistance”.  
The Project’s cumulative emission reduction potential up to 2030 in the INDC has been calculated using a much 
larger amount of energy being generated by the Project which seems to be based on an earlier pre -feasibility study 
report which envisaged a cascad e development of two hydropower plants in one river. As indicated in section E.1, 
the latest design envisages annual generation of 78.35 GWh which will displace diesel generation to reduce emission 
by 49,500  tCO 2eq per annum.  
 
Solomon Islands National Ene rgy Policy.  As detailed in section C.1, SINEP establishes a target to “i ncrease the 
use of renewable energy sources for power generation in urban and rural areas to 50% by 2020.” The Project’s 15 
MW installed capacity will generate 78.35  GWh per annum which is 6 5% of the 120 GWh demand projected in 2022 
when the Project is scheduled to come on line.  
 
NAMAs.  Not prepared by MECDM yet.  
 
NAPAs/NAPs. Not relevant as Project is a mitigation project.  
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
Please describe experience and track re cord of the accredited entity and  executing entities  with respect to the activities that  they are expected to 
undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
The World Bank  is the Accredited Entity. The World Bank, through its International Development Association ( IDA) 
operations,  has a proven track record in the energy sector of the Solomon Islands. It has been providing assistance 
to SIEA since 2008 through the ongoing Sus tainable Energy Project (SISEP; originally for $4 million -equivalent) for 
which an additional financing was approved in 2013 for $13 million equivalent. The objective of SISEP is to assist  
SIEA to develop its technical, operation and financial management capacities, as well as supporting its investments 
to augment the Honiara grid system.  The World Bank has also recently approved in July 2016 the Electricity Access 
Expansion Project (SIEAEP ; $2.5 million from the Global Partnership on Output based Aid) which aims to provide 
targeted subsidies to help the low -income households pay the one -off upfront initial connection fees.  The Project is


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
expected to contribute to SIEA and SIG’s target to in crease the customer base from 15,500 currently to 30,000 by 
2021.  
With regards the Project, the World Bank has been supporting the Project and SIG since its identification in 2006. By 
utilizing financial support from development partners such as the Gover nment of Australia and the European 
Investment Bank, the World Bank has been supporting the preparation of a bankable feasibility study, selection of an 
investor through transparent and competitive bidding procedure, preparation of safeguards documents, fa cilitating 
the arrangement of concessional finance, and ensuring that international best practices are adopted in all aspects of 
the Project.  
 
Consortium of Korea Water Resources Corporation and Hyundai Engineering (K -Water -  HEC) are the 
preferred Projec t sponsors responsible for securing financing, development and operation over the concession 
period, while HEC is al so the preferred EPC Contractor. K-Water was founded in 1967 and operates 16 multi -
purpose dams and integrated regional water supply systems  in South Korea. It is also the leader in renewable energy 
and operates 25% (1,335 MW) of all domestic renewable energy installments. Since 1994, K-Water has also 
aggressively advanced its overseas business , and is now engaged in 32 overseas projects in 21  countries. This 
includes the Patrind Hydropower Project (150 MW; $ 436 million) in Pakistan under a 34-year BOT concession. 
Another example is the Angat D am Project (218 MW; $469 million) in the Philippines for which a concession has 
been granted for 50 ye ars since November  2014.  On top of such international experience as the project sponsor of 
hydropower projects, K-Water’s net worth of $11,000 million (2013) also demonstrates their financial strength to 
undertake the Project as the main project sponsor.  
 
Solomon Island Electricity Authority (SIEA)  is the Project off-taker and will also invest in the transmission line to 
distribute power from the Project. It is also the body authorized, under the Electricity Act, to issue license to third 
parties to generat e electricity. Until 2011, SIEA was in financial crisis and close to  insolvency, with severe cash -flow 
problems and with poor and inconsistent information  available to management.  However, by the  end of 2011, SIEA 
had improved its cash flow position by foc using on key aspects of the  commercializa tion program that SISEP 
supported . As a result of such efforts, SIEA, made a drastic turnaround from losses  until 2010  to a net profit of 
SBD68 million in 2012, increasing  since to SBD107 million in 2015. SIEA, therefore, is a viable offtaker. SIG will also 
guarantee the obligations of SIEA under the Government Guarantee Agreement.  As the executing entity of the 
transmission line component, SIEA has substantial experience developing and operating transmission lin es, and is 
also familiar with the World Bank’s relevant policies including those on safeguards, procurement, financial 
management and anti -corruption.  
 
Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MOFT) represent SIG in the Government Guarantee Agreement and the 
Implementation Agreement. It will facilitate mobilization of concessional financing, and may also lend to the Project 
Company and/or hold equity stakes in the Project Company on behalf of SIG;  as well as provide  funds to MMERE for 
the construction of the road and to SIEA for the construction of the transmission line. As indicated in section E.4.2, 
MOFT has significantly developed its capacity to understand  its obligations and is likely to honor them as a 
shareholder of the Project Company.  
 
Ministry of Mines, Energy and Rural Electrification (MMERE) is responsible for supervising the  Project through its 
Project Office (PO), and will jointly represent SIG with MOFT in the Implementation Agreement. More detail regarding 
MMERE’s capacity has bee n provided above in section E 4.2.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs , civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description  of the steps taken to ensure country ownership , including the engagement with NDAs on the funding proposal and 
the no -objection lette r. 
The Project has been  a priority, national  impact project since the initial set -up of a Project Office in the Ministry of 
Mines, Energy and Rural Electrification in 2010. Every y ear since the creation of the Pro ject Office , the Solomon 
Islands Government has provided national budget financing for the operation of the P roject Office, including between 
5-8 staff, office costs, community engagement, and project preparation activities. Strong support has been expressed 
by all three of the Prime Ministers which have served during this period, with the project often cited in speeches. 
MEC DM, the NDA for Solomon Islands, has been supportive of the project from the beginning. The Ministry has


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
provided advice on processes for development consent for a private developer/operator, provided feedback on draft 
social and environmental reports, participated actively in government task force meetings on the project and is 
actively supporting this proposal. The National Climate Change Policy, 2012 -2017, development by MECDM , 
identifies hydropower as one of the most significant investments that could b e made to reduce GHG emissions. The 
NDA has provided significant support to the World Bank as the Accredited Entity to prepare this funding proposal, 
and has cited the Project when signing the immunity and privileges agreement with GCF’s Interim Executive Director 
at the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly on 21 September 2016. The no -objection letter issued by 
the NDA is attached.  
 
The public is informed about project developments on a regular basis through the media and through community 
cons ultations. The P roject Office has an active program of community engagement that informs those affected as to 
project developments and the way in which the project will affect them. Community -based groups, local government 
(ward, provincial and national MP), engage in community and other P roject Office-facilitated discussions to share 
their views on the project.  The Project Office also conducts consultations with local and international NGOs with a 
presence in Solomon Islands.           
 
Please also specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal was developed.   
In 2012, the Project Office  prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (submitted as part of this proposal) which laid 
out specific actio ns for engaging with each stakeholder group, including the form (i.e. meetings, radio, etc.) and 
frequency of the activities. This Plan has provided a guide for stakeholder engagement over the few years, since it 
was developed. Targeted consultations and i nterviews have also been conducted for various studies including the 
feasibility study, social assessment, environmental assessment, land identification and acquisition, and gender 
assessment. The Project Office  also keeps a record of every meeting held in  the field, in their office or elsewhere, 
including the date, location, participants, topics discussed and actions to be taken. The Project Office  has recorded 
more than 2 50 meetings over the last 5 years.   
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addr essing existing 
bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality;  and without crowding out private and other public  investment.  
Given t he low oil price environment,  drop in the price of diesel generation and lack of consensus on future oil price s, 
the financial structure has been adjusted  from the initial assumption of mainly commercial financing, to optimiz e 
concessional debt finance so as to achieve parity between the hydropower generation cost and current diesel 
generation cost.  The level of private sector equity investment remains at a level that optimizes private investment and 
provides sufficient incentiv es to the private investors to perform their obligations under the PPA and other project 
agreements.  
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ adaptation impact that the 
project/pr ogramme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference t o 
E.6.5 ( core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
High cost environment. The cost of the hydropower plant is expensive compared to international standards, but is 
efficient  in the context of the Pacific Islands. Due to the remoteness , its inability to harness economies of scale, the 
need to import nearly all equipment and mater ials, and absence of a market and competition , the Pacific Island 
states all suffer from the high cost environment.  Even among the small island development states of the Pacific, the 
development cost in Solomon Islands is higher than countries with higher GDP/capita with a stable socio -economic 
environment and a track -record in hydropower development such as Fiji and Samoa. ADB has reported that a 
hydropower project it financed in Papua New Guinea (similar GDP/capita but with a larger power system and a tra ck-
record in developing multiple hydropower plants) had a unit based cost of  around $6 -7 million/MW , but explained that 
the project benefited from the rapid depreciation of the local currency during the bidding process which lowered the


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
cost of civil works  denominated in the local currency. It may be noted that a civil works contractor with experience to 
develop a sizeable hydropower plant cannot be found in the Solomon Islands.     
A conceivable  alternative renewable energy source would be solar PV, but th e 1 MW p solar farm which is being 
commissioned by SIEA now (grant funded jointly by the governments of the United Arab Emirates and New Zealand) 
cost $4.21 million without the cost of land. The unit investment cost of $4.21 million/MW p is also extremely expensive 
compared to other parts of the world. It is worth noting that the very first pilot 50 kW p installed on the rooftop of 
SIEA’s parking lot cost the Japan International Cooperation Agency $450,000  in 2015 , which is equivalent to $ 9 
million/MW p. This does not demonstrate that the unit cost has reduced between the two solar projects, but points to 
the fact that a lack of economy of scale leads to extremely high costs. Generally, it is an important reminder  that the 
cost of this Proje ct should not be compared with the cost of alternatives in different parts of the world.  
Land constraints  to new, alternative projects . Due to the complex nature of customary land in the Solomon 
Islands (as well as in most other countries  in the Pacific), the availability of land for the Project is an immense 
advantage. While all the compensation has not be en paid yet, SIG identified five tribes who claim customary rights 
over the Project site through a customary process, and has successfully agreed on the terms of the compensation. 
For an alternative project of equal magnitude, it is expected that several years will be needed to settle the customary 
land issue. It may be noted that the land acquired for the Project is mostly around a mountain valley with st eep 
slopes  ideal for a hydropower project , and therefore inefficient to introduce other alternatives such as solar PV.  
Hydropower facilitates  step-change  in solar integration . It may be possible to introduce increments of solar PV, 
but (i) land acquisitio n is a challenge  especially if many small patches of land are required in different parts of 
Honiara to distribute the PV farms in order to mitigate the risk of a small cloud causing output drops across all 
facilities;  (ii) continuous financial support for  numerous small projects will be necessary since capital cost of solar is 
also very expensive  in the Solomon Islands , and (iii) there is a limit to the penetration level of solar due to its 
intermittency as well as the lack of inertia it gives to the power  system.  
Efficient  and effective  GHG emission reduction  by hydropower . The actua l data on the performance of SIEA’s  
50 kW p pilot rooftop solar indicates that the plant factor is 21% on average over a year. Since any solar farm in the 
same region can be ass umed to have a similar plant factor, it can be said that the plant factor of solar is one -third of 
the Project which has a plant factor of 61%. This means that for solar to produce the same amount of energy  as the 
Project , and therefore displace the same a mount of energy and reduce GHG emission from diesel generation, 45 
MW of solar is needed. Assuming 1 ha is needed for 1 MW of PV, acquiring 45 ha of relatively flat land would be a 
great challenge in Honiara.  
Least -cost capacity expansion. Ultimately, the effectiveness of the Project cannot be measured by assessing the 
Project against another alternative in an either -or situation. Therefore, SIEA has diligently commissioned a least -cost 
generation capacity expansion analysis to understand the most efficient  combination of generation sources  to serve 
growing demand. While details of this analysis is provided in section F.1, the analysis found that the best least -cost 
option is a combination of the Project, new solar PV with and without storage, and limited capacity of diesel 
generators.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co -financing ratio  (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the project/programme)  and/or the potential 
to catalyze indirect/long -term low emission investment.  
The total Project cost is $ 233.98  million. Financing from the various sources  excluding GCF  is expected to be 
$147.98  million, while the requested GCF financing is $ 86 million. Th e co-financing ratio is 1.72. 
 
The Project ’s ability to provide spinning reserves and load following reserves will enable a higher penetration of solar 
PV. Assuming that 15  MW of solar will be in tegrated at the unit cost of $3.0 million /MW, the co-financing volume is 
increased from $ 147.98  million to $ 192.98  million, thereby increasin g the co -financing ratio to 2.24.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected e conomic and financial rate of return  with and without the Fund’s support, base d on the analysis conducted in F.1. 
Financial viability is particularly important for Component 1. As explained in section F.1, sensitivity analysis around 
the availability and volume of  GCF concessional loan has demonstrated that the Project will not be able to provide 
the required return on equity to the private investor at the level of PPA price acceptable to SIEA without the provision 
of $70 million from GCF.  
 
Please describe  financia l viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
The GCF fu nd is requested to partially debt finance the Project which will be developed by the Project Company 
under a BOOT modality. The GCF loan will be close to fully serviced by the end of the 34-year concession period  (as 
most concessional financing will provide for a 40 -year repayment period) , and once the facility is transferred to SIG, 
SIEA will be able to generate at no cost except for the minimal O&M costs  and residual SIG debt service . SIEA will 
also conduct O&M for the transmission line , and SIG will maintain the access road  as part of its national road system . 
Given that hydropower plants typically have a life of more than 50 years and even up to 100 years, the financial 
viability of the  Project is robust.  It may be noted that the Feasibility Study has indicated that under the base case 
sediment inflow scenario (50,000 m3/year), the dead storage of the reservoir will only be filled up after 65 years, and 
can be further extended with regul ar flushing operations.  Even if the dead storage is filled up, sediment removal is 
possible by dredging especially since the reservoir is not that deep. The Feasibility Study estimates this cost to be 
approximately $1.0 million every five years.  
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy  in case of private sector operations  (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.).  
The Project will be developed under BOOT modality  whereby the Project Company will develop and operate the 
Project for 30 years and transfer the facility to SIG at th e end of the concession period. GCF financing will be paid off 
by SIG after the 40 year life of the proposed loan, by which time SIG would have taken ownership of the facility and 
would be experiencing a significant reduction in electricity costs as a result of not having to make PPA payments 
after the 30 year PPA operating period , but rather only covering the costs of O&M  and debt service of  SIG loans as 
well as any equity returns to SIG investors  during Years 34 to 40 .  
Through the O& M training provided during the concession, SIEA is expected to build capacity to conduct O&M by 
themselves . Since the cost of the facility would be substantially amortized by the end of the concession , SIEA will 
easily be able to finance the O&M cost out of the large savings it enjoys when the Project is transferred to them.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
Hydropower is a well -established renewable energy technology which delivers dispatchable  energy to the system 
and can also function to provide ancillary services including spinning reserves and load following (frequency control) 
capacity . In addition, hydropower plants provide “inertia ” to the system which helps the system to be stable under 
conditions of varying load and/or output of other generators. Other renewables such as solar and wind are not able to 
provide such functions, and while it is not a problem from the grid operation perspective when the penetration is low, 
such intermittent r enewable sources without inertia will destabilize the grid once the penetration is high. Since the 
Project is aimed, not to make incremental increase s of renewable energy, but to transform SIEA’s grid from being 
supplied nearly 100% by diesel to a system w ith a major renewable energy share, hydropower is the best available 
technology.  
 
As described in E.2, there are a number of innovations on land acquisition, land management and benefit sharing 
that will provide best practice examples for Solomon Islands and elsewhere.  The land acquisition process utilized the 
compulsory acquisition division of the Land and Titles Act, but it added several activities including: the use of 
traditional/indigenous leaders to identify land owners through customary processes; t he signing of a Process 
Agreement between landowners and government which was a condition of land acquisition and which provided 
ongoing benefits to landowners such as royalties; establishment of tribal accounts for every tribal member to receive 
an equal portion of compensation and royalties directly; establishment of a joint landowner/government land


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
management company which will allow previous landowners to still play an active role in the management of land 
which they sold to the government.  
 
A benefit  sharing mechanism would channel 15% of the ongoing net benefit of the hydropower facility (derived from 
the savings between diesel and hydropower prices) to the affected community. A fund shall be established to receive 
and manage the funds and the commun ity shall be assisted to establish governance arrangements and procedures. 
An initial investment in water supply, extension of the electricity grids into local communities and job training shall be 
provided as early benefits during the construction period,  before the benefit sharing funds begin to flow. This initial 
investment and the design of the benefit share fund are components of the Japan Social Development Fund project 
which is being prepared in parallel.  
    
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
(a) Total project  financing  $233.98  million   
(b) Requested  GCF amount  $86 million   
I Expected lifetime emissi on reductions overtime  2.48 million  tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c)  $94.54  / tCO 2eq 
I Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed  (e = b / c)  $34.75  / tCO 2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators  (d) and I above.  
The lifetime GHG emission reduction, as detailed in section E.1.2, is 2.48 million tCO 2eq (over 50 years, 
noting that the life of the plant is likely to significantly exceed this period) , or 49,500  tCO 2eq per year.  
 
The following is a s ummary of the calculations made to determine the expected lifetime emissions reductions overtime.  
Generation Emissions from Diesel  (Counterfactual)  
Annual Energy  78.35  GWh    
EF of Diesel  650 tCO 2eq/GWh  
Annual Baseline Emissions  50,900  tCO 2eq/GWh   
Baseline emissions - tCO2e  (annual)  50,900  
Project emissions -tCO2e  
(annual)  Reservoir Emissions  705.2  
Land Clearing  580.8  
Embodied Material and Energy 
Emissions during Construction  78.4 
Net Annual Emissions (annual)   -49,500  
Total Net Emissions (over 50 years)  -2,48 million   
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 58 
 
 
 E 
As indicated in section E.6.2, GCF financing of $ 86 million is expected to leverage $ 147.98  million of co -
financing for the Project alone. The indicative breakdown of the $ 147.98  million is as follows:  
 
Public  Sources  
- World Bank IDA  ................................ .................  $33.6 0 million  (of which $8.9 million is grant)  
- ADB Asian Development Fund  ..........................  $30.0 0 million  (of which $12.0 million is grant)  
- Government of Australia  ................................ .... $11.00 million  (all grant)  
- IRENA/ADFD  ................................ .....................  $15.0 0 million  (all loan)  
- Gove rnment of South Korea (EDCF)  ................  $31.60 million  (all loan)  
- SIEA  ................................ ................................ ..... $1.49 million  (counterpart financing)  
Public Total  ................................ ................... $122.69  million  (83% of co -financing)  
 
Private  Sources  
- Sponsor  ................................ .............................  $25.29  million  
Private Total  ................................ .................... $25.29  million  (17% of co -financing)  
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
The volume of public concessional financing including GCF was derived based on a financial model to 
achieve a levelized cost of energy which is lower than that of SIEA’s business -as-usual scenario that is 
nearly fully dependent on diesel g eneration, while securing appropriate return to the private sponsors. As 
indicated in section B.3, the private sponsor’s return will be between 13% and  15%.  
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a co mparable context.   
The cost of the hydropower plant is expensive compared to international standards, but is reasonable in 
the context of the Pacific Islands  which all suffer from the high cost environment due to the remoteness 
and small scale  of developm ent. The expected equity return of 13 -15% is industry standard, and is in line 
with the p referred sponsor’s experience with  hydropower BOOT projects in other countries.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)  An estimated 300 jobs will be created during the 
period of construction and 25 -30 jobs will be created 
for operations and mainten ance.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 58 
 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the  detailed economic and financial analysis  (including the financial model, taking into consideration 
the information provided in section  E.6.3). 
Feasibility study -level economic analysis.  Economic analysis for the Project was conducted under the Feasibility 
Study Phase 3 in 2014, and updated in November 2015, by comparing “with Project” against “without Project” cases 
for the 50 year horizon. The “without Project” case considered the scena rio where SIEA meets growing demand by 
continuing to install diesel generators. The “with Project” case also involves diesel generation since the Project alone 
cannot meet all the demand during the horizon of the analysis. The economic benefit considered i s predominantly the 
avoided cost of diesel generation. In this analysis, the economic benefit of GHG emission reduction is not accounted 
for. The resulting economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was 17.8%.  
Least -cost generation capacity expansion plan . To inform its decision -making with regards to the Project, SIEA 
commissioned a least -cost generation capacity expansion plan in July -August 2016 including (i) power system 
planning that will ensure G -2 reserve margin, and a (ii) dispatch model to optimize th e generation of various sources 
to meet the hourly load under a range of demand scenarios. It may be noted that G -2 reserve margin is a critical 
system design criterion ensuring sufficient reserve margin when the largest unit  is offline due to maintenance.  
The least -cost analysis considered existing and new diesel generation, new hydro (i.e. the Project, using updated 
data and cost), new solar with and without storage, new geothermal and biomass. The levelized cost of energy of the 
Project is determined to be US¢ 22/kWh. Geothermal envisaged was a specific 10 MW project proposed on Savo 
Island, but was not included in the analysis due to lack of data, unproven resources and risk of connecting such a 
large unit by a submarine cable. Data for solar power refer red to actual insolation and PV output data based on the 
50 kW pilot rooftop solar installed in the SIEA premises. Assessment of the solar performance found that PV 
generation is subject to significant minute by minute output generation, and assumed that 0 .8 MW of load following 
capacity is required for every 1.0 MWp of installation to compensate for the random fluctuations. The solar with 
storage option does not require load following capacity, but was assumed to need 4 MWh of energy storage capacity 
inste ad. Furthermore, in consideration of system stability, the penetration of solar without storage was capped at 40% 
of the maximum load, and 50% for solar with storage.  
Demand forecast was provided by SIEA following their distribution network expansion strat egy to double the number 
of residential and small business customers from 15,500 in 2016 to 30,000 by 2021. Given that the electrification rate 
is 60% even in the capital city, this seems to be a plausible target. The base case demand forecast assumed 6% 
annual growth until the mid -2020’s and moderate to 3.5% per annum for the rest of the planning time horizon. It may 
be noted that while the demand growth during 2010 – 2015 was only 1.0%, SIEA has reported 6% growth during the 
past 12 months. This is believ ed to be the result of the new 10 MW diesel units commissioned in January 2016 which 
has enhanced system reliability and alleviated suppressed demand.  
Oil price was projected to increase to $80/barrel by 2030 and remain at the same level during the planni ng horizon.  
Based on these assumptions, the result of the base case least -cost generation capacity expansion plan was 
concluded to involve: (i) the Project (15 MW) being commissioned in 2022 by when peak load is forecast to be 25 MW 
and annual energy of 120 GWh; (ii) solar with storage and without storage will be developed continuously over the 
simulated period; and (iii) new diesel units will be commissioned in 2029 as a result of limitations of solar integration 
into the system.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 58 
 
 
 F 
 
Source: August 2016. Least Cost Modelling of Future Generation Expansion Options for the Honiara Electricity System  (Draft Report) . Marsden 
Jacob Associates.  
Sensitivity analysis has demonstrated that the outcome is particularly susceptible to changes in demand growth 
forecast . Under the slow demand growth at 2.5% per year, the Project is still found to be economical, but its entry 
would  be delayed to 2030. A combination of higher levelized cost of energy of the Project, due to increases in 
construction cost and/or financing and other cost, and lowered demand growth will make the Project unviable.  
Revised Economic Analysis. The World Ban k has conducted a separate economic analysis to assess the project’s 
economic viability in accordance with the Bank’s guidelines. For this, the Bank commissioned an independent system 
optimization study to derive the “with project” and “without project” sc enarios. The optimization model  used similar 
parameters as the least -cost study done by Solomon Power, but used 3% discount rate  which was calculated based 
on two times the forecasted real GDP/capita growth rate as per the Bank’s guidelines, and assumed th e project to be 
commissioned in 2021. The “with project” and “without project” scenarios derived show that Tina River Hydropower 
displaces more diesel generation and increases the penetration PV. The project acts as an “enabler” for PV because 
it provides frequency regulation and spinning reserves needed to respond to the intermittency of PV outputs.  
The economic analysis was conducted based on the “with project” and “without project”, and included the social value 
of carbon in the benefit stream as per the Bank’s guidelines. The analysis resulted in an EIRR  of 7.1% which is  much 
lower than the EIRR ca lculated in the Feasibility Study because of the investment cost now being higher for the 
project while the cost of fuel is much lower.  Nevertheless, the EIRR exceeds  the hurdle rate determined to be 3% in 
the Solomon Islands. A Monte Carlo analy sis which assessed the combination of various risks such as higher capital 
cost, delay in commissioning, reduced hydrology, lower fuel prices showed that the probability of the EIRR being 
lower than 3% is 9.3%.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 58 
 
 
 F 
   
Source: November 2016. Least -Cost System Expansion. Concept Consulting Group (Dr. Grant Read and Dr. Ramu Naidoo).  
Financial analysis.  A detailed financial analysis for the Project was conducted by IFC. The financial analysis used 
the construction cost proposed by the preferred investor (offered as a fixed price), and assumed 75/25 debt equity


---
*Page 47*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 58 
 
 
 F 
ratio. It was also assumed that 51% of the equity will be held by the private investor (with assumed equity IRR of 
13%) while the balance of 49% will be held by SIG with lower returns that are only sufficien t to repay IDA which it will 
borrow for its equity contribution in the Project Company. The structure of the debt assumes $30 million of 
concessional financing from ADB (including $12 million grant) , $31.6 million from EDCF  and $4.27 million from 
IRENA/ADFD , while several scenarios on the volume of GCF loan were considered to confirm the minimum 
concessionality needed to obtain the required equity IRR for a PPA price e stimated at a maximum  of US¢22 /kWh. 
The shortage of concessional loans, due to sm aller volumes of GCF loan and limitations on IDA, ADB and EDCF 
country allocations, was estimated to be filled by commercial bank loans  and the balance of total IRENA/ADFD  
funding of $15 m . 
GCF loan (0%; 40 yrs)  $70 million * $50 million  $35 million  $0 million  
Equity IRR (price capped at 
US¢22/kWh)  14.4%  11.4%  8.1%  negative  
Source: IFC estimates . 
* Excludes $16  million grant requested from GCF since the grant is directed to the financing of Component 2 which does not impact the PPA ta riff. 
It may be noted that the assumed 13% equity IRR is at the lowest end of the 13% to 15% range being discussed 
based on international precedent and regulated equity returns for IPPs and previous projects implemented by the 
sponsor.  
Based on the  above  analysis, please provide economic and financial justification  (both qualitative and quantitative)  for the concessionality that GCF 
provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed  in section B.2 . 
The least -cost generation capacity expansion plan demonstrates that the Project is an economically viable generation 
source for SIEA to serve projected demand growth over the planning time horizon. This analysis is performed with the 
Project’s levelized cost of energy set at a minimum of US¢22/kWh wh ich can only be obtained if all Project debt is 
sourced from low -cost, concessional sources.  
The financial analysis also confirms that to obtain an equity IRR of 13% (the level assumed to be the hurdle rate for 
investors to invest in the Project) or highe r, US$70 million from GCF is required.   
The consequence of not being able mobilize $70 million * and having to rely on commercial bank loans is the Project 
cost increasing, mainly through much higher interest during construction which in turn raises the levelized cost of the 
Project to levels which may make the Project unviable. While the exact figur e cannot be disclosed, SIEA, the offtaker 
will likely expect  a PPA price at or below US¢22 /kWh.  
It should be noted that although commercial banks were consulted, commercial bank appetite for a project in the 
Solomon Islands (on project finance basis) is l imited due to lack of precedent. In addition, equity and debt capital 
markets are not expected to participate in the project as it would be the first large scale private power project in the 
Solomon Islands.  
The concessional 0% loan of $70 million with a 4 0 year tenor including a 10 -year grace period from GCF is, therefore, 
critical for SIEA to part from its heavy reliance on diesel generation and make a transformational change into a power 
system supplied predominantly by renewable energy.  
* Excludes $16  million grant requested from GCF since the grant is directed to the financing of Component 2 which 
does not impact the PPA tariff.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solu tion has been chosen, describe why it is the most 
appropriate for this project/programme.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 58 
 
 
 F 
Hydropower is a well -established renewable energy technology which delivers dispatchable energy to the system and 
can also function to provide ancillary services including spinning reserves and load following (frequency control) 
capacity. In addition, hydropower plants provide “inertia” to the system which helps the system to be stable under 
conditions of varying load and/or output of other generators. Other renewa bles such as solar and wind are not able to 
provide such functions, and while it is not a problem from the grid operation perspective when the penetration is low, 
such intermittent renewable sources without inertia will destabilize the grid once the penetr ation is high. Since the 
Project is aimed, not to make incremental increases of renewable energy, but to transform SIEA’s grid from being 
supplied nearly 100% by diesel to a system with a major renewable energy share, hydropower is the best available 
techn ology.  
 
As described in section C.1, the hydropower planning and design has been optimized through a series of studies 
since 2006, and least -cost generation capacity expansion plan also confirmed the key contribution of the Project for 
SIEA to meet its growing demand at the lowest cost while ensuring reliability and stability of the power system.  
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social Management Pl an, and how 
the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and opera tion), in accordance with 
the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance  with the Fund’s 
Gender Policy and Action Plan.  
The full ESIA has been publicly disclosed and is included as an annex to this proposal. Updates to the ESIA may be 
made from time -to-time, including the addition of a more extensive Executive Summary, which has also been 
submitted as a supplement to this p roposal. Key issues included in the i mpact assessment include  the effect the 
Project will have on  water turbidity during construction, necessitating  the supply of alternative clean water for affected 
communities. In addition, during  operation, Tina River d ownstream of the dam will experience reduced flow at night 
during dry periods  and close to normal flow conditions during the day and evening (peak hours). To mitigate impacts 
a 1m3/s environmental flow shall be maintained at all times in the 5.7 km by -pass ed river stretch.  The project has 
potential to restrict upstream migration of native inland fishes and mitigation measures  to address this impact are 
included in the report.  
 
The project construction will clear about 115 ha of terrestrial natural habitats,  most of which are  disturbed forests with 
signs of logging activities. Best management practices are provided for vegetation  clearance, soil management, 
erosion management and  wildlife protection. I n the long term, the  restored and improved Black Post Road  will 
improve mobility between local villages and with Honiara,  which is a significant positive impact. Regarding cultural 
heritage, a protocol for managing cultural  heritage sites (tambu sites) is also described in the ESIA. For acquisition of 
the “core L and’ required for construction of the hydropower facility, the Government has exceeded the requirement of 
broad community support based on Free, Prior and Informed Consultation  (FPIC) as per World Bank Operational 
Policy 4.10 – Indigenous People  (which is applicable to government implemented activities). Because World Bank 
Performance Standard (PS) 7, Indigenous Peoples, will be applicable to the private sector project developers (and 
the yet -to-be-established Project Company) upon agreement for them to own , construct and operate the hydropower 
facility, the Government has met the higher standard of Free, Prior and Informed Consent , as required by PS7. 
Consent as a result of extensive, inclusive and meaningful consultations is, among other things, evidenced by the 
signature of a Process Agreement with the four landowning tribes (and later extended to a fifth land -owning tribe that 
was identified during the formal land acquisition process) which specifies terms of compensation for land, additional 
benefits inc luding royalties and land lease income, as well as co -management arrangements for the acquired land 
between Government and the landowners. The ESIA also documents the intensive consultation process with the 
broader community beyond “core” landowning tribes , leading to broad community support and FPIC for the overall 
design of the project, as per both OP 4.10 and PS7.  
 
During implementation, the Project Company  will continue to consult  directly with local communities throughout the 
life of the project using  culturally appropriate, inclusive  and proven methods and arrangements. To minimize 
interaction with local communities, non -local workers will be housed outside the Project area, most likely in the


---
*Page 49*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 58 
 
 
 F 
Eastern side of Honiara. It is intended  that the majority of the work force will be local, this will be another important 
benefit for communities.  
 
A Gender Action Plan (GAP) , which has also been shared as an annex to this proposal,  was completed as part of 
project preparation, drawing on the results of the socia l assessment and informing the finalization of the ESIA, the Land 
Acquisition and Livelihood Restoration Plan (LALRP) and the design of the benefit sharing mechanism. While the Tina 
River Project will have national impact through the provision of more reli able and affordable electricity, the  GAP is 
principally concerned with the impact of the project on the lives of communities within its immediate footprint area. This 
focus of the GAP mirrors the localized approach adopted by the Project towards impact mit igation and benefit sharing.  
Although employment opportunities will be prioritized for women and men who live within the project area, there may 
also be some small contracting opportunities available to Solomon Islanders from further afield (including to w omen -
owned businesses). An emphasis on equal pay for equal work, ensuring that the workplace is safe and welcoming for 
qualified female recruits, and ensuring that female owned businesses are encouraged to compete for supply chain 
contracts, are all part o f the guidelines and standards that the Developer must adhere to. Once the PPA is signed, the 
project can be presented to the Solomon Islands Women in Business Association and opportunities for women 
owned businesses could be discussed with the Developer.     
 
Given the baseline of gender inequality in its footprint area, the Tina River Hydro Project has an opportunity to include 
design and monitoring measures that will, at a minimum, not exacerbate existing challenges faced by women, while 
at the same time  aim to promote their participation and wellbeing. This opportunity is strengthened by i) recent 
national level policy commitments on gender equality, and the support of donors for the same; ii) the willingness and 
openness of the Project Office, as the ma in entity responsible for implementation, to promote gender equality; and iii) 
dedicated resources for supporting gender mainstreaming in the project.  
 
As per Bank’s BP/OP4.37, an emergency preparedness plan will be drafted by the time of the Bank’s appra isal, 
scheduled in mid -March 2017.  
 
As part of project appraisal, the Bank is conducting due diligence to ensure that the project is in compliance with 
World Bank Performance  Standards and Safeguard Policies. The analysis and actions proposed in the ESIA a nd 
LALRP are considered to be compliant with these requirements. The Bank’s Concept -stage Integrated Safeguard 
Data Sheet has been shared as a part of this proposal and will be publicly disclosed.  
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, disbursement methods and auditing.  
GCF funds would be c hanneled through the World Bank ( Accredited Entity ) to the Ministry of Finance and Treasury  
(MOFT) , and then on  lent to the Project Company to finance part of the debt component of project financing. The 
Project Company would repay MOFT  who would then repay GCF. The exact nature of the financial transfer and legal 
arrangements between the A ccredited Entity and GCF are under discussion and would be utilized in the most efficient 
manner for the benefit of the project and implementing agencies.  
The Project Company would be required to provide regular financial reports and evidence of implementation to trigger 
financia l transfers or the withdrawal of project funds. Annual audits would also be required and would be a condition 
of further disbursements. As the Project Company would be responsible for the performance of the EPC contractor, 
the World Bank would not have any  such reporting and auditing requirements for the EPC contractor , but rather 
reserve the right to investigate any suspected cases of fraud or corruption .      
Following the World Bank’s standard appraisal procedure, the Accredited Entity will complete  due diligence on 
financial management including financial accounting, disbursement methods and auditing; procurement; and anti -
corruption and governance  by the time of project appraisal in mid -March 2017 .


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 58 
 
 
 F 
The World Bank  has extensive experience working w ith MOFT on publicly financed Projects including those that 
involve on -lending, and grant pass through, to SIEA. For SIEA, the World Bank  has been producing semi -annual 
financial management reports for SISEP since 2008, whereas the recent reports have all concluded that SIEA’s 
financial management performance to be “satisfactory” and assessed the financial management risk to be 
“moderate”.  
The World Bank  has also been working with MMERE’s Project Office for a number of years to prepare the Project 
using tru st funds from development partners such as the Government of Australia. Supervision of financial 
management performance by MMERE’s Project Office has found performance to be satisfactory  with a need for 
capacity enhancements to manage the increased volume of funds during the construction phase of the project .


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 47 OF 58 
 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the project/programme 
objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  The tariff proposed by the developer m ay be too high for SIEA to accept  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Cost estimates provided so far by K -Water have 
indicated possible tariff levels that may be above the 
threshold that SIEA is willing to pay. High construction 
costs are likely the result of the need to import nearly 
all construction materials and skilled l abor, 
contingencies due to unfamiliar and potentially 
unpredictable working environment, limited 
hydrological information, challenging geological 
environment that requires conservative design, and 
other factors.  Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified  risk will be mitigated or managed.  Do the mitigation measures  lower the probability of risk oc curring? If so, to 
what level?   
SIG is negotiating individual cost items actively with the developer while also seeking to attract as much 
concessional financing as possible to bring the eventual tariff cost down to levels acceptable to SIEA. The approval 
of GCF financing of $ 86 million , including $16 million in grant financing for the access road,  would significantly 
mitigate this risk.   
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 Geological uncertainties  may result in increased works (e.g. tunneling)  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
This may result in  increased costs of construction. 
Risks associated with adverse variations from the 
baseline geological conditions indicated in the 
Geological Baseline Report  provided to bidders would 
need to be carried out by SIEA.  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be elaborated in G .2. 
As outlined in the section above, financial viability is one of the greatest risks. The various challenges of attracting a 
developer, constructing and operating the first utility scale hydropower facility in a small, island economy conspire to 
result in hi gh costs and an electricity tariff level that may not be acceptable for the off -taker. There are also a range of 
technical issues which are typical for hydropower facility construction such as the uncertainty around geological 
conditions in the constructio n of the tunnel, as well as the operational challenge of variable hydrology which is 
exacerbated by the absence of long period of rainfall and river flow data to build confidence in likely output levels. 
Environmental and social issues are thoroughly cover ed in the ESIA. One of the most significant risks to the project 
and to all development projects in Solomon Islands is the sustainable outcomes of land acquisition and associated 
compensation. This risk is being managed at the moment through the compensati on process and will continue to be 
an active focus of attention for the PO to ensure that there is full community support for the project throughout 
construction and operation.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 48 OF 58 
 
 G 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
SIG is pursuing a fixed price contract which would leave these risks with the developer.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 Hydrology  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Drier conditions in some years/season s than predicated 
averages will result  in lower plant output  and the need 
to utilize more expensive, nonrenewable diesel 
generation .  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Hydrological risks will be borne by SIEA in as much as the Project Company  will be paid for available capacity.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Conservation of the upstream area  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
The upward and downward migration of fish will be 
obstructed by the hydropower facility, affecting the fish 
population in the upstream river system.  
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  High  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The area upstream of the dam will be the object of different measures to ensure sustainable management of the 
reservoir and adjoining watershed. The reservoir area will be the object of a specific management plan whereas the 
larger catchment area upstream will be subject to further studies to monitor and precisely determine project impacts 
and de velop if required conservation initiatives with different interested parties, including the SIG.  The primary 
means of maintaining upstream populations and facilitating migration will be a “ trap and haul ” system to be 
implemented by the operator with the su pport of local communities. Details are provided in the ESIA.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 Compensation for land acquisition remains incomplete or contentious at the time of 
construction  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
The SIG has made efforts to reduce the project’s 
footprint by limiting land acquisition to the core area 
that is required for hydropower facilities and access 
roads. The tribal leaders have used indigenous 
processes to establish the owners of the land in t he 
core area and have signed a “Process Agreement” 
whereby the landowning tribes and SIG agree on the 
land acquisition process and its future management. 
The Commissioner of Lands has acquired the land in 
accordance with the Lands and Titles Act, the appea ls 
process to challenge the acquisition has concluded 
with no appeal claims filed, and compensation is being Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 49 OF 58 
 
 G 
provided to the five tribes which were identified as 
customary owners of the core land. Two out of five 
tribes have received compensation so far an d the 
funds to complete the compensation payments are 
being held in an escrow account. It is possible that the 
remaining three tribes continue to hold out and 
demand higher compensation than the amount offered 
by the Commissioner. This could entail the ris k of 
disruptive behavior during construction and/or 
operation as a negotiation tactic.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
SIG is engaged in ongoing discussions with members of all five tribes to ensure that funds are properly received that 
the remaining three tribes accept the compensation offered and the associated support in establishing tribal co -
operative societies, bank accounts and financial management training. Under the Land and Titles Act the ti me limit 
for appeals against the award of compensation has expired and the compensation offered exceeds the minimum 
figure agreed between the parties in the terms of the Process Agreement.  Details are provided in the LALRP.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., iss ues that have not yet 
raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring) .  This could include issues rel ated to external stakeholders such as project 
beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors . 
 
At the moment, political support for the project is strong, but this could change depending upon unforeseen 
circumstances . Ongoing briefings of key government officials will be needed to monitor support and address 
concerns as they arise. SIEA’s financial performance is much improved from previous years. However, this could 
change if problems of customer repayment recur, tec hnical issues or poor financial management. Due diligence prior 
to World Bank project appraisal in mid -March will be conducted on SIEA’s financial condition to ensure that PPA 
payments can be confidently met.  SIEA’s latest audit was unqualified and no conc erns have been raised in the 
auditor’s management letter.      
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management F ramework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts  at the Fund level4 
Paradigm shift o bjectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  Please elaborate on the paradigm shift objectives to which the project/programme contributes.  
The Project will drastically shift the balance of renewable energy in the Honiara -grid from 
only 3% in 2017 to 65% in 2022, including both hydropower and solar PV. This move to 
renewable energy will not only result in lower cost electricity tariffs , but reduction s in carbon 
emissions  that are nearly 2.5 times higher than SIG ’s commitment in the INDC of  18,800 
tCO 2eq per year by 2025 and about  60% higher than the target reduction of 31,125 tCO 2eq 
per year by 2030  , This shift away from diesel generation wil l also lead to more stable, 
lower electricity prices to SIEA customers, with the final magnitude of savings to be 
assessed at the time of PPA signing between SIEA and the Project Company  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level i mpacts  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low -emission 
energy access and 
power generation  M1.1 *Tonnes of  
carbon dioxide  
equivalent (t CO2eq)  
reduced or avoided  
from gender ‐
sensitive  
energy access and  
power generation  Emissions 
reduced per 
KWh of 
hydropower 
reported by 
SIEA.  0 n/a 2.48 
million  50 year project 
life, 100 year 
reservoir life, 
annual energy 
78.35 GWh , EF 
of diesel 650 
tCO2eq/GWh . 
Emissions 
reduction could 
be positively or 
negatively 
affected, 
depending upon 
SIEA’s future 
choice of other 
generation 
options to meet 
gorwing demand.  
Volume of  
finance leveraged by  
Fund funding  Ministry of 
Finance and 
Treasury  
verification  0 n/a $147.9
8 
million  Combination of 
K-Water , IDA, 
ADB, EDCF, 
GoA, 
IRENA/ADFD . 
Adjustments 
(reductions or 
                                                             
4 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following li nk (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
increases) and 
exchange rate 
fluctuations may 
take place among 
any of these 
financiers before 
financial close.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Components Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term (if 
applicable)   Final  
Project/  
programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and 
large low -
emission power 
suppliers  M6.1 Proportion 
of 
low‐emission 
power  
supply in a  
jurisdiction or 
market.   
SIEA annual 
generation data.  0% n/a 65% Demand 
forecast of 
120 GWh in 
2022 when 
Project is 
commission
ed, and 
Project’s 
expected 
generation 
of 78.35 
GWh.  
SIEA’s new 
generation 
investments 
before 
hydropower 
plant 
commissioni
ng would 
affect this 
outcome.  
M6.2 Number of  
households, and  
individuals  
(males and  
females) with  
improved access 
to 
low‐emission 
energy  
sources  SIEA customer 
records  0 n/a 180,000  SIEA plans 
to increase 
the number 
of customers 
to 30,000. 
National 
average 
household 
size of 6.0 
persons per 
household, 
conservative
ly. SIEA may 
not be able 
to reach this 
target as it 
depends on 
successful


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
achievement 
of an 
ambitious 
expansion 
plan.  
M6.3 MWs of low  
emission  
energy  
capacity 
installed,  
generated and/or  
rehabilitated  SIEA generation 
capacity reports  1MW  n/a 16MW  Project’s 
15MW 
hydro; and 
existing 
1MWp solar 
being 
commission
ed. 
Excluding 
future solar 
as their 
development
s are 
dependent 
on various 
external 
factors.  This 
amount 
could be 
higher if 
SIEA 
investments 
in additional 
solar PV in 
the years 
leading up to 
commissioni
ng of the 
hydropower 
facility.  
Project/  
programme 
components  Outputs that contribute to components  
1. Tina River 
Hydropower 
Plant  is 
commissioned  15 MW 
hydropower 
plant developed 
on the Tina 
River  Progress reports 
prepared by 
Project Company 
submitted to  
MMERE Project 
Office  
Testing and 
commissioning 0 MW  n/a 15 MW


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
certification issued 
by SIEA  
2. Access Road  
is completed  18.7 km of 
paved access 
road upgraded 
from Kukum 
Highway to 
Managakiki 
village and new 
road from 
Managakiki to 
Project site  MMERE quarterly 
project progress 
reports and 
completion reports 
submitted to AE  0 km n/a 18.7 km Detailed 
design 
completed 
by MID and 
procurement 
completed 
by MMERE 
Project 
Office  
3. Transmission 
Line is 
commissioned  23 km of two 
parallel single -
circuit 
transmission line 
from Project to 
Lungga Power 
Station  SIEA quarterly 
project progres s 
reports and 
completion report  
submitted to AE  0 km  n/a 2X 23 km  Detailed 
design 
completed 
and 
procurement 
and 
construction 
conducted 
by SIEA  
4. Project 
management 
capacity is 
stren gthened  Assistance 
provided to 
retain experts to 
ensure 
compliance with 
AE’s policies on 
safeguards, 
fiduciary control,  
etc. and to 
support day -to-
day operation of 
the MMERE 
Project Office  MMERE Project 
Office quarterly 
progress reports 
and completion 
report submitted to 
AE. Panel of 
experts (POE) 
comprising 3 
dam safet y 
experts and 
two 
environmental 
and social 
experts 
retained for 
Project 
preparation  n/a Same 
number of 
POE retained 
throughout 
Project 
implementati
on and initial 
years of 
operation    
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Output 1: Tina River Hydropower Plant commissioned  
1.1 Sign PPA  Signing of PPA between Project 
Company and SIEA  n/a  
1.2 Financial 
close  Full underwriting of all debt  Total project cost of 
$181.16  million   
1.3. Procurement 
of EPC contractor  Project Company to procure an EPC 
contractor  n/a  
1.4. Execution of 
EPC contract EPC contactor to design the Tina 
River Hydropower Plant  n/a


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
(major design 
items)  
1.5 Execution of 
EPC contract 
(construction)  EPC contactor to procure and 
construct the Tina River Hydropower 
Plant  n/a  
1.6  
Commissioning  Testing and commissioning 
certification  issued by SIEA   n/a  
Output 2: Access Road completed  
2.1. Detailed 
design of access 
road MID’s design consultant to prepare 
detailed design of the access road  Self-financed by MMERE 
and managed by MID.   
2.2. Procurement 
of civil works 
contractor  MMERE  Project Office to procure civil 
works contractor  n/a  
2.3  Execute 
works contract  Works contractor to construct access 
road $25 million   
2.4. Hand over  MMERE PO to accept hand -over of 
the access road  n/a  
Output 3: Transmission Line commissioned  
3.1. Detailed 
design of 
transmission line  SIEA’s design consultant to prepare 
tender design of the transmission line  Self-financed and 
managed by SIEA.   
3.2. Procurement 
of supply and 
install contractor  SIEA to procure supply and install 
contractor  n/a  
3.3 Construction 
of the 
transmission line  Supply and install contractor to  
construct the transmission line  $22.82  million   
3.4 Testing and 
commissioning  Testing and commissioning 
certification issued by SIEA  n/a  
Output 4: Project management capacity strengthened  
4.1 Project Office 
support 
(contracting of 
key personnel)  MMERE to recruit Project Manager, 
and PO to recruit key personnel  n/a  
4.2 Project Office 
support 
(implementation)  Project Manager and key personnel to 
supervise progress of EPC contract 
and coordinate with relevant 
ministries to ensure Project 
Company’s undertakings are 
appropriately executed  $2,5 million  Including operating cost of 
the Project Office for 4 years.  
4.3 Procurement 
of access road MMERE PO t o recruit consulting firm 
to assist with tendering of the access n/a


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
 
 
 
 supervision 
consultants  road construction civil works contract 
and supervise the contractor’s works  
4.4 Mobilization 
of supervision 
consultants  MMERE PO to mobilize consulting 
firm for tendering and supervision of 
civil works contract  $1.0 million   
4.5. Procurement 
of panel of 
experts members  MMERE PO to recruit experts on (i) 
dam, (ii) geology, (iii) seismology, (iv) 
hydrology/sedimentology, (v) 
environment, and (vi) sociology  n/a  
4.6. Periodic 
mobilization of 
panel of experts  MMERE PO to mobilize experts semi -
annually during construction, at 
testing and commissioning, and 
annually during first five years of 
operation  $0.8 million   
4.7. Procurement 
of independent 
monitoring 
agents  MME RE PO to recruit independent 
monitoring agents to monitor the 
Project Company’s implementation of 
(i) environmental mon itoring and 
management plan;  (ii) land acquisition 
and livelihood restoration plan ; and 
(iii) gender action plan  n/a  
4.8. Semi -annual 
mobilization of 
independent 
monitoring 
agents  MMERE PO to mobilize the 
independent monitoring agents on a 
semi -annual basis during 
construction, at the time of testing and 
commissioning, and annually during 
first five years of operation  $0.7 million   
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid -term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.  
 
M&E arrangements will comply with the terms specified in the AMA between the World Bank and GCF once this 
documents are finally agreed and signed by the parties. MMERE will be the lead agency for SIG monitoring and 
regularly reporting to the World Bank  and o ther stakeholders on overall Project progress. MMERE’s reporting will 
include assessments of performance of the Project Company based on contractual arrangements, drawing on 
independent supervision reports, as well as the reporting by SIEA on transmission line construction and the road 
construction contractor. The World Bank  will conduct regular (3 -4 times per year  over the five -year Project  period ) 
implementation support missions (ISMs) throughout the duration of the Project to identify and agree with SIG on 
implementation challenges and actions to address them. The World Bank  will coordinate the participation of co -
financiers for each mission, liaising with SIG to assess project performa nce through site visits, community consultations


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 58 
 
 
 H 
 and meetings with stakeholders. Each mission will conclude with the preparation of an Aide Memoire (summary report) 
which will be agreed with SIG and other stakeholders. MMERE  will monitor overall Project pr ogress, assess the work of 
SIEA, the access road construction firm, and engage specialists to monitor the construction and early operation of the 
power plant.  
 
An independent,  midterm review report will be contracted by SIG/MMERE and a mission to review the report and 
prepare its own MTR will be led by the World Bank  in coordination with other co -financiers  in the third year of the 
Project and a final evaluation will be conducted at the end of the five year implementation period.     
 
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key out comes of the project/programme.  
MMERE  and MECDM will monitor the GWh s of diesel displaced by the hydropower facility through reporting by SIEA 
on generation by source (e.g. diesel, hydro, solar). This data will be converted into GHG emissions reductions and 
reported by MECDM against national targets. Changes in retail electricity tariffs will be reported by SIEA, identifying the 
portion represented by the Proj ect and the cost reduction compared to diesel. These cost savings will be calculated 
using a clear and transparent formula for determining benefit sharing transfers, and used as the basis for finalizing the 
annual benefit sharing transfer amounts. Specific  aspects of PPA performance by the Project Company such as 
available capacity will be monitored by SIEA to ensure that the terms of the PPA are being honored and that any price 
adjustments are enacted, as needed.


---
*Page 62*
---

ANNEX ES 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 58 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents. I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility S tudy 
☒ Integrated Financial M odel that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if applicable )  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (If applicable)  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation /Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
(If applicable)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation R eport  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 63*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 7 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 64*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 7 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Tina River Hydropower Development Project (Solomon Islands)  
Accredited entity  International Development Association (World Bank Group)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) c ategory  Category A  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -08-15 
Language(s) of  
disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  http:// documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/768061471430569820/Environm
ental -and-social -impact -assessment  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESMP) (included in ESIA above)  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -08-15 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  http:// documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/768061471430569820/Environm
ental -and-social -impact -assessment  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -08-15 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  http://d ocuments.worldbank.org/curated/en/832721471415550419/Land -
acquisition -and-livelihoods -restoration -plan  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website  Click here to enter a date.  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  
Link to disclosure  http://  
________