=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20170314172446+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20170315102329+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum I V 
Funding proposal package for FP04 1 GCF/B.16/0 7/Add.04 
14 March 201 7 Meeting of the Board  
4 – 6 April 2017  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item  11(e)  
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “ Simiyu Climate Resilience Project ” submitted by KfW ;
b)A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents  are presented as sub mitted by the accredited entity,  and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 4 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

Project  Title:  Simiyu Climate Resilience  Project  
Country/Region:  Tanzania  
Accredited Entity:  KfW 
Date of Submission:  _____________________________  
Assumed exchange rates:  1 EUR = 2,484 TZS      1 EUR = 1.135 USD


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT  SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES  
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
 Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document.  
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT  SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 82 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  Information  
A.1.1. Project  title Simiyu Climate Resilience Project 
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     Tanzania  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)  The Office of the Vice President  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  KfW 
A.1.5.a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity: Ministry of Finance and Planning  
Beneficiary: Ministry of Water and Irrigation  Regional 
Secretariat of the Simiyu Region  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
x  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission   
A.1.10 . 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Katrin Brandes, Senior Project Manager  
Organization  KfW Entwicklungsbank  
Email address  katrin.brandes@kfw.de  
Telephone number  +255 688 758 329  
Mailing address  Palmengartenstr. 5 -9, 60325 Frankfurt,  Germany  
   
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retro fitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc. ) 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses , etc.) 
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☒


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT  SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 82 
 
 
 A 
A.2.  Project  Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
The Project  provides the remarkable opportunity to support a government of a least developed country that proves  a 
strong commitment to  introdu cing a paradigm shift in its climate adaptation policies. The Tanzanian Government 
intends to design an inter -sectoral approach in one of its regions most affected by climate change, the Simiyu Region. 
The holistic approach contributes to the two main driv ers for the population’s resilience: Sustainable provision of water 
and farming c onditions. Simiyu is supposed to serve as a role model - with lessons learnt from the Project  being 
adapted to the national level  at a later stage . 
The Simiyu Region is a high profile example for the urgent need to face multi -sectoral challenges of climate change in 
Tanzania. Impacts include profound changes in water availability, temperature stresses to people , livestock and crops, 
changes in public he alth, farming practices, i ncome, food security and ecology. Climate models predict a further 
intensification of dry seasons, but also of unpredictable intense rains and floods, posing a significant threat to 
livelihoods, especially amongst the poor. For the population, and women ar e particularly negatively affected,  these 
developments present increasing challenges for day -to-day life, with insufficient local water supply, worsening health 
conditions and deteriorating (subsistence) farming opportunities posing particular threats.  
The objective of the Project  is to increase the climate resilience of rural and urban households, particularly small scale 
farmers and women , living in the S imiyu Region and to improve policies and regulation for cross -sectoral action  towards 
climate adaptat ion. It will contribute to the implementation of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) of 
Tanzania. More than 495,000 direct beneficiaries (o ut of them 257 ,000 women ) and 2.5 m indirect beneficiaries are 
expected to increase their climate adaptive  capacities through the Project . Fields of action include:  
 improving the government’s institutional and regulatory framework for cross sectoral  and community based 
adaptation  planning  
 improving climate resilience of water supply infrastructure, sanitation  services and agricultural practices in the 
Simiyu Region  
 pursuing a  community driven approach to ensure targeting of the most vulnerable  
 enhancing adaptive capacities of vulnerable urban and rural population, as well as implementing capacities of 
local a nd central government structures  
 
A.3.  Project  Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  Not applicable  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  01/01/2017  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/03/2017  
End:  28/02/2022  
Project  lifespan  5 years 0 months


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 82 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project  
The estimated total costs of the Project  amount to 143.4 m EUR . The Government of Tanzania earmarked 13.1 m 
EUR as its own contribution, which is a remarkably high amount for a LDC and which shows the exceptional 
government  commitment. In addition, the Project  is expected to receive 1.5 m EUR cash and in -kind contributions 
from local communities . During Project  preparation, the government already made available EUR 600,000 for studies 
from the Water Sector Development Project . Furthermore, funding from the GCF leverage s 26.1 m EUR grant funding 
from KfW provided by the German Government. The co -funding commitment by the German Government through 
KfW has been earmarked in the Government Negotiations between Tanzania and Germany .  
The Government of Tanzania (GoT) seeks 102.7 m EUR of  grant funding from the GCF. Maximum concessionality is 
proposed since t he Project  is urgently needed to reduce climate in duced stress of particularly poor and vulnerable 
population groups  like subsistence farmers and women  in a L east Developed and post - Highly Indebted Poor Country 
(LDC and post -HIPC). The Project  is needed to cover basic  needs and fulfil human rights  to dri nking water, health and 
food security, in a region strongly affected by climate change. The GCF funds are used to overcome barriers that 
constrain the ability of the Government of Tanzania to implement an advanced and integrated approach to climate 
adaptat ion. N one of the Project ’s components generates sufficient revenue to pay back investment costs and/or 
interest, despite the fact that revenues shall cover at leas t maintenance  costs wherever possible . Grant financing 
allow s Tanzania to undertake the propo sed adaptation measure s without reducing funding for other priority 
development needs or increa sing its risks of debt distress. Tanzania is taking part in the Policy Support Instrument 
(PSI) of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and shows continued stro ng efforts for fiscal consolidation and 
strengthening revenue mobilization, public financial management and debt management. Despite the fact that 
sovereign repayment capacity is not expected to be called into question in the near future, it should be cons idered 
that financing this climate adaptation Project  with debt would be an additiona l stress factor for the country by either 
increasing the risk of debt distress  or leading to reduced funding for  other  priority development needs. This should be 
avoided e specially in light of Tanzania’s  low own emission profile.  Grants match local financial and in -kind 
contribution s to the maximum possible extent .  
As can be seen from the  table below, funding from the G reen Climate Fund is used for those costs of the Proje ct that 
are solely attributed to increasing climate resilience, which are  
 transfer of lessons learnt during  implementation of the multi -sectoral Project  into improved  procedures and 
regulatory framework: strategic consultancy for establishing a holistic i nter-sectoral policy implementation 
mechanism;  
 those components of the water supply system which are needed because local water sources are not 
available and reliable anymore and water has to be transferred form the Lake Victoria  to the region  
(particular ly the water intake and the transmission main including reservoirs ); 
 rural distribution networks needed to ensure that the piped water reaches the beneficiaries , and that the water 
supply system covers operation  cost as soon as possible;   
 parts of the cost s for consultancy to strengthen the implementation capacities at regional and district level  and 
to supervise construction works;  
 climate smart agriculture.  
German y finances investments for development, which would have also been necessary without climate  change, 
namely the water treatment plant, urban distribution networks, rural and urban public taps and parts of the 
consultancy costs . The Tanzanian contribution is used for staffing and compensation payments.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 82 
 
 B 
 
 
Note: Contingencies include physical and price contingencies. 12.5% are in line with the usual value for KfW financed 
projects and reflect the quality of the feasibility study as well as experiences with price escalations in the region.  
 
 
 
ComponentSub-component (if 
applicable)Amount (for entire 
programme) in million 
EURGCF funding 
amountKfWGoTBeneficiaries
1.1 water treatment 5.8 5.8
1.2 intake, pumping stations, 
main pipe, reservoirs52.8 52.8
1.3 operation subsidy year 1-3 0.5 0.5
59.1 52.8 5.8 0.5
2.1 urban distribution incl. 
public water taps6.9 6.9
2.2 rural distribution incl. 
public water taps20.0 20.0
2.3 household connections 0.4 0.3 0.1
27.3 20.0 7.2 0.1
3.1 wastewater treatment 
plant2.0 2.0
3.2 exhauster trucks 0.5 0.5
3.3 public toilets 1.0 1.0
3.5 3.5
4.1 small earth  dams and 
charco dams3.1 2.9 0.2
4.2 climate smart agriculture 1.2 1.0 0.2
4.3 Ngitili and firewood 4.3 3.4 0.9
4.4 training (Farmer Schools) 1.6 1.6
10.2 8.9 1.3
5.1 studies 1.7 1.1 0.6
5.2 supervision of water & 
sanitation & demand driven 
smart agriculture6.1 4.2 1.9
5.3 mangement support 
through Strategic Consultant 1.2 1.2
5. Project Management 9.0 5.4 3.0 0.6
6.1 paradigm shift facilitation 
through Strategic Consultant0.8 0.8
6.2 capacity development to 
WSAs3.0 1.0 1.7 0.3
6.3 PMU Smart Agriculture, 
community based planning & 
user associations5.6 2.3 2.0 1.3
6.4 ICT Platform 0.1 0.1
9.5 4.2 3.7 1.6
8.8 8.8
Total 127.4 91.3 23.2 11.6 1.3
Contingencies 12.5% 16.0 11.4 2.9 1.5 0.2Agriculture
Strategic Support 4. Agriculture
6. Strategic Support Project ManagementBulk Water Supply
1.5 13.1 26.1 143.4 102.7 TOTAL PROGRAMME FINANCING7. Land Compensation and ESMP1. Bulk Water Supply
Water Distribution
2. Water Distribution
3. Sanitation
3. Sanitation


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 82 
 
 B 
 
B.2. Project  Financing Information  
 Financial Instrum ent Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  143.4 million euro 
(€)  
(b) GCF co -
financing  Grants  102.7 million euro 
(€)  
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient*  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Teno
r Pricin
g Seniority  
Grant  
Grant  
Budget  
Cash & In 
Kind 26.1 
0,6 
12.5 
1.5 million euro (€)  
million euro (€)  
million euro (€)  
million euro (€)  KfW (Germany)  
GoT Water Basket  
GoT 
Local User Groups     
pari passu  
upfront  
pari passu  
upfront  
Lead financing institution: KfW  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview ( not applicable)


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 82 
 
 C 
C.1. Strategic Context  
Over the past 30 to 60 years, Tanzania has experienced more frequent precipitation extremes such as droughts and 
heavy rainfall. The following changes have been observed between 1960 and 2006 (all statistically significant1): 
 The average annual temperature  has increased by 1°C, with the largest increase during January and February ;  
 the number of extremely hot days and nights has increased ; 
 rainfall has become more v ariable, showing  a significant decrease in mean annual precipitation and in 
seasonal rainfa ll in the dry season (June -September) and in the rainy season (March -May) ; 
 the number of ‘5 -day maximum rainfall’ events in March  to May has increased . 
Predictions foresee a stronger variability, but also an overall slight increase of the cumulative amount  of rainfall in the 
Lake Victoria region. Temperature and extreme weather events such as droughts, heavy rains and flooding are 
predicted to increase further in both frequency and severity in the future.  According to various studies including the 
feasibili ty studies for the presented Project , impacts  are expected to include profound changes in water availability, 
temperature stresses to people , livestock and crops, changes in disease vect ors and ranges, public health,  farming 
practices, incomes and food sec urity, ecological disruption, and many other related impacts. Tanzania’s economic 
performance is highly sensitive to weather related shocks with food being the largest component of the Tanzanian 
consumer p rice index and a high dependency  on hydropower (ref er to section  E.4.2). The Government of Tanzania 
(GoT) estimates the annual economic costs of addressing climate change impacts to be about 1% of the country’s 
GDP. This figure could rise up to 2% by the year 2030 according to the Intended Nationally Deter mined Contributions of 
Tanzania (INDCs).  
The negative impacts of climate change are perceived as a major obstacle for the country’s efforts to achieve economic 
growth and to its poverty reduction targets to reach  middle income developing country status  in the future as defined in 
the country’s Five Year Development Plan (FYDP II) and the Poverty Reduction Strategy (MKUKUTA II). Tanzania has 
therefore shown an active role in the international diplomatic processes related to climate change and is one of the 
countries that committed to Nation ally Determined Contributions ( NDCs) at the COP 21 in Paris in  2015. Furthermore, 
the country has developed its own National Climate Change Strategy  (2012) and several sector climate strategies as 
outlined in section  E 5.1 . Tanzania currently gets support from the German Government though GIZ on the National 
Adaptation Planning (NAP) process.  
The new Simiyu Region (see maps in Annex 2) in the north -west of Tanzania is one of the country’s most prominent 
examples of how nega tive effects of climate change pose a burden for development. According to  the results of the 
Population and Housing Census from 2012, the population of Simiyu Region was 1,584,000 of which 824,000 were  
female and 760,000 male. The population growth rate in the Region amounts to 1.8% per annum, meaning that by 
today there are around 1.7 million people.  Whereas the growth rate is rather low compared to the national average of 
2.7%, the household size with 6.9 persons per household is the largest in the count ry. This translates to  a high 
migration rate and a low level of living conditions, especially in rural areas.  The Simiyu Region’s Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) was estimated at USD 1.3 billion in 2010, which accounted for about 6% of the national GDP. 
Agric ulture dominates the livelihood and economic performance of the region. The sector contributes about 75 percent 
to the regional economy and employs about 80 percent of the active population. Water supply is a major challenge in 
the Simiyu Region : only abou t 20% of the urban and 40 % of the rural population have access to clean drinking water. 
Industrial development comprises some scattered medium and small -scale industrial establis hments like oil mills and 
ginneries , flour mill s, tailors , carpent ers, weld ers, garages, printing and rice processing industries. An international 
Nickel mining project in the village of Dutwa has been identified but is currently on hold. It is currently unknown if and 
when it will resume. Great distances to the economic centres of  Arusha and Dar es Salaam and inadequate availability 
of road infrastructu re to bridge these distances have  hampered economic development and alleviation of p overty in the 
region.  
The Government has taken  action to overcome the deteriorating  living condit ions in the Simiyu Region. It extended the 
road network and improved the connectivity of the Region  which will help to market agricultural products . For two years  
                                                             
1 Source: http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportalb/home.cfm?page=country_profile&CCode=TZA&ThisTab=ClimateBaseline


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 82 
 
 C 
now, Bariadi is reachable by a tarmac road from Mwanza that is partly built on a dam with inc reased drainage 
provisions, so that it is fully functional even during floods. Some attempts to improve water supply were made by the 
government, however, they were not successful since the new infrastructure was strongly affected by floods, increased 
land degradation and droughts as described in Section  C.2. The electricity network in Bariadi is currently being 
upgraded and extended . For information on relevant initiatives of Development Partners in the Region and in Tanzania, 
please refer to section C.2.  
To overcome the generally weak institutional capacities, the Simiyu Region was newly established in 2012 in the course 
of the countr ywide decentralization process . With this, the Government of Tanzania sought to facilitate provision of 
urgently needed bas ic services in Simiyu. However , the newly established administration is not yet fully functional and 
overwhelmed by the challenges it faces. The lack of safe drinking water makes it difficult to find adequate staff.  KfW has  
carried out a comprehensive asse ssment of the capacities of the regional administrative bodies, which in contained in 
Section C.7. In summary, despite  weak nesses, capacities are sufficient to carry out the Project  with consultancy 
support during implementation , and with extended capacity  building to enhance sustainability during operation.  
Looking at the recent climate trends and climate change predictions , the lack of reliable and secure water resources will 
pose  a great threat to the population’s health situation and will endanger  food security in Simiyu : rainfall patterns have 
become more unpredictable and increasingly erratic. In addition, temperatures  are rising and extreme events such as 
droughts and floods  have become  more frequent . Future climate projections predict a trend of risi ng mean annual and 
monthly temperatures of between 1 and 2°C for the Simiyu Region by the end of the century. Moreover Simiyu will 
experience more rainfall during the rainy seasons, a continuous shift in seasons and a higher occurrence of extreme 
events.  
 According to researchers from Ukiriguru Research Station, in the districts of Meatu and Maswa the rainfall 
pattern is turning unimodal, obliterating the dry season of bimodal areas (January / February).   
 According to data from local weather stations, Bariadi has experienced a rainfall increase of 45% over the 
years from 1900 to 2012  for the month of December , indicating the possibility of increased  rainfall during the 
short rainy season (Oct -Dec)2.   
 In a household survey conducted as part of the feasibili ty studies for the Project  in the month of April, 2016, 
70% of the interviewed communities confirmed to have noticed climate changes in their area and the majority 
identified droughts and heat waves as new climate trends that appeared during the last decad e, followed by 
changes in  rainfall  patterns . Most people described changes in precipitation such as less rain and unpredictable 
amount of rainfalls.  The interviewees reported that m ost rivers used to be permanent, but are now seasonal.  
A shift in agro -ecological zones can already be observed . It is likely to further change the overall conditions for 
agricultural and livestock practices in Simiyu Region  in the future . Because precipitation patterns are shifting and 
seasons become more variable, farmers canno t rely on the two (bimodal) rainy seasons anymore, which they used in 
the past to decide when to plant what type of crop. The predominantly poor population is highly dependent on 
subsistence farming which makes them especially vulnerab le. Poor households n ormally do not  have enough stor age 
and adequate financial reserves to withstand climatic shocks. Pest and diseases, like Striga, fungi species and 
parasites, pose a serious problem and are expected to further increase with plants being under stress due to climate 
change. Currently, pesticides are only used in commercial farming of cotton and selected agricultural crops since 
farmers lack the financial means  to buy them . Traditional plants like m aize and cotton, both of which are very sensitive 
to climate ch anges, are not  able to resist and adapt to future climate projections since they are not continuously 
modified through improved varieties. The same applies to the selection of tree species , where a decision to plant a 
particular tree species has to factor in the climate for at least the next 15 years. Despite the fact that statistics show a 
decreasing number of livestock over the past years, there is an increasing risk that livestock keepers and their pasture  
may migrate to neigh bouring districts and restri cted areas, such as Maswa Game Reserve and Serengeti National Park 
                                                             
2 Source: Feasibility Study “Climate Smart Agriculture /Climate Change adaptation in Simi yu Region, Tanzania”, GOPA, July 2016


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 82 
 
 C 
in search of water, if soil and water resources will not be protected and managed in a more appropriate manner. Limited 
availability of pastures and water leads to conflicts over resources between farmers  and pastoralists. Farmer s often lack 
knowledge and training concerning climate change adaptation measures, they use outdated agricultural techno logies 
and poor quality seeds. Agricultural e xtension services are weak, leading to a low adapti ve capacity of the region.  
Secure drinking water supply in Simiyu Region has to rely on surface water since the amount of available groundwater 
resources is not sufficient . Also, a  high concentration of fluoride in the groundwater causes stained teeth and  deformed 
bones of children, which inhibits its use for drinking purposes. Therefore, l ocal s urface water has been  traditionally used 
as drinking water, but as a result of climate change , it now falls dry periodically. Private water suppliers charge high 
water tariffs of more than 8 EUR /m³ in  the dry season. Since rainfalls have become  more and more intensive and 
concentrated to shorter periods of time, water drains off faster into Lake Victoria with negative erosion effects and 
reduced water availability.  In addition, temperature increase leads to higher evapotranspiration. For example, the 
Simiyu River used to be permanent but now turned into a seasonal river despite the fact that it is originated in the highly 
protected Maswa game reserve and the Serenget i Ecosystem and benefits from very little upstream human 
interference. Especially women have to walk longer and longer distances to fetch water for domestic use. Waterborne 
diseases spread due to the use of unsafe water. These problems are expected to further increase in the future. 
Ecosystem services have to be improved and water sources for agricultural uses need to be increased through dams 
and measures to retain run -off water, while at the same time harnessing Lake Victoria as the only suitable solution  to 
ensure safe drinking water supply in a more and more unreliable climate.  
The sanitation supply infrastructure in Simiyu Region  is very poor or even non -existent . Especially in rural areas , but 
also in urban centres traditional pit latrines are the main  toilet facility. Once the pit is full, a new one is dug and the old 
one is covered. Heavy erratic rains and floods cause pits to overflow and to contaminate  surface water. Currently , there 
is no stormwater management system and hardly any related structur es exist  in the Project  region. This poses a major 
threat to people’s health. With an increasing number of floods and heavy rains the number of cases of water -borne 
diseases, e.g. cholera, is expected to rise accordingly. The Simiyu Region  is one of the mo st endangered regions for 
cholera outbreaks. Additional ly pits are a breeding ground for flies and mosquitoes, which  transmit disease s. There is 
no system of discharge, transport and treatment of sludge. The only existing sludge extraction truck is in Mwan za – 
about 130 k m away.  
C.2. Project  Objective against Baseline  
The objective of the Project  is to increase the climate resilience of rural and urban households, particularly small scale 
farmers and women living in the Simiyu Region and to improve polic ies and regul ation for cross -sectoral action  towards 
climate adaptation . 
The Project  contains a comprehensive approach that addresses the most prominent needs for climate change 
adaptation at the national planning level and in the Simiyu Regio n, which is s upposed to s erve as a role model:  
Challenge 1: Vulnerable people, communities and regions suffer most from l imited experiences in cross -
sectoral planning and implementation  of climate adaptation project s 
While strategies and objectives for climate adaptati on already exist  in Tanzania, their implementation  still lags behind. 
Transfer of those strategies into concrete action  is required urgently to improve climate resilience, but  the country faces 
considerable institutional, financial and technical barriers. The reasons for this are  
(a) the cross - sectoral nature of adaptation needs in Tanzania ; 
(b) the need for interventions  that effectively target the most prominent adaptation needs of  the vulnerable . 
Adaptation needs in Tanzania often  call for interventions that touch several sectors . In the Simiyu Region for example, 
the main drivers of climate vulnerability are  unsecure supply of drinking water and sanitation services, and  the fact that 
agricultural practic es are not adapted to the changing climate. About 50% of t he rural population in Simiyu is affected by 
both adaptation challenges at the same time. As a consequence, the livelihoods particularly of the most vulnerable 
people will only become climate resilient if interventions are implemented in both sectors . This particularly applies  e.g. 
for low -income or female headed households. The Project  embraces on the  two major resilience drivers in Simiyu.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 82 
 
 C 
Tackling them in one approach prevents replication of efforts or even mutual impediment. On the contrary , it increase s 
effectiveness. A s an example in Simiyu, secured income from agriculture will help especially the poorest farmers to pay 
for their water bills even during dry spells.  This, in turn, improves effectiveness and sustainability of the water supply 
system. Suc h gains will only materialize if the adaption actions of the involved sector line ministries  are well 
coordinated. The Project  seeks to improve and establish adequate cross -sectoral planning and implementation 
mechanisms. They shall become day to day work routine, be targeted towards joint objectives and  entail  clear 
deliverables . 
To ensure that the Project  really addresses the most prominent adaptation challenges , it has to seriously take  into 
account the needs of the most vulnerable and it has to empower them. Such approach requires  holistic technical and 
organiz ational solutions that are fostered at the highest political level, but initiated, implemented and pursued by the 
most vulnerable communities themselves . The Project  introduces a community driven, demand oriented approach. It 
offers communities a menu  of measures in agriculture, water supply and sanitation. The competitive nature of this 
approach  ensures that the communities choose those measure s, that best fit t o their adaptation needs  (instead of just 
agreeing to “the one measure ” that is proposed by the next project ). Transparent selection criteria, that target at the 
maximum possible involvement of poor and vulnerable households and women, and that ask for sound operational 
concepts, increase eff ectiveness and sustainability. Since the programmatic and community driven approach requires 
intense extension services at local level, including travel to remote areas, awareness campaigns and also 
establishment of access modalities, combining all most re levant sector s in one Project  bears efficiency gains.  
With the Project , the high -profile e xample of the Simiyu Region serves as a role model for the establishment and 
refinement of the institutional setup for multi -sectoral, community driven climate adapt ation action and facilitates 
upscaling and replication throughout the country. E xperiences from the Project  feed into improved rules and regulations 
and shall be replicated throughout Tanzania .  
Challenge 2: Increased vulnerability of health and well -being , and food and water security due to diminishing 
water availability , inappropriate agricultural practices and inadequate sanitation  
The climatic trends described in  section  C.1 have severe effects on the daily life of people  in Simiyu , who are suffering 
from unsafe  drinking water supply and are highly dependent on rain -fed agriculture, pasture for their cattle, and 
fuelwood for domestic energy. For the second year in a row, the region received food aid in 2016.  Precipitation patterns 
are shifting and farmer s cannot rely on the two rainy seasons anymore . Due to limited availability, water prices now go 
up to 8 EUR/m3 during dry seasons. The predominantly poor population is highly dependent on subsistence farming 
which ma kes them especially vulnerable. T he newly established Region  lacks the adaptive capacities required to cope 
with the changing climate .  
The Project  respon ds to these challenges by  enhancing  the resilience  of 495,000 people in one of the most vulnerable 
areas in Tanzania . Livelihoods will improv e significantly by securing climate resilient water supply, improving sanitation 
services and introducing climate smart agricultural practices. This significantly improves the resilience to climate related 
shocks.   
Challenge 3: Increased exposure  of Infra structure and built environment  to climate risks  
The water supply infrastructure in Bariadi was partly renewed in the year of 2003  but has already become non-
functional . It was initially supposed to be fed through local dams but never entered into operation  because dams dried 
out (just like many agricultural dams in the region) and the water treatment plant was flooded.  While the existing water 
supply infrastructure in Simiyu is ext remely prone to climate hazards,  the infrastructure newly constructed under t he 
Project  is adapted  to climate change. Using water from Lake Victoria is the only reliable solution to provide the Region 
with safe and reliable drinking water. The specific action is the construction of a drought - and flood resilient water 
supply system  and the expected outcome is secured water supply in a changing climate.  
Challenge 4: Disruption of ecosystem and ecosystem s ervices  
Ecosyst em Services are core to regulating  water resources and to ensur ing the  provisioning of water for household and 
agriculture purposes. Since rainfalls are becoming more and more intensive and concentrated to shorter periods of


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 82 
 
 C 
time, water drains off faster into Lake Victoria with negative erosion effects and reduced availability of water for 
agriculture.  In order to add ress the challenge of increasing  water scarcity, unpredictable floods, erosion and diminishing 
soil fertility , eco-system services should be maintained . 
Climate - smart agriculture help s to maintain the water storage capacity of the soil in a scenario of in creased run -off and 
erosions though intensified rains and droughts  by building contour lines and forestation.  Planting of adapted species 
and push -pull technology strengthen s the ecosystem’s resilience to plant diseases , which are expected to increase with  
climate change . Introduction of species with a broader genetic variability increases the resilience of the ecosystem 
against climatic stress. S anitation measures preserve surface and groundwater from pollution . 
Initiatives of Development Partners that are  relevant to the Project  
A study carried out in 2013 by ODI and t he University of Dar Es Salaaam  identified 78 programmes across 15 ministries 
that are climate change relevant. However, only a small share of these projects (5 -13%) has a specific climate ch ange 
focus. Most projects carry a climate change component along, but have limited relevance to climate change. UNDP 
facilitated a stakeholder workshop on National Adaptation Planning (NAP) and Germany through GIZ supports the NAP 
process of the country th rough advisory services. In Simiyu Region, w ith financing from the World Bank, the Ministry of 
Water and Irrigation and the Lake Victoria Basin Commission implement the Lake Victoria Environmental Management 
Programme (LVEMP). The Simiyu River was identifi ed as a focal area of the programme, and in the last decades, a 
number of measures have been implemented to protect the river banks like gazetting and enforcing a protection 
corridor on the river banks, introducing alternative sources of income like beekee ping and providing alternative sources 
of water for cattle.  A number of lessons learnt have been  drawn from the LVEMP programme, e.g. the importance to 
pursue a community driven approach and the need for dams and irrigation systems to take into account bot h 
agricultural uses and cattle. Experiences from various water supply projects financed  by KfW and other development 
partners are being taken into account for the design of the Project , e.g. experiences in the establishment and 
sustainable operations of  Community Owned Water Supply Organizations  in the Hai Water Project, and on capacity 
development, sustainable operation and tariff setting in various regional urban centres in Tanzania, including e.g. 
Tanga, Mwanza and Iringa. To tackle i ncreased and uncoord inated abstraction of raw water  and pollution of Lake 
Victoria, a programme to address this issue on a transnational level, combined with strategic investments is currently 
under preparation by East African Community, Lake Victoria Basin Commission and Mem ber States with financial 
support from Germany (KfW) and potentially the European Union.  It includes investments in sanitation infrastructure for 
riparian towns and polluters, as well as enhanced monitoring systems for the water quality of the lake and str engthening 
of corresponding institutional structures.  
C.3. Project  Description  
The Project  respond s to the four challenges and areas of impact as described in Section C.2 through the following 
components :  
1. Refining mechanisms for implementation  of adapt ation activities   
2. Improving water supply infrastructure, agricultural practices and sanitation services  
3. Pursuing a community driven approach  
4. Capacity development  
Implementation of the Project  follows the national structures for pl anning and implementation . Using these structures, 
learning from them  and feeding experiences into an improvement of this system is an important part of the Project  and 
prerequisite for paradigm shift  and sustainability . A Strategic Consultant and an Implementing Consultant delive r 
capacity development measures and support the government of Tanzania in implementing the Project  as described in 
section C.7.2.  
1. Refining mechanisms for implemen tation of adaptation activities   
The Project  will be the role model to establish mechanisms  for implementation of multi -sectoral programmes on climate 
adaptation in Tanzania. For this purpose, a high level Steering Committee  for cross -sectoral implementation is tasked 
to review lessons learnt from the Project , monitor targeting of the most vulne rable and equal participation of women, 
propose legal and regulatory changes as needed and initiate the replication of similar cross -sectoral adaptation


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 82 
 
 C 
projects . The Steering Committee comprises of high level representatives (Permanent Secretaries or Dire ctors) of the 
different Ministries that take part in Project  implementation, the regulator “Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory 
Authority ” (EWURA ) as well as the Regional Secretary. The District Administrative Secretaries, Directors of the urban 
water ut ilities, a representative of the local user groups, civil society representatives  and KfW are observers of the 
Steering Committee. More information on the institutions involved in Project  implementation is described in sections C.4 
(ministerial level) and C.7 (regional level).  
The Steering Committee  is expected to propose and initiate  new sets of rules and regulations for climate adaptation, 
which will be identified in the course of implementation on the basis of experiences made in the Project . New rules and 
regulations shall  focus on facilitating cross -sectoral and multi -level implementation, on improving sustainability and on 
ensuring equal participation of women . The implementation arrangements  of the Project  as described in section C7.2 
shall be furthe r refined in the course of the Project  and shall serve as a blueprint  for other adaptation projects. A  
Steering Committee like this has proven to be a powerful forum in the Tanzanian context to escalate cross sectoral 
challenges during implementation of th e Water Sector Development Programme , e.g. to improve the flow of funds or to 
better monitor achievements on rural water supply through local administrative structures . It is therefore regarded as an 
important prerequisite for facilitat ing paradigm shift  towards cross -sectoral implementation of climate change adaptation 
measures. With the new structures  and procedures , it is expected that Tanzania will be able to accelerate the 
implementation of complex, multi -stakeholder climate change adaptation projects.  
Furthermore, the Project  creates an ICT platform on climate change to increase generation and use of climate 
information in decision making. The online based system facilitates information and interaction between  experts, 
researchers, training institution s and extension officers. It is an important basis for future climate adaptation policy 
making.  
2. Improving climate resilience of water supply infrastructure, agricultural practices and sanitation 
services  
A set of measures will be  implemented  in the Simiyu Region  to improve climate resilience of those with the most 
pressing adaptation needs. As described below, a community driven and demand -based approach is pursued, where 
communities can decide on measures on the basis of climate adaptation planning. While some beneficiaries may take 
part in only one area of action, others may benefit from several Project  components  (please refer to Section  E.1). 
2.1 Water supply:  
The Project  reliably supplies  urban and rural households (about 395,000 people) of the  three distr icts Busega, Bariadi 
and Itilima in the Simiyu Region with clean and safe drinking water. Water supply from Lake Victoria is the only 
sustainable and climate adapted solution  as described in section  C.1. A water intake and treatment plant is installed at 
Nyashimo town, located in the vicinity of Lake Victoria. The treated water is then pumped over 15 km through a DN 500 
pipeline to a command reservoir. From that reservoir water flows by gravity to the urban centres of Bariadi and 
Lagangabilili. The pipeline  is constructed in a manner that allow s a further expansion to southern Districts that are also 
affected by climate change  at a later stage . The infrastructure is designed to withstand the extreme weather events and 
climate conditions that are expected to increase in Simiyu, like floods, heavy winds and increased heat.  
In the three towns, d istribution networks are rehabilitated and expanded . Villages within a 24 km corridor of the main 
pipeline are supplied with water via secondary reservoirs, secondary pip e systems and public taps. More than 1,000 
rural and peri-urban settlements within a corridor of roughly 24 km along the water pipeline have been identified. 
Important aspects for this pre -selection have been the per-capita cost for rural water distributio n and the available 
budget. Settlements that are extremely scattered or distant from the pipeline routing are not part of the Project , since 
per-capita and unit cost s would be too high. Each secondary reservoir along the pipeline is equipped with a tanker 
filling station. The bulk water supplier operates water tankers that temporarily and selectively supply the most affected, 
areas scattered far from the transmission main during dry spells.  Among the pre -selected communities, the demand -
based, community dr iven approach is pursued, as further described below. This ensures that the needs of women and 
the most vulnerable in accessing water points  are c onsider ed in the selection and design, e.g. in terms of  number, 
types, location  and child safety .  
As a genera l principle, the Project  concentrates on the provision of public tabs in low -income areas, to ensure cost -


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 82 
 
 C 
efficiency and targeting of the poor and vulnerable. However, as an exception , in the initial phase, the Project  partly 
subsidises 4,000  house connect ions in Bariadi to accelerate achievement of the critical minimum demand for the water 
supply system. The off -taker tariff of SIMWASA and the retailer tariff of the urban utilities are approved by the national 
regulator EWURA . They  are based on the financi al model showing coverage of operating costs from the third year of 
operation onwards for the four utilities . They are also  in line with the ability and willingness to pay of the population 
according to the household survey (please refer to section F.1). Block tariffs ensure that the poor and most vulnerable 
benefit from reduced water tariffs that are in line with their financial capacities.  
2.2 Public sanitation and hygiene:  
The Project  improve s sanitation supply for at least 300,000 people in the three dist ricts of Simiyu Region and thereby  
prevent s the outbreak of water -borne diseases and improve s peoples’ health situation. It includes the whole cycle of 
wastewater, from  improve d latrines  to faecal sludge transport  through vacuum trucks and  sludge treatment  plants, 
where the sludge is treated through anaerobic ponds and constructed wetland s and finally used as fertilizer for 
agricultural purposes. Procedures and tariffs for sludge management are defined in a MoU between the Local 
Government Authorities ( LGAs ) and the Water and Sanitation Authorities ( WSAs ) before start of construction.  
Public sanitation facilities are established at schools, market places and bus stands. Locations for public toilets are 
selected by communities following climate adaptation pla nning in the demand based approach. Women are involved in 
the whole process, including planning and the decisions on the design of the public sanitation facilities e.g. the 
prioritization of locations that consider women’s need for privacy, safety, securit y and dignity.  
Hygiene awareness campaigns and the i nstallation of demonstration facilities such as Urine Diversion De -Hydrating 
Toilets and Double -Ventilated Improved Pit Latrines (UDDTs and DVIPs)  are also part of the Project . Schools establish  
“sanitat ion clubs” to raise awareness of hygiene behaviour.  The improvement of individual household latrines is 
promoted through the distribution of subsidized construction material (concrete slabs and ventilation pipes).  
2.3 Climate - smart agricultural  practices:  
These activities target an improvement of the economic situation of about 200,000 people living in Simiyu Region by 
supporting several climate - smart agricultural practices in a  programm atic approach that  contain s: 
 construction/rehabilitation/finalization o f small dams for rain water harvesting and water storage,  
 small -scale irrigation systems (e.g. drip irrigation) . Through community based planning, it is ensure d that 
irrigation technologies match the preferences of users . This includes adaptations to ensur e inclusion of women, 
like sprinklers, putting steps in irrigation structures and align ing irrigation schedules  with time available for 
access for livestock or household needs, or avoiding night irrigation schedules because of women’s increased 
risk of har assment after dark.  
 support to the provision of climate resillient  seeds for horticulture, maize and rice , 
 expansion of forests and areas under Ngitili management. Ngitili is a traditional form of community -owned or 
private land management aimed at having  sufficient fodder until the end of the dry season, and at producing  
fuelwood. The Project  promotes the extension of the area under Ngitili  and the improvement of existing Ngitili. It 
introduce s a mix of tree and grass species better adapt ed to changing en vironmental conditions and with a 
broad er genetic variance  to sustainably retain an increased adaptive capacity of the system .  
The Project  introduce s adapted  farming technologies which improve the farmers’ climate resilience and increase 
participating farm households ’ income s. Additionally, food security is improved. The entire population in Simiyu active in 
agriculture is the target group. As an open program it is demand driven and participatory. Selection criteria make sure  
that vulnerable and poor peopl e as well as women participate in decision making and implementation . For example, a  
minimum percentage of women headed households among the Project ’s participants is defined.  Annex 3 shows a list of 
possible interventions that can be financed by the Proje ct. 
3. Community driven approach   
The Project  follows a community driven  approach for all adaptation activities at local level  (e.g. rural water supply, 
Ngitili, public toilets), as proposed by the National Climate Change Strategy. By supporting all prominen t adaptation


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 82 
 
 C 
needs of the Simiyu Region in the programmatic approach and by letting communities decide on specific actions to 
pursue, it is secured that the Project  addresses the most pressing adaptation needs. Since the demand -based 
approach requires inte nse capacity development and presence at local level, the fact that the Project  covers several  
sectors bears efficiency gains. These cost savings are expected to be replicated in similar adaptation projects 
throughout Tanzania  
An Operational Manual will be  set up for the community driven approach, including a user guide for communities. As a 
starting point, c ommunity liaison officers and extension workers of the L ocal Government Authorities (L GAs) discuss 
climate change with the communities and facilitate d evelopment of community adaptation plans. Contests and awards 
are carried out to further mobilise the communities and develop ideas. The community adaptation plans include  
proposals for activities to be supported by the Project . These proposals are consoli dated and approved by the Regional 
Secretariat and sent to KfW for no -objection. Annex 4 contains an overview flow chart of the demand driven approach.  
It is expected that about 29 Community Based Water and Sanitation Organisations, and several further com munity 
based user associations will be  established  as part of  the Project . To ensure their ownership, as a prerequisite for the 
commencement of works for all activities on local level, they must deliver proof of a holistic concept for operation and 
mainten ance  and show the gazette note of establishment of th eir user association .  
Defined upfront community contributions are mandatory and a strict pre -condition. To ensure that poor and vulnerable 
can participate in the Project , they can be delivered in -kind, e.g. by digging of trenches, provisi on of construction 
material or labour for construction . The list in Annex 3 shows specifications and restrictions related to operation  of 
agricultural investments . User fees that cover operational cost shall be applied w henever possible. Some installations 
like school toilets do not generate income at all and inclusion of sufficient funding for maintenance need s to be secured 
in the LGA’s budgets. Others like toilets at public bus stands involve private service providers and shall be designed in 
a manner to cover operational costs.   
As is typical for demand driven approaches, highest quality of project preparation and consequent planning for proper 
operation already from the beginning on is decisive for sustainability. The  LGAs sensitize communities and provide 
comprehensive support in community driven selection and structuring of proposals. The Implementing Consultant 
support s this process.  
4. Capacity Development   
Comprehensive capacity development measures are an essential  part of the Project . The Regional Secretariat and the 
Local Government Authorities ( LGAs ) of the Districts  are supported and trained in all their functions to efficiently 
support the community based approaches in planning, implementation and operation. Th is includes training in  
preparing the framework for community -driven planning  for climate adaptation measures, promoting the establishment 
of Community Owned User Associations , procurement, contract managem ent, supervision and approval of construction 
work s as well as supporting Community Owned User Associations in sustainable operation and maintenance of their 
schemes.  
The water utilities are trained and supported in establishing a proper system for sustainable operation and management 
of the water supply systems. They receive support in financial, commercial, technical and administrative aspects . 
Training measures are aimed at improved financial viability of the utilities through optimisation of operational costs, 
improvement of revenues through effective collection systems, tariff setting and conducive household connection 
policies. Special focus is given to the supply of vulnerable areas with public tabs and sanitation infrastructure. MoWI is 
supported an d trained in overall coordination and in taking req uired management action to ensure high quality of all 
aspects of the Project , including metho ds for upscaling and replicating  lessons learnt as well as advice on needed 
changes to the institutional and regulatory framework for climate adaptation. To suppor t capacity development, long - 
and short -term experts are deployed on specific topics.  
Communities are encouraged to establish Farmer Field Schools with support through the Project . The basic principles 
of Farmer Field Schools are: a) learning by doing, bas ed on seasonal work; b) the field is the classroom; c) the aim is 
the acquisition of skills and knowhow, not of information; d) experimental, reflective learning; e) the principle of 
discovery. Farmers' groups (including women and youth groups) are guided in the selection of appropriate measures to


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 82 
 
 C 
implement on their farms. The focus is on integrated approaches that increase yields through soil protection practices, 
plant and seed variety selection, fertilization, weed control, integrated plant protection a nd climate -adapted  harvesting 
techniques. The plots of the Farmer Field Schools allow a comparison of production of the treated soils with traditionally 
cultivated soils. Evaluations of the approach show that especially female - headed smallholder household s benefit 
above average from participation. At the same time, F armer Field Schools which have been initiated and influenced by 
women tend to work sustainably and longer. F armer Field Schools are designed specifically for women with several 
measures as desc ribed in sections E. 3 and  F.3. 
C.4. Background Information on Project  Sponsor (Executing Entity)  
The Office of the Vice President (VPO)  
The Office of the Vice President (VPO) is the  Designated National Authority  for the Green Climate Fund.  
Ministry of F inance and Planning  (MoFP)  
KfW sign s the Financing Agreement for the funded activity with the United Republic of Tanzania (recipient), represented 
by the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MoFP) . MoFP is the executing entity for the Project . It ensures that  the agreed 
financial counterpart contributions are made available to the Project  through the different line ministries.  
Ministry of Water and Irrigation  (MoWI)  
The implementing entity for the Project  is the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MoWI)  on behal f of the United Republic of 
Tanzania . MoWI leads all required interaction s and interlinkages with different Tanzanian partners related to the 
Project , including coordinating the process of replication and paradigm shift, and chair ing the Steering Committee . It 
tenders and assigns contractors and c onsultants and is responsible for ensuring  the due execution of works and 
services.  
MoWI ’s vision  is to ensure sustainable management and development of water resources for the social and economic 
development  of the country . Since 2007, it  has continuously strengthen ed its planning and implementation capacity  
through implementing the Water Sector Development Programme, one of the largest sector wide transformation reform 
programmes in Subsahara Africa. Staff numbers  have been increased to 2.300 people (FY 15/16) and a 
comprehensive capacity development plan has been implemented. The approved budget for the FY 2014/2015 
compiled by MoWI was about 200 m EUR including the administrative budget and the development activi ties. MoWI 
initiated the Climate Chan ge Dialogue Forum in 2012 to provide a platform for stakeholders to exchange experiences 
and best practices. Since then the ministry has successfully initiated 11 forums with great participation of stakeholders 
from var ious backgrounds, including different Ministries, local government institutions, NGOs, universities, the private 
sector and development partners.  Accordingly, MoWI already plays a coordinating role concerning climate  change -
related activities and dialogue in multi -sectoral  settings.  
MoWI is experienced in the implementation of large scale projects, thus well prepared to guide the Project  in a holistic 
manner. The Water Sector Investment Programme Phase I implemented by MoWI between the years of 2009 and 201 6 
contained Projects worth more than 1.5 Mio. USD in total. For example, it implemented the water supply project from 
Lake Victoria to the towns of Kahama and Shinyanga (KASHWASA) and 54 villages along the pipeline. The total project 
cost was about 1 50 mil lion Euro, it was commissioned in 2009.  The project production capacity is 80,000 m3/day. 
Lesson s learned from  WSDP including  the KASHWASA project have been  integrated in the Project  e.g. with regards to 
the design  of the intake, the choice of a staged app roach and the central role of decision making and capacity building  
at local level.   
KfW and MoWI  have an excellent and close working relationship due to the long -term engagement of German 
Development Cooperation in the Tanzanian water sector. The employee s of the responsible Urban Water Supply and 
Sanitation Division show a great commitment to the Project  and are highly motivated. Despite these strengths, it has to 
be considered that staffing levels are still low and there is room for improvement in terms of training efforts and 
empowerment especially of young professionals. This shall be addressed by delivering capacity building on specific 
topics and on overall management as well as  support through the Strategic Support Consultant.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 82 
 
 C 
Ministry of Agricultur e, Livestock and Fisheries  (MALF)   
The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries  (MALF ) gives strategic direction to the Project  through the Steering 
Committee. It seconds staff for the implementation of the Project  to the Regional Secretariat and t o the LGAs. Its 
seconded officers will approve the due execution of works and services including capacity building with regards to 
climate resilient agriculture.  
MALF has the responsibility to provide  a conducive environment for the various stakeholders in  Tanzania’s  agricultural 
sector . This includes building capacities  of LGA s in delivering agricultural services, training and technology , as well as 
facilitating the role of the private sector in agricultural production. MALF is a strong stakeholder of the Tanzanian 
climate adaptation agenda. The corresponding strategies and action plans are contained in the Agriculture Climate 
Resilience Plan, 2014 -2019 and the Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Programme (TCSAP), 2015 -2025.   
President’s Office, Regional Ad ministration and Local Government (PO -RALG)  
PO-RALG supervises the Regional Secretariat of the Simiyu Region. It is responsible for transfer ring funds to the 
Regional Secretariat, to the LGAs and to the District Town Urban Water and Sanitation Authoritie s in Lagangabilili and 
Nyashimo. Additionally, it is responsible for payment of salaries and operational costs. This includes funds for activities 
of line ministries that are implemented through the Regional Secretariat and LGAs in the fields of education, h ealth, 
water supply, rural roads, agriculture and livestock . 
Ministry of Health, Community  Development, Gender, Elderly and Children  (MHCDG EC) 
MHCDG EC’s preventive health section is responsible for hygiene and sanitation, and the Ministry is also responsib le for 
develop ing and oversee ing the  implementation of policies and programmes for community development. Non -
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) are registered, coordinated and monitored by M HCDGC. It support s women 
empowerment initiatives and c ollect s, processes and store s gender related data and statistics . A representative from 
MHCDG EC will participate in the Project ’s Steering Committee.  
For further information on the implementing entities on the local level and the Steering Committee, please refer to 
Section C.7.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
Household surveys have been carried out as part of the feasibility studies of the Project , to attain reliable information on 
markets, prices and demand. According to these surveys, people see the lack of sa fe and year round water supply as 
one of the biggest challenges and therefore as a priority they are willing to pay for. Average water tariffs required to 
cover operational costs are in the order of 50 -80 ct /m3, which  is in the range of  average price for d rinking water in 
Tanzania , though at the higher end. Tariffs will be approved by the national Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory 
Authority (EWURA).  EWURA has gradually increased water tariffs throughout the country over the last years and is 
planning to  continue doing so in line with its policy to ensure that tariffs cover operation and maintenance costs. To 
date, m any water utilities in the country still do not cover their operational costs . According to the survey in Simiyu, 
people are willing to pay h igher tariffs if water is provided reliably and at good quality. D uring dry seasons, the price of 
water tends to escalate to up to 8 EUR  per m³, for water supplied from private providers at poor quality and reliability. 
People see this as a major and unfai r burden for the large proportion of poor  in the region. Prices for this informal water 
supply are expected to rise even more as intensity an d duration of droughts increase . The Project  promote s block 
tariffs , so that poor and vulnerable households benefit  from lower prices . Since the major part of the population in 
Simiyu is poor and water is a basic need and human right, the revenue collection from tariffs covers only operational 
and maintenance costs , but not the investment costs . This underlines the nee d for grant financing as further described 
in section  E.4.2.  
To date, there is no considerable market for sanitation activities in Simiyu. Like elsewhere in Tanzania, the population is 
not used to  appropriate hygiene behaviour and knowledge about the impor tance of sanitation and waste management 
for health is still low. The Project  includes components  to raise awareness o n the importance of hygiene, especially 
during floods. This serve s to increase the demand for sanitation services. The use of treated slud ge, and in rural areas 
where appropriate  also the use of separated urine , also form s a part of the awareness campaigns.   
Rain-fed agriculture is the main economic activity in the region, generally with paddy as food crop and cotton as cash


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 82 
 
 C 
crop. There is a  strong competition amongst producers of food and cash crops and good quality rice fetches higher 
prices. Pricing structures are generally base d on market principles but are guided by the government. The government 
provides subsidies in farm inputs, partic ularly fertilizers , in the case of the Simiyu Region. Changes in precipitation 
patterns increase the risk of crop -failures and an overall decline in productivity in the region in the long term. This will be 
catastrophic for the majority of people who depen d on subsistence farming. Simiyu has been receiving food aid for two 
years in a row.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
The Project  is implemented in line with the policies and regulations of the United Republic of Tanzania and in li ne with 
KfW’s financial, procurement and environ mental and social safeguards. A  number of licenses need to be obtained for 
implementing and operating the Project , among them  
 National Environment Management Council (NEMC) approval of Environmental and Socia l Impact Assessment, 
Environmental and Social Management Plan, Resettlement Action Plan: prior to commencement of 
construction ; 
 Evidence on consent from riparian states of Lake Victoria and from the Lake Victoria Basin Commission on 
extraction of water fro m Lake Victoria for domestic supply of the Simiyu Region in line with the Protocol for the 
Sustainable Development of Lake Victoria Basin signed on November 29th by the United Republic of Tanzania, 
the Republic of Kenya and the Republic of Uganda: before b eginning of construction;  
 Gazette  of Managing Board of Simiyu Bulk Water Supply Authority (SIMWASA) and of the UWSAs in Nyashimo 
and Lagangabilili : before commissioning of the water supply system;  
 Gazette on establishment of Community Owned User  Organisati ons ( COWSO s): before start of groundworks ; 
 EWURA approval of business plans and water tariffs for Bariadi Urban Water and Sanitation Authority 
(BARUWASA), Nyashimo and Lagangabilili utilities and SIMWASA : at the time of commissioning;  
 Offtaker agreement be tween the three urban utilities and SIMWASA : at the time of commissioning;  
An Implementing Consultant will be tasked to support MoWI in ensuring that all relevant licenses and permits are 
obtained for the Project  in due time. The general conditions of the works contracts ensure that the contractors provide 
the required guarantees and insurances. No additional insurance arrangement or policy is related to this Project . 
No public charges and taxes shall be  financed from the GCF contribution.  According to a MoU between the United 
Republic of Tanzania and Development Partners, the government exempts all expenditures for goods, works and 
services financed under the Water Sector Development Programme (of which the S imiyu Climate Resilience Project  is 
part) from al l taxes imposed directly by the Government of Tanzania . In 2014, the government launched a new VAT act 
that caused delays  of some development projects by changing the exemption procedure  into a reimbursement 
procedure. KfW’s engagement in the Water Sector Development Programme has not been affected so far. The 
government is currently reviewing the VAT act and committed to  accommodate th ese administrative problem s.  
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
KfW will take over responsibility for the  overall Project  as Accredited Entity as defined in the Accredited Master 
Agreement between GCF and KfW.  It will open a separate trust account for the funds from GCF and will administer the 
funds on behalf of GCF . For an overview of how GCF proceeds will f low from GCF to the Funded Activity  and the 
contractual and legal arrangements that facilitate the flow of funds , please refer to the diagrams provided in Annex es 5 
and 6 . Further details on financial management and procurement are provided in section F.4.  
C.7.1. Institutions involved at r egional and local level  
KfW has carried out a comprehensive assessment of the institutions that are involved in Project  implementation and 
operation. As a result, local government and community based organisations are exp ected to be capable of 
implementing their tasks under the Project  if supported by an international consultancy firm. For information on the roles 
and responsibilities of the relevant Ministries, please refer to section  C.4. This section C.7.1. describes th e assessment 
of institutions involved on the local level: the regional administrative bodies, Wate r and Sanitation Utilities and


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 82 
 
 C 
community owned user associations. A more detailed description of institutions involved is provided in Annex 7. 
Local Administr ation  
The Local Government Authorities (LGAs ) are responsible for local service delivery in education, he alth, water 
supply, rural roads, agriculture and livestock . They are authorized to levy charges, fees and local taxes . However, 
grants from the central  Government  constitute the bulk of their financial resources. LGAs  advise communities on the 
creation of Community Development Plans. Based on the Community Development Plans, the LGAs prepare District 
Development plans and create annual work, procurement,  and financing plans  which are then submitted to the 
Regional Secretariat . Communities are organised in so -called Wards , which consist of a whole small village, or parts of 
larger villages or towns. In towns, the area of the Wards usually follows the roads . LGA officers are responsible for 
ensur ing that the planning on ward level is done as close to the target group as possible, in a participatory manner . 
They are also important key staff to ensure that the needs and interests of women and marginalised grou ps are taken 
into account, e.g. by encouraging equal representation of women in the Ward Development Committees as described in 
section C.7.1. LGAs also advise Community Owned User Associations on the development of a sound concept for 
operation and mainte nance  of their schemes. They also oversee the Water and Sanitation Authorities (WSAs) of the 
District towns.  
The Regional Secretariat  of the Simiyu Region overse es and supervises the operations of LGAs and advises them. It  
receives the annual work, procur ement and financing plans from LGAs and feeds  them in the national planning and 
budgeting process. The Regional Secretariat also accounts for the expenditures of LGAs , and it reports to PO -RALG 
and sector Ministries. The Regional Secretariat o f the Simiyu Region is located in Bariadi town. It was set up in the year 
2012, following the establishment of the new Region.  
In summary, all local administration structures in Simiyu have only recently been set up, or have been upgraded from 
District to Regional leve l following the establishment of the new Region  in 2012. Today , the existing bodies overall 
execute  their functions. However , it has to be considered  that they are still developing, and that skills are still low. 
Experience s in overseeing larger projects  are very little.  Finding adequate staff is a significant challenge also due to 
poor basic services, like lack of clean and reliable drinking water.  While the capacity of the Regional Secretariat is 
considered to be satisfactory in the Tanzanian context, the  capacities of the LGAs are still relatively low. About 50% of 
the staff posts are vacant and there is a lack of basic prerequisites for successful extension work like transport , printed 
materials, or inputs for demonstration plots. Strengthening LGAs will  be critical to improve the currently limited adaptive 
capacities and to build commun ity resilience in a sustainable and gender -sensitive manner. The Project  takes this into 
consideration by giving high attention to capacity building and training of LGAs a nd the Regional Secretariat through 
the Implementing Consultant.  
Water and Sanitation Authorities  (WSA)  
WSAs  are independent Authorities under Tanzanian law that operate to their own accounts, generate revenues, can 
take commercial loans, s ue and be su ed. The WSAs  own, run, operate and maintain water  distribution infrastructure, 
sludge digester s and sludge exhauster trucks . They are responsible for supply ing clean drinking water  to all people in 
Regional and District towns , as well as for sludge transport and treatment . They may involve private or other public 
service providers for sludge transport.  Currently, all WSAs in Tanzania receive subsidies from the central government 
at least for larger infrastructure investments. They are regulated by the Electric ity and Water Utilities Regulatory 
Authority (EWURA). EWURA approves the tariffs of the WSAs.  
 
Bariadi Urban Water and Sanitation Authority (BARUWASA)  was originally a district utility under PO -RALG and 
became a regional WSA  under MoWI wi th effect from Jan uary 1st, 2013. Revenues of BARUWASA are low, mainly due 
to missing water supply infrastructure. According to EWURA  standards , BARUWASA is a category “C” WSA. This 
means that its serves less than 65% of the population in Bariadi, an d that electricity and s alary bills are subsidised by 
MoWI. BARUWASA has recently been staffed with a new and qualified Managing Director, but the utility is confronted 
with several interrelated factors inhibit ing its capacity to perform  better . This includes a low coverage rate,  poor quality 
of water, low revenues and difficulties to fill open posts with capable staff due to the inadequate working environment.   
There are no WSAs in the  District capitals of Nyashimo and Lagangabilili . MoWI will set  up autonomous WSAs for


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 82 
 
 C 
these two  District towns in line with the Tanzanian rules and regulations. BARUWASA intends to deliver services to the 
two district utilities in the fields of legal advice, personal management as well as finance and accounting.  
The Simiyu Bulk Water Supply Authori ty (SIMWASA)  will be established as provided for  under the Water  Supply and 
Sanitation Act 2009 . It owns, operates and maintains  the water treatment plant , pumpi ng stations, transmission mains, 
the command reservoir  and secondary reservoirs along the pipel ine. It is responsible  for extracting water from Lake 
Victoria, treating it, supplying it at good quality to the urban utilities and the COWSOs, and collecting revenues 
accordingly. SIMWASA enter s into off -taker agreements with  the three urban utilities and with COWSOs.  
All WSAs will receive comprehensive training and capac ity building measures through  the Project . Capacity building, 
the provision of adequate infrastructure and sound water tariffs are expected to put them in a position to adequately 
operat e the water supply system . Experiences in Tanzania show that utilities efficiently operate their business once 
these prerequisites have been put in place (like Tanga, Iringa or Mbeya WSAs with support through KfW).  
Community Owned User Associations  
These are organisations established by communities, like farmer associations, irrigator’s organisations or water user 
associations . They are established following agreed actions defined as part of the Community Development Plans. 
There are different opti ons for the legal structure of c ommunity owned user associations under Tanzanian law. T hey 
can be r egistered trusts, a water consumer association,  a cooperative society , a non-governmental organization , or any 
other body or organization established under written l aw of Tanzania . In all of these possible legal structures, the 
communities are the legal owners of the organisation and its assets . Wherever required, e.g. for drinking water supply 
schemes or Irrigator’s Organizations, the community selects a local  operat or that is responsible for revenue collection, 
operation and maintenance of th e scheme. The operator is assigned with a performance agreement elaborating on 
tariff setting, revenue collection and payment procedures. It collects user fees and submits them t o the bank acc ount 
maintained by the board. Selected board members oversee all these activities.  Community Owned Water Supply 
Organisations (COWSOs) that will connect to the bulk water supplier will be encouraged to establish themselves  in a 
clustered form , covering 3-5 villages.  This has shown to ease operation and maintenance and to enhance sustainability 
of such schemes. However , this only proved to be successful if fully supported by the communities. As per September 
2016 data , there are 1,086 COWSO s in the country.  The Ministry of Water and Irrigation is currently preparing 
guidelines for performance criteria and tariff setting of the COWSO. Various program mes on capacity development and 
performance improvement of the COWSO are underway supported by the Department for International Development 
(DfID) of  the United Kingdom. The KASHWASA project connects 61 COWSOs that supply  water from a bulk water 
system to villages  in the Kahama Shinyanga Region . The general performance of these COWSOs is satisfactory a nd 
they are able to pay their current bill s. Most of the COWSOs in KASHWASA supply more than one village with the 
biggest Mwamashimba COWSO supplying water to 14 villages.  
Today,  there are only a few COWSOs  in the Simiyu Region. While some of them are doin g well, others lack a proper 
legal and institutional setup and/or an agreed operational concept. No efforts have been taken so far to establish 
community based struc tures at a larger scale in the r egion. Experiences from other regions in Tanzania like the Hai 
Water Supply Project show that community based user associations function well if set up appropriately.  
C.7.2. Implementation Arrangements  
Steering Committee and paradigm shift   
The Steering Committee as described in section C.2 reviews annual reports as well as audits of the Project  and 
provides feedback on them , particularly on  aspects like  targeting of the most vulnerable, gender balance, and 
sustainability. It is responsible to ensure that experiences from the Project  are used to improve the institu tional , 
regulatory  and legal framework  for climate adaptation . It is tasked to initiate  the establishment of new sets of laws and 
regulations . Another important task of the Steering Committee is to solve challenges that materialize at the interlinkages 
between the different line ministries or between the different levels (local, regional, national actors) and to clarify roles 
and responsibilities of stakeholders as required.  
Urban water supply, sludge management and bulk water supply systems  
MoWI  is fully responsible for p rocurement , contract management and construction supervision of the urban water 
supply, sludge management and bulk water supply systems  during  the initial Project  phase s. While capacities of the


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 82 
 
 C 
WSAs are enhanced during implementation, MoW I will gradually  delegate  parts of its tasks, like the supervision of 
works , to the respective WSAs  by signing delegation agreements.  This proved to be a practical and doable approach in 
Tanzania.   
Community Based Approach  
The Regional Secretariat reviews the adherence of measures proposed by communities to the agreed criteria of the 
Project . It checks the validity of the proposed concept and its suitability to address climate change e.g. by assessing 
criteria like the distance to a n existing reliable sourc e of water (well, river). It  also ensures that the communities ’ 
proposal s take  into account the needs of and is accessible to the vulnerable people, e.g. through fair tariff s and their 
explicit inclusion in training and labour contribution. An important  criterion for selection of activities is the concept  for 
operation and maintenance prepared by the community . It must contain cost covering end -user tariffs wherever 
possible (e.g. for all water supply projects) and show how revenue is collected and stored i n an account accessible for 
the purpose of operation, maintenance and small repair of the scheme as required. Also, a clear concept on how 
women’s needs have been taken in to account (refer to section E.3.1)  has to  be provided. Half of the board member s of 
the Community Based User Associations must be women.  
After review, the Regional Secretariat sends the proposed measures to KfW for no -objection. Following approval, the 
LGA procures goods and services in the field of agriculture in line with the procureme nt plan and supervises 
construction works together with the Community Based User Association  and the Implementing Consultant. Water 
supply and sanitation are part of the large water supply works contracts, to enhance efficiency (please refer to section 
F.4), but communities still have the same imp ortant roles in establishing  local user associations, planning, detailed 
design, construction supervision as well as operation and maintenance.  
To support all these critical processes of local planning and impleme ntation, the Regional Secretariat hosts a Project  
Management Unit (PMU) . The PMU is  staffed by the Regional Secretariat. It is comprise d of a general manager, a 
procurement specialist, a financial manager and  an accountant financed by PO -RALG as well as technical liaison 
officers , extension officers and social welfare officers seconded from  and financed by MoWI, MALF  and MCDGC , 
respectively . The PMU is responsible for ensur ing 
A) adherence of community driven activities to fiduciary safeguards : 
 compile and endorse annual work plans, procurement plans and bu dgets prepared by the LGAs,  
 monitor and report to MoWI and KfW on implementation of community driven activities on the basis o f 
information provided by LGAs,  
 be the holder of the Project ’s disposition fund  for climate smart agriculture  and rural sanitation , assign  audits 
and send request s for disbursements to KfW for funding under the disposition fund.  
B) a conducive  framework for co mmunity -driven planning:  
 coordinate capacity -building measures for LGAs in cluding deploying short term experts on specific topics 
especially on community mobilisation and sensitization.  
 ensure equal participation of women and men, and targeting of the most vulnerable  
 facilitate upscaling and replication of lessons learnt on regi onal and local level e.g. by implementing the 
contest -award system . 
The PMU is supported by an international consultancy firm  (Implementing Consultant).  
Role s of the consultants  
A Strategic Consultant  support s MoWI and the Steering Committee in overall coo rdination and in taking required 
management  action to ensure high  quality of all aspects of the Project . This include s reviewing deliverables of the 
Implementing Consultant e.g. detailed design, procurement and supervision of works contract , and commenting  on 
adherence to KfW and national standards, and international best practices. The Strategic Consultant also advises the 
Steering Committee on options to strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT  DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 82 
 
 C 
implementation . It trains and strengthens MoWI staff in their coordinating role.  
An Implementing Consultant  supports day to day operations during Project  implementation. It reviews the detailed 
design, prepares the tender documents, supports the tendering and supervises co nstruction works for urban water 
supply, sludge management and bulk water supply . It countersigns  all documentation submitted to KfW for no -objection 
on financial, procurement and contract management, proposals for support under the c ommunity based approac h and 
withdrawal applications . It also prepares progress report s for MoWI, the Regional Secretariat, KfW and the Steering 
Committee. The Implementing Consultant also carries  out capacity -building measures to strengthen WSAs and the 
LGAs. It also assist s in the formation of community based user associations including their constitution, regulation, 
performance agreements and tariff setting.   
Detailed ToR describing the tasks of the consultant s in line with KfW’s internal control systems are developed by MoWI  
with the support of a Tender Agent that is financed by the Government of Germany . The ToR are commented and need 
to be approved by KfW.


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJ ECT DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 82 
 
 C 
C.8.  Timetable of Project  Implementation  
The overall implementation period is five years. Construction activities st art in the middle of the second year after selection of  the consultant s and the 
contractors. For the water supply and sanitation component , the constr uction period of two years is followed by  an 18 months operation period which 
allows a close monitoring of  performance and – if required – an adaptation of operational structures. For the agriculture component measures are 
implemented according to the annual investment plans over the first four years. Monitoring of operation will be done continuo usly and with a special 
focus in the second half of the last year.  For further information on monitoring and reporting, please refer to section H.2.  
 
Task Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20
Improved procedures for 
implementation of adaptation activities
Establishing and improving mechanisms 
towards cross-sectoral planning and 
implementation
Capacity buliding to Regional Secretariat, 
Water utilities, 
COWSOs and LGAs
Resillient water supply services
Bulk water supply system (intake, 
treatment, transmission) 
Rural water distribution  
Urban water distribution
Preventive public sanitation and 
hygiene measures
Public toilets
Faecal sludge treatement
Awareness campaign
Improved household latrines
Improved climate smart agriculture 
practices
Dam construction / rehabilitationCONSTRU
CTION
Equipment and seeds
Ngitli Development
ICT platformTender
Strategic                                     
Consultant
Develop Operational Manuals, 
Selection of measures, Design, 
ESIA and TenderCONSTRUCTION/
SUPPLYTender Implementing 
ConsultantReview Detailed Design
+PQ for ConstructionFinal RAP 
& 
Compensa
tionTender 
Construct-
ion
AWARENESS CAMPAIGN Monitoring
CONSTRUCTION / OPERATION BY USERS
OP E RAT IONCONSTRUCTION / 
SUPPLYTender Implementing 
ConsultantCD SUPPORT TO RS, UWSSAs, COWSOS, LGAs
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION
CONSTRUCTION / 
SUPPLYCONSTRUCTION / 
SUPPLYOPERATIONDetailed Design 
+PQ, RAP and compensation where 
applicableTender 
Construct-
ionOPERATION
OPERATIONCONSTRUCTIONCONSTRUCTION / OPERATION BY USERS OPERATION
Tender Implementing 
ConsultantTender Implementing 
Consultant
Develop ICT PLATFORM OPERATION AND REFINEMENT OF ICT PLATFORMSelection  
design, 
ESIA & 
TenderSteering
Committeepropose 
structures, 
procedures, 
regulationsfinal 
review &
replicatereplicate propose 
structures, 
procedures, 
regulationsreview 
lessons 
learntreview 
lessons 
learntreview 
lessons 
learntpropose 
structures, 
procedures, 
regulationsestablish
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
Steering
Committee
OPERATION 
Selection  
design, 
ESIA & 
TenderSelection  
design, 
ESIA & 
Tender
OPERATION OPERATION Steering
Committee


---
*Page 26*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 82 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Tanzania is a LDC and sever ely impacted by climate change. Despite strong effo rts to put in place the necessary 
policies and strategies for climate adaptation, without GCF involvement to complement ongoing efforts and address 
gaps, G overnment of Tanzania  is not in a position to translate these plans into cross -sectoral action.  
Only with involvement of the Green Climate Fund it is possible to  
 tackle climate challenges in the required holistic manner . Classic development partners  usually focus on 
sectoral funding. A sectoral intervention however does  not serve to achieve the ultimate  goal of increased 
resilience of the most vulnerable  people that are affected by various climate -related challenges , as described 
in section C.2 . Implementing stand -alone sectoral interventions could certainly provide some relief, but does  
not lead to clim ate resilient livelihoods  in most cases like in the Simiyu Region . For example, if the intervention 
focusse s on climate smart agriculture, people still starve from shortage of drinking water during the increasing 
droughts. Furthermore, the classic parallel  sectoral interventions miss efficiency gains especially when it 
comes to actions that need a high level of activities and presence on the local level. This applies to planning, 
awareness raising and educational measures or setting up sustainable water sup ply organisations for 
domestic and agricultural purposes;   
 obtain the  calling  power needed to bring together stakeholders  and knowledge from various sectors. This  is 
crucial for success of the Project  since it is a prerequisite to develop procedures and be st practices for 
implementing the needed coordinated, streamlined interventions. With the GCF funding, the Project  unlocks 
potential for replication  and scaling up, thus facilitating  paradigm shift ; 
 implement the unique programmatic community driven  approa ch at sufficient scale  and according to 
international standards, to facilitate the feeding  of lessons learnt into the national and local planning systems. 
The GCF provides a n unique opportunity to make use of the experiences and ownership of those most 
affected by climate change ;  
 use a proportion of funding for measures that facilitate achieving impacts beyond the Project  itself like the 
strategic  consultancy support for paradigm shift;  
 leave locked -in development paths  and use an innovative approach in th e design for climate smart agriculture 
and an innovative, staged approach for the use of the country’s big lakes for secure, sustainable and cost -
covering water supply. The Project  demonstrate s that both irrigation and drinking water needs can be viably 
met and managed in a sustainable manner.   
 
The GCF, as the central implementing entity of International Climate Finance, is in a unique position to provide all 
elements which are required for the su ccessful implementation of the Project : 
 strengthening  highe st ownership and country drivenness ; 
 providing sufficient  volumes of grant funding from international climate finance sources ; 
 promoting cross -sectoral broad approaches which promote long lasting paradigm shift towards a climate 
resilient development path . 
GCF Funding ensure s that people in one of the most vulnerable areas in Tanzania significantly improve their resilience 
to climate related shocks and climate -induced diminishing of available water resources an d that lessons learnt from 
the Project  are repl icated  throughout the country.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 82 
 
 
 
 D 
D.2. Exit Strategy   
The Project  has a strong focus on ensuring sustainable operation, scaling up and replication . The main features  of this 
“exit strategy” are (1)  knowledge building on the basis of lessons learnt fro m the implementation process of the Project  
(2) establishing conducive institutional structures and fair tariff setting, and (3) community based planning and 
operation processes . All three aspects are strengthened through comprehensive capacity development  measures that 
are imple mented through local structures.  
Knowledge building on the basis of lessons learnt  
The Project  establishes a  collaborative and participatory  process of institutional learning to enhance efficiency and 
effectiveness of planning and i mplementing cross -cutting climate adaptation interventions. It enhances acquiring 
specific knowledge and adapts state of the art coordination and implementing mechanisms to the local context. It 
further develops knowledge products including guidelines for inter-ministerial implementation of cross -sectoral 
projects, or the ICT Platform on climate change. These products complement and are integrated into existing policies 
and sectoral strategies like the Water Sector Development Programme and the Agricultural  Sector Development 
Programme. They are owned by the government, well integrated into the Tanzanian budget and regulatory systems 
and will be sustainably pursued long beyond the implementing horizon of the proposed Project .  
Institutional structures and ta riff setting   
The Water Supply and Sanitation Authorities are expected to fully cover their operational cost s from the water supply 
system’s revenues from year three of operation onwards. However, revenues only flow in once household connections 
and public  taps are implemented. S peedy connection of new customers is therefore decisive for the financial 
perfo rmance and the sustainability of the water supply system  (also refer to Section  G.2). A number of measures are 
taken to incentivise speedy connection of customers: The urban utilities develop household connection strategies , 
showing how they intend to achieve the  number of customers necessary to cover operational costs in the shortest 
possible time.  The Project  pre-finances household connections in urban c entres to help urban utilities overcome this 
critical stage. Customers pay back the connection costs over a period of 3 to 5 years. This generates additional 
income for the utilities and allows them to invest in smaller network extensions in order to furth er increase the number 
of customers. Furthermore, BARUWASA will support the two district towns utilities of Nyashimo and Lagangabilili in 
fields like administration, accounting and legal services through service agreements. While the urban utilities have t o 
take off a minimum amount of water from SIMWASA, there is no pre -defined amount of water to be sold to COWSOs. 
This is a strong incentive for urban utilities to increase customers, and for SIMWASA to engage in support ing the  
formulation of COWSOs in coop eration with the LGAs.  Despite these efforts to connect customers as quickly as 
possible, SIMWASA and the urban utilities depend  on financial support in the first two or three years after 
commissio ning, since water connections n eed some time to be establis hed. To ensure that the urban utilities  and 
SIMWASA build up successfully from day one and ha ve the power to install  the needed connections, the Government 
of Tanzania provide s them  with the necessary financial support within this phase.  This will be close ly monitored 
through the annual financial statements of the Authorities, the financial model and the reporting. The Government of 
Tanzania commits to staff the urban utilities and SIMWASA  sufficiently in line with  Tanzanian standards  and according 
to detai led staffing concepts . This staff benefit s from capacity -development measures of the Project .  
Community  based planning  
The Project ’s long term sustainability strategy in rural areas builds on experiences from the Hai water supply project in 
Kilimanjaro Re gion and from the traditional agro -pastoral system Ngitili. They show that there is a strong cohesion of 
communities and high ethics of compliance, if projects are planned in line with local structures right from the 
beginning.  Community -based climate adap tation planning, effi cient lines of official and casual communication, a long -
term flexible work -plan and fair and equable community representation  taking into account gender balance are critical 
(please also refer to section  G.2). Communities are supporte d in their planning processes though local structures, i.e. 
the Regional Secretariat and the LGAs. H igh le vel technical capacity building helps to improve  extension services  up 
to the level required to achieve adequate adaptive capacities. Local Civil Society Organisation s are involved to 
enhance sustainability of the efforts.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the Project  to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Adaptatio n impacts:  
 At least 495,000 people , out of which half are women , are direct beneficiaries and are expected to adapt their 
livelihood s to be in a position to cope with climate impacts through improved water, sanitati on and/or 
agricultural services . The tot al number of beneficiaries equals to about  1 % of the country’s total population of 
around 50 m illion people. About 395,000 people (52% of them being women) profit from year -round access to 
reliable and safe drinking water supply despite climate shocks and  stresses. About 300,000 people (60 % being 
women since girls particularly benefit from improved school sanitation) benefit from improved public sanitation 
facilities, and thus become less prone to climate -induced waterborne diseases. About 200,000 people (52% of 
them being women) increase food security and climate resilience of their livelihoods.  Part of the beneficiaries 
may benefit from several Project  measures. As presented in the table below, double counting of beneficiaries  
was avoided to the maximum possible extend . For more information on the calculation of the beneficiaries of 
climate - smart agriculture, please refer to the supporting documentatio n (Economic and Financial Analysis 
Agriculture)  
Activity  component’s  
beneficiaries  factor  calculated 
beneficiaries  Justification of calculation factor  
urban water supply  95,000 1 x 95,000  
rural water supply  300,000 1 x 300,000  
sanitation  300,000 0 x 0 all beneficiaries also benefit from water supply  
agriculture  200,000 0,5 x  100,000 half of the benefic iaries also benefit from rural water supply . This is 
assumed since the geographical scope of the water component follows 
the main pipeline from Lake Victoria to Langangabilili, and mainly 
includes a 24 km corridor in 3 out of the 5 districts of Simiyu.  
total beneficiaries    495,000  
 
 About 85% of the Project  activities avoid lock-in of long -lived infrastructure . In the past, many efforts have been 
taken and money has been spent in Simiyu by trying to use established, well known technologies like 
groundwat er wells and dams for water supply. The major ity of these dams and wells are abandoned today  
because they are not adequate to serve for reliable drinking water supply, and because community needs and 
dynamics and climate smart technologies have not been ta ken into account sufficiently for sustained 
agricultural use . A new, innovative staged approach  is proposed, where a cost covering and financially viable 
Project  secure s people’s right to water and create the environment needed to ensure basic services . At the 
same time income is generated and households increase their adaptive capacities by applying climate smart 
agriculture based on locally available water resources. Also some f urther small elements of the Project  take 
new technology paths : Operation and maintenance of local pumping facilities with diesel pumps proved to  be a 
major challenge to COWSOs, thus the Project  opts for solar pumps wherever possible. Sanitation infrastructure 
uses locally adjusted on -site techniques that are economically and techni cally more viable than sewerage 
networks even in the urban areas of the smaller or middle -sized towns (pleas e refer to section F.2) . The use of 
improved or adapted inputs (e.g. seeds) in agriculture and agro -forestry, together with capacity building 
measur es like Farmer Field Schools, increases climate resilience and at the same time improve s beneficiaries’ 
livelihoods. Implementing th is holistic approach  require s considerable capacity building and facilitation of a 
paradigm shift.  
 Vulnerable population gr oups , especially women, ex perience significant relief  from the daily burden of finding 
acceptable water. Women are expected to significantly increase their adaptive capacity in comparison to their 
situation today, where they are forced to spend up to 6 hou rs daily in search for water, leaving little time for


---
*Page 29*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
other adaptation activities e.g. improved agriculture. The adaptive know -how of farmers and communities is 
strengthened through sensitization campaigns and Farmer Field Schools. The Project  also contrib utes to 
solving the increasing conflicts over scarce water resources from which vulnerable groups tend to suffer most. 
BARUWASA and the two newly established water utilities apply block tariffs with preferable water prices for the 
poor. Additionally,  the Project  gives preference to public taps in poor areas. Adequate representation of women 
and vulnerable people in the boards of COWSOs and local user groups ensure s inclusion.  
 The Project  strengthen s institutional systems for climate responsive planning and development  on the central 
government, regional and district levels. On the national level, the Project ’s mechanisms for inter -ministerial 
coordination  shall serve as a role model. They are needed to address the multi -sectoral nature of climate 
adaptation measures in Tanzania. The Steering Committe e develops  standard procedures, organizational 
structures and working guidelines on the basis of experiences made in the Project . The proposed structures 
have a clear focus on implementation. With the new structur es, it is expected that Tanzania is expected to be  
able to accelerate implementation of climate change adaptation projects that could include all relevant sectors. 
On Regional and district level, LGAs and water utilities receive comprehensive capacity buil ding and the 
necessary means (infrastructure, manpower) to be able to serve the people. The Vice President’s Office has a 
critical role in overseeing the suitability of the proposed mechanisms for the achievement of the country’s 
climate targets. Through t he National Climate Change Steering Committee (NCCSC) and National Climate 
Change Technical Committee (NCCTC), they are responsible for continuously monitor ing the new processes 
and for establish ing feedback and review mechanisms for adjustments and fine -tuning as required. 
Performance of water utilities is annually assessed and ranked by EWURA. MoWI is currently setting up a 
COWSOs Competency Assessment Framework, that is used as part of the Project  monitoring system to track 
performance of COWSOS.  
 The Project  increases generation and use of climate information in decision making  by establish ing an ICT 
network on climate change. This includes identifying available and needed data, developing a systematic data 
collection and manage ment as well as  capacity b uilding. It is an online based system of communication and 
interaction for experts,  researchers, training institutions and extension officers. The Steering Committee is 
tasked to ensure that it is integrated in climate related planning and implementation p rocesses throughout the 
country.  
 There is a high demand for the services offered by the Project . Actual usage of offered service by vulnerable 
households , communities and public service providers will be high due to the strongly felt adaptation needs of 
the beneficiaries. Community based planning and decision making takes into account traditional systems of 
land use and concertation.  
 While awareness about climate risks is already present in Simiyu today (in the household survey, 70% of the 
population refer red to climate change as a major threat to their livelihood), know -how about climate risk 
reduction  is still low. All individuals and institutions involved in the Project , from the village level up to the 
Steering Committee, are expected to increase their awareness and knowledge on climate related risks and 
adaptation measures. They are e xpected to amount to more than 495 ,000 people altogether , more than half of 
them being women  
In addition to these described mitigation impacts, the expected improvement of land or forest areas  contributes  to 
emission reductions amounting to 766,800 tons of CO 2 equivalent3. Irrigation  systems , protection of soil and water 
resources and promotion of Ngitili and fuelwood plantations optimize crop production and productivity. Th is minimize s 
the need for more land to feed the population, thus reduce s encroachment on natural vegetation, especially in the 
sensitive ecosystem of the ne arby Serengeti Natural Heritage. It also  enhance s the capacity of the vegetation to act as 
carbon si nk.  
 
                                                             
3 Projected according to information from Barrow, E. and A. Shah (2011) TEEBcase: Traditional forest restoration  in Tanzania. Available at: TEEBweb.org.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual   
Lifetime   
 Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggre gated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only)  Total  495,000 direct beneficiaries, 257,000 of 
them being women, and 2.5 Mio. indirect 
benefic iaries  
Percentage 
(%) 1% of the Tanzanian population, 52% of 
them being women.  
Other 
relevant 
indicators   Please refer to E.1.1 and H.1  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impa ct beyond a one -off project  investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Procedures for implementation of climate adaptation projects in Tanzania are established and refined in the course of 
the Project . In this way , the Project  is expect ed to catalyse at least 5 further investments in infrastructure for climate 
resilience in the country leading to an expected number of indirect beneficiaries of up to 2.5 million (with an estimated 
target group of 500,000 people per project).  The Project  delivers hands -on experience in planning and implementing 
cross -sectoral climate adaptation projects. Community based climate adaptation planning is introduced and streamlined 
into the District Development Plans of LGAs  and shall serv e as a role model for future adaptation projects . Furthermore, 
the Project  improves information available on climate effects and adaptation needs through the ICT Platform on climate 
change.  
The investment underlying the Project  entails a unique, new appro ach towards tackling the increasing competition for 
the country’s water resources . It bears the potential to become an important future strategy for Tanzania: The country  is 
scarce in groundwater resources. There is alarming data on the declining availabil ity of renewable fresh  water. It has 
reduced from 2 ,300 m3 per capita in 2002 to 1 ,950 m3 per capita  in 2015 and it is projected to further decline to 1 ,500 
m3 per capita in 2025, if not managed well. Climate variability, resource degradation and pollution  affect quantity and 
quality of water resources . They  become threats to the sustainability of competing water -using sectors like urban and 
rural water supply, agriculture and irrigation, hydropower and the manufacturing industry. With increasing impacts of  
climate change, the country is no  longer able to afford uncoordinated and low efficiency water use. At the same time, 
Tanzania is endowed with huge natural surface water reservoirs (Lakes Victoria, Tanganyika and Nyasa, Ruvuma 
River). The Project  sets an example for u sing and preserving them for climate resilient drinking water supply, while also 
developing a strategy for satisfying competing sectors’ demand for water  at the same time . This does, among others, 
require to overcome a currently prevailing loc k-in of applied infrastructure (refer to E.1). The presented approach sets 
an example by  promoting economic development through usage of l ocally available water sources for agriculture . This 
promote s sustainability of multi -purpose water supply, protection  of water resources and climate resilience for the 
people. The shared water resources are furthermore protected for future generations through improved sanitation and 
sludge treatment.  
A Steering Committee takes up results and experiences from the Project  and uses them for improved planning, 
monitoring and regulation  of climate adaptation . Proposed improvements of rules and regulations are developed on the 
basis of experiences made under the Project . For examples for such regulation s, please refer to sectio n E.2.4 . The 
Strategic Support Consultant advises and supports the Steering Committee in setting up the framework.  The Vice


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
President’s Office has a critical role in overseeing the suitability of the proposed mechanisms for the achievement of the 
country’s  climate targets.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
Strong competence s on district, regional and national level  in implementing cross -cutting projects , as well as the 
inclusion of the most vulnerable are core to cope with the multitude of chall enges associated with climate change. The 
Project  improves the capacities to implement cross -sectoral adaptation projects of the various involved institutions and 
stakeholders at the different levels. For more information about capacity development include d in the Project , please 
refer to section C.3.  
Furthermore, t he Steering Committee initiates new rules and regulations, standard procedures, organizational 
structures and working guidelines on the basis of experiences made in the Project . These new regula tions are expected 
to unlock so -far unused expertise and structures, especially in the fields of inter -ministerial coordination and community 
based planning and implementation. Using these new capacities it is expected to put the government into a position  to 
accelerate implementation of climate change adaptation projects that could include all relevant sectors.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
As described in sections  E.1 and E.2 the Project  entails a holistic solution for climate adapted use of water resources 
for drinking and agricultural purposes. It is unusual and requires leaving well -known institutional paths. The proposed 
structure is complex and requires high level information of decision makers on effects of climate  change, the nature of 
the Project , their interrelation and the needed corresponding commercial and regulatory framework . A whole series of 
financial models and assessment s of technical and economic alternatives ha ve been carried out as part of the feasibi lity 
studies. Results have been connected to regulatory questions right from the beginning and are the basis for beneficiary 
involvement, tariff setting and monitoring. The Project  serves as a role model to show how challenges can be overcome 
and that appr opriate tariff setting supported by detailed financial projections and wise use of subsidies create a 
conducive environment to effective and sustained resil ience , also for future projects with similar challenges.   
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framewo rk and policies  
As described in E.2.2, result s of knowledge and learning are  transferred into improved rules and regulations  with the 
support of the Steering Committee.  Details of such regulatory changes will be defined in the course of Project  
implementa tion on the basis of experiences and lessons learnt from the Project . A first idea of topics to be discussed by 
the Steering Committee could be:  
 The Utility Performance Assessment carried out annually by the national regulator EWURA, could be enhanced 
to also consider climate change relevant indicators, e.g. sustainability and protection of water sources, 
measures to avoid wasting of water as well as  energy efficiency and inclusion of the most vulnerable  
 Strategies to improve management and availability of data on local water resources  
 Some conventional design criteria as laid down design manual drive cost s and could be revised. Also, phased 
approaches like the one taken are not yet proposed or promoted. This is of particular importance for piped 
water proj ects with long bulk mains, which have the potential to become an important future strategy for the 
country (refer to section E.2.1 ). 
 Lessons from the community driven, multisectoral planning approach could be used as blueprint for future 
adaptation project s.


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
The Project  contributes to the Sustainable Development Goals:  
SDG 1 End po verty in all its forms everywhere  
The Project  increases the resilience of poor people and their assets towards extreme climate and natural hazards. 
Negative impacts of climate change mostly affect the poor population which does not have the (financial) mea ns to  deal 
with weather shocks. The  Project  strengthens the risk -reducing capacity of the poor. It also strengthens the poverty -
orientation of adaptation strategies and applicable regulations through the paradigm shift component. It takes into 
account that  gender inequality plays a large role in the perpetuation of poverty and it's risks . 
When  provided with a reliable and secure source of drinking water, especially poor people are less dependent on 
informal and unsafe water resources or on buying water at e xcessive prices from private water vendors. This, together 
with better sanitation services, improves their economic situation by reducing  time spent on fetching water, costs for 
medical treatments and unproductive days of illness. Climate -smart agriculture  measures enhance soil productivity and 
stabilize income of farmers, leading to improved livelihood s and food security.  
SDG 2 End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture  
The Project  increase s the productive  capacity and climate resilience of small -scale farmers in a region where people 
regularly suffer from famine and have received food aid for two years in a row  now.  
SDG 3 Ensure healthy lives and promote well -being for all at all ages  
Through the comprehe nsive sanitation component and by providing access to clean drinking water, the Project  reduces 
water borne diseases and infant mortality.   
SDG 4 Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all  
By impro ving school toilets, the project removes a major barrier  to education.  This will especially benefit  girls who often  
have to stay home  from school during menstruation if the toilets offered are not appropriate . Farmer Field Schools and 
the community based a pproach bring high quality learning opportunities to poor and vulnerable communities.  
SDG 5 Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls  
The Project  improves living conditions , particularly for women, who are primary household caretakers and re sponsible 
for the availability of secure water and food. The Project  strives to p rovid e women and girls with equal access to 
education, health care, decent work, and representation in decision -making processes . The proposed measures are :  
 women’s needs in accessing water points are considered with regards to number and security of the location of 
the facilities and child safety. The design of the water taps is made women -friendly, i.e. allowing easy handling 
of buckets  
 location choices for sanitation facil ities consider women’s needs for privacy, safety, security and dignity. The 
project involves women in decisions on the design of public sanitation facilities as part of the community based 
planning process  
 equal training and employment opportunities are m ade available for women and men in water resource 
protection, water quality monitoring and testing, maintenance and repair of public/school toilets and water 
points, especially of the community -based operations system  
 women and girls are provided an activ e role in awareness campaigns and are trained to become social change 
agents by taking on roles as house -to-house hygiene promoters, teaching about the prevention of water and


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
sanitation related disease transmission within their communities  
 production syst ems in which women are particularly involved (e.g. poultry farming, horticulture) are supported  
 gender -friendly design features are considered in the layout of improved irrigation facilities  ensuring  that they 
are safe and secure to use and socially accept able. This includes  drip irrigation, sprinklers, putting steps in 
irrigation structures and irrigation schedules that are aligned with time available for access for livestock or 
household needs, and avoid night irrigation because of the increased risk of women being harass ed after dark  
 the Project  raises awareness for gender mainstreaming and empowerment within administrative structures. 
Participation of women in community based planning and decision -making is mandatory. Workshops will be  
organized to rais e awareness among local authorities and the advisory services in order to strengthen their 
gender orientation  
 Women traditionally do not have land ownership rights. The Project  promotes women's participation in decision -
making processes and introduction of  property for the family rather than the (male) family head, to give them 
more power to influence long -term soil protection measures  
 Where service providers are used, the Project  ensures that a high number of services are offered by women 
(as well as reque sted by women). The Project  ensures that women are paid equal wages for equal work. 
Contractors are tasked to provide separate toilets for women and provide shift child care facilities for working 
mothers on construction sites  
 Schedules of Farmer Field Sch ools will be  set up in a manner to minimize conflicts with other farming and non -
farming daily activities of women. Women farmers enrolled in Farmer Field Schools will be  provided  with 
training on not only climate -smart agriculture, but also on financial a nd entrepreneurial skills  
 Communication material and messages focused on women are disseminated. Since the literacy rate among 
women is low , posters, theatre performances and radio broadcasts are especially suitable for this purpose  
SDG 6  Ensure availabil ity and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all  
The Project  improves the access to clean drinking water and sanitation services and reduces fecal contamination for 
more than 395.000 people in the Simiyu Region.  
SDG 8 Promote sustained, incl usive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and 
decent work for all  
The Project  provides a number of work  opportunities for the local population, including w omen and youth. During 
construction, local companies and/or  local recruit ment of labourers are given preference wherever applicable and 
delivery of a gender action plan will be required.  The Project  strengthens and  creates several public, private and 
community -owned entities  that create new jobs, e.g. at water uti lities, public  water taps, LGAs or  public sanitation 
installations. This improves the region’s economic development.  Additionally, the Project  generates alternative means 
of income for subsistence farmers, like selling firewood, which will make them less dependent on un predictable weather 
conditions due to climate change.  
SDG 9  Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industriali zation and foster innovation  
The Project  improves access to basic sanitation and water supply infrastructure. Small sca le enterprises in the region 
benefit from improved water supply . Farmers are encouraged to develop new, sustainable and climate adapted farming 
technologies. Resilient water and sanitation supply infrastructure is being built.  
SDG 11 Make cities and human  settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable  
The Project  protects urban poor and vulnerable  people  from climate induced water shortage s and contam inated water 
resources. The holistic sanitation concept which includes water treatment facilities protects urban settlements from


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
pollution.  
SDG 13 Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts by regulating emissions and promoting 
developments in renewable energy  
The Project ’s climate adaptation measures target the most vulnerable and po or in a least developed country.  
SDG 15 Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, 
combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradatio n and halt biodiversity loss  
The Project  improves  ecosys tem services through forestation and adapted farming systems and reduces encroaching 
into the Serengeti ecosystem during dry spells through  promotion of sustainable grazing patterns ( Ngitili).  It reduce s 
land degradation and soil erosion, implement s sustai nable land management practices, preserve s water resources for 
future generations and reduce s GHG emissions. The Project  provide s safe and clean drinking water to 395,000 people 
who would theoretically need to boil 1.2 million litres of drinking water dail y, mostly with the locally available fuelwood, if 
they really strictly adhered to the requirement of safe drinking water , which would further accelerate deforestation an 
GHG emissions  
SDG 16 Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable developm ent, provide access to justice for all 
and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels  
Through its capacity development and paradigm shift components, the Project  contributes to the development of 
effective, responsibl e and transp arent government institutions.  Participation and inclusive development is promoted 
through community based planning and implementation.  Potential  conflicts between different types of land use, 
especially arable farming and pastoralism , are mitigated. The i nvolvement of all users in the selection  of and decision -
making processes for climate adaptation measures further strengthens the development of communal structures and 
increases social cohesion . Local Government Authorities (LGAs) whose revenues  mostly de pend on agriculture benefit 
from more stable and less climate dependent revenue.    
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation  only)  
Climate change  impacts are expected  to affect  all people  in Tanzania to some degree. This include s reduced 
availability of  water  and increased temperature stresses  to people, livestock and crops, ecological disruption  as well 
as changes in disease vectors and ranges . In addition to diminishing sources, experts predict that heat stress will 
increase per capita water demand by about 7 -10%. This particularly affects women who are  the primary household 
caretakers and responsible for providing  safe water  and food as well as  (newborn) children that are most affected by 
insufficient sanitation and hygiene as well as  contaminated drinking water. Additionally, temperature stress estimated 
as ‘perceived temperature’ is likely to increase substantially over the  next decades. Since the majority of the 
vulnerable population is working outdoor s in the agricultural sector, severe heat stress will result in a loss of 
economic productivity.  
These impacts on the people’s day to day life will require a number of adapti ve measures with regards to  farming 
practices , water supply, sanitation, public health services provision , and ecosystem conservation. In Simiyu Region, 
people’s adaptive capacity to cope with additional challenges is particularly  limited . The income per capita  is low, 
90% of rural households and 80% of urban households earn less than 145 EUR per month). Seasonality  has been a 
continuous stress factor and an important reason for the low overall productivity, high poverty rates and poor 
standard of living in  the region, and now climate change brings along additional threats.  Agricultural productivity, 
which used to be well -adapted to the local conditions, is under pressure  due to climate change and resource 
degradation.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
Furthermore, government services are s till weak in the still developing administrative structure of the new ly 
established region. The district’s own resource collection (local taxes, charges) is almost entirely dependent on 
agriculture and in some cases mainly on one major crop (e.g. cotton). If the cotton crop is affected, the district’s 
revenue collection will decrease considerably, jeopardizing the provision of public services like extension services .  
This again reduces knowledge and learning on adapted technologies and leaves farmers more and more prone to 
crop failures.   
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
The Tanzanian public budget allocated for the Financial Year 2016/17 is about 11.8 bn EUR. Real GDP growth was 
7% for 2015/16, thus remained at the same level as  the year before. Domestic revenue collection was 4.6 bn EUR 
and tax revenue amounted to 4 bn EUR from July 2015 to April 2016. The average inflation rate in 2015 was 5.6% 
and slightly dec reased  compared to 6.1% in 2014, mainly due to  a decrease  in petrole um prices. However, since 
food is the largest component in Tanzania's consumer price index  (38.5%), the Economist Intelligence Unit sees a 
considerable risk that weather -related shocks to domestic food production will push inflation. Continued reliance on 
rain-fed agriculture and hydropower are seen as economic structure risks that perpetuate the economy's vulnerability 
to climate and weather events.  
As of March 2016, the national debt amount s to 18.4 bn EUR, compared to 17.34 bn EUR in June 2015, which is an 
increase of 6.34%. The increase is mainly due to Government borrowings to finance development projects. Tanzania 
is a Least Developed Country (LDC) and a post HIPC (Heavily Indebted Poor Country). It has a Policy Support 
Instrument (PSI) of the Internat ional Monetary Fund (IMF) in place and shows continued strong efforts for fiscal 
consolidation and strengthening revenue mobilization, public financial management and debt management. Despite 
the fact that sovereign repayment capacity is not expected to be  called into question in the near future, it should be 
considered that financing this climate adaptation Project  with debt would be an additional stress factor for the country 
and should be avoided especially in the light of the low own emission profile of  Tanzania.  
The Project  is urgently needed to reduce climate induced stress of particularly poor and vulnerable population groups 
in a LDC and it contributes to fulfilling their basic needs and human rights. Financial models (refer to supporting 
documentati on) show that none of the components generates sufficient revenue to pay back investment costs and/or 
interest, despite the fact that revenues are used wherever possible to cover at leas t maintenance  costs . For the 
detailed  economic and financial analysis of the Project , including our assessment of the integrated financial model 
with detailed assumptions , rationale and a sensitivity analysis of critical elements, please refer to section  F1. 
We propose the Project  to be financed on grant basis. Since Tanzani a is a Least Developed Country (LDC) and post -
HIPC (Heavily Indebted Poor) country, grant financing allow s Tanzania to undertake the proposed adaptation 
measure without reducing funding for other priority development needs or increasing its risks of debt d istress (refer to 
section  C.4). Grants match local financial and in -kind contributions to the maximum possible extend.  
For further information on institutional needs please refer to section  C.7 and and for social needs please refer to 
section  F.3. 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Tanzania ha s developed and established a number of policies, strategies and programs which address climate 
change and climate change adaptation and which are in line with the Project ’s interventions:  
 Tanzania’s National Adaptation Programme of Action  (NAPA) identifie s immediate and urgent climate 
change adaptation actions and activities that reduce the risks to sustainable development imposed by a


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
changing climate. The agriculture and food security sector as well as  the water sector are ranked as number 
one and two ac cording to their importance for actions that have to be undertaken in order to strengthen 
adaptation to climate change. Proposed interventions that also fit in the context of the Project  are amongst 
others: alternative farming systems, sustainable water ma nagement  and irrigation measures such as drip 
irrigation. For the water sector, integrated water resource management and new infrastructure are 
mentioned.  
 The process of formulating a National Adaptation Plan  (NAP) was initiated in 2013 and is planned to be 
finalized after five years. The objective is to establish a process for formulating and implementing sectoral 
and national adaptation plans for Tanzania addressing medium and long -term adaptation needs.  
 The Project  coincides with the adaptation prioriti es highlighted in Tanzania’s Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions (INDCs) . To reduce the impacts of frequent droughts and floods is number two  of the 
adaptation priorities in Tanzania’s INDCs, with a particular focus on the resilience of the agricu ltural sector, 
livestock and forestry. Improved efficient management of water resources and increasing access to clean 
and safe water is another important pillar for adaptation, highlighted in Tanzania’s INDCs.  
 The National Poverty Reduction Strategy  (MKUK UTA from Swahili) and the National Strategy for Growth and 
Reduction of Poverty (MKUKUTA II) acknowledge climate change as externality that needs to be addressed 
to ensure food security, to reduce poverty and to achieve environmentally sustainable growth.  
 The Project  is in line with the National Climate Change Strategy  (NCCS, 2012), which is the main planning 
instrument for climate change actions. Adaptation is clearly a priority in this strategy, due to Tanzania’s low 
national emissions profile and high d ependence on natural resources for livelihoods. Water and agriculture 
are core sectors that need to be attended to urgently according to this strategy.  
 The Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan  (ACRP, 2014 - 2019) and the Water Resources Management and 
Strategic Interventions and Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation  (2013) further outline actions in line 
with the proposed Project . Both propose to develop and operationalize an Information Management System 
and web portal for climate change . 
 Climate chang e is addressed in the context of environmental management in the National Environmental 
Policy  (1997). The Environmental Management Act  (EMA 2004) is the legal framework for environmental 
management and covers climate change adaptation planning, including efforts undertaken within the 
National Environmental Policy.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
There is a momentum of outstanding ownership and attention to the proposed Project  among a wide variety of 
stakeholders  from the Govern ment of Tanzania. All relevant m inistries are show ing highest interest  in and 
commitment to the Project . The Ministry of Water and Irrigation has initiated financing and started implementing the 
feasibility study for the Project  from its ow n resources. Together with the Ministry of Finance and the Vice President’s 
Office, it takes a strong lead in seeking considerable financing from own sources for its implementation, which proves 
the overall high political commitment of the Tanzanian author ities to the Project . 
The Ministry of Water and Irrigation , the Executing Entity, is responsible  for the implementation of the Project  and for 
the coordination of the line ministries  with respect to the Project . It is well prepared to implement the Project  in 
collaboration with the other involved institutions on ministerial and regional level, as detailed in Sections C.4. and 
C.7.  
KfW as Accredited Entity ensure s the Executing Entity ’s compliance to GCF’s fiduciary principles and standards 
including A nti M oney -Laundering and C ountering the Financing of Terrorism  (AML -CFT) requirement s, procurement 
regulations, environmental and social safeguards and financial management guidelines  within all components of the 
Project , as detailed in the Accredited Master Ag reement between GCF and KfW.   
KfW is Germany’s public Promotional Bank and with a balance sheet of 503 bn EUR and a funding volume of over 
79,3 bn EUR (201 5), one of the largest development b anks in the world. On behalf of the German Government,


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
particula rly the Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ), KfW administers Germany’s 
official Financial Cooperation in about 70  developing and transition countries in Africa, Asia, South and Central 
America, the Middle East and Eastern Europe . KfW has a long record of financial cooperation in Tanzania, with a 
portfolio extending from 1965. Currently, KfW has an ongoing portfolio  in the water, health, natural resource 
management, energy and governance sectors in Tanzania with a total volume of about 500  m EUR .  
The team from the local KfW -Office in Dar es Salaam has profound knowledge of the local institutional setting and 
procedures, which will facilitate smooth implementation. KfW Headquarters in Frankfurt provides oversight and 
backstopping se rvices as well as technical advice through experienced engineers in water, sanitation and agriculture.  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
Tanzanian ownership has been high right from the beginning of Project  preparation : The Government of Tanzania 
gives high priority to the development of the newly established Simiyu Region and the challenges th e region is facing 
due to climate change.  
During the Government  to Government negotiations between the Unite d Republic of Tanzania and the Federal 
Republic of Germany held in Dar es Salaam on August 12/13th, 2015, the German Government agreed to make 
available 25 m EUR for climate resilient water supply and sanitation in Simiyu  upon request of the Tanzanian 
Gove rnment . At the same time , it was agreed that the Project  shall be proposed for funding from the Green Climate 
Fund. On November 19th, 2015, KfW received a letter of commitment from the Vice President’s Office  (NDA)  as the 
coordinating authority for climate  adaptation projects in Tanzania . In this letter, it requested MoWI and KfW to 
prepare the Simiyu Climate Resilience  Project , with the ultimate objective of submitting a Funding Proposal to the 
GCF.  Germany , through KfW , made available 1.1 m EUR for prepar atory studies, adding up to a total German 
commitment of 26.1 m EUR.  
Following this, a high level stakeholder meeting  took place  on January 15th, 2016, where the way forward for this 
challenging Project  was defined including an agreed proactive action plan  to bring the Project  proposal to the GCF 
Board as soon as possible. Since then , monthly stakeholder meetings and preparatory meetings have been taking 
place to monitor achievements against the set schedule and to continuously involve all the stakeholders.  Consent 
has been achieved on a revised Concept Note on the Simiyu Project  that has been submitted to the GCF on May 3rd, 
2016  and on the draft Funding Proposal . The high number of participants during the appraisal mission, amongst 
others from MoWI, the Mi nistry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF), the Vice President’s Office (VPO), the 
National Environment Management Council (NEMC), the Lake Victoria Basin Water Board (LVBWB), and – at the 
regional and district level – with the Regional Administ ration of the Simiyu Region, the District Administrations of 
Busega, Bariadi, and Itilima, the Town Council of Bariadi, BARUWASA and Mwanza Urban Water and Sanitation 
Authority (MWAUWASA), and the lively and fruitful discussion s proved again the importance  and great involvement 
of various stakeholders in Project  preparation.  
The Ministry of Water and Irrigation consulted Civil Society Organi zations  during Project  preparation. At the n ational 
level, the project was discussed with CSO  at the  climate change forum at the Ministry of Water  and Irrigation . At the 
regional level, CSO were consulted during the planning following the baseline survey. Feasibility studies were carried 
out in close consultation with the beneficiaries. A list of participating  NGO and CS O are appended in the social 
economic report of the Feasibility  Study. CSO’s ideas have been incorporated in to the project concept . They 
particularly highlighted the importance of awareness campaign s on sanitation and hygiene  already during 
preparation of the implementation phase. T raining on sanitation and hygiene awareness and integration with the 
community is going to be facilitated by CSO in cooperation with the community development officers in the respective 
district councils.  Please also refer to the stakeholder engagement plan  of the Resettlement Management Framework.   
Project  implementation will be  carried out in close cooperation with CSO . They will be  involved i n awareness raising 
and in community driven activities . Concepts and e xperiences from t he Project  will feed into strategies and action 
plans at national level. Under the guidance of the Steering Committee and MoWI, structures , targets and actions for


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
replication are established. These review processes will include CSO that are taking part in  the Steering Committee 
as observers.  
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fina ncial soundness of the  Project  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
The Project  includes  an optimised mix  of using water from the shared reso urces of Lake Victoria for drinking 
purposes only, while promoting agricultural development on the basis of locally available water resources and 
protecting soil and water resources though improved, climate -adapted land management. The solutions adopted ar e 
least cost solutions to ensure climate resilience of  the urban and rural population in Simiyu, particularly women and 
farmers.  For example, an alternative solution to the loss of productivity and increased climate risks in agriculture is to 
use water fr om Lake Victoria for cattle trou ghs and for large scale irrigation. This would come at high er costs and 
would bear considerable additional environmental risks. The Project  uses locally available water resources and 
increase s the efficiency of the existing irrigation infrastructure by introducing  water -saving tech nologies (drip 
irrigation) and other systems more suitable for being integrated  into the schedules and livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable and women.  
The pre -feasibility and feasibility studies inve stigated all possible alternative solutions  including using groundwater 
resources through boreholes and using surface water resources through dams for drinking water supply. All these 
options have proven  to be either much more costly and bear substantial h ealth risks (wells), or not feasible at all due 
to the changing climate. For the improved water supply, the selected solution is a “two pipe solution” with the first 
pipe being installed during the first phase as part of the proposed Project , and the possi bility to  install a second 
parallel pipe and to  extend the supply scheme later in a second phase. From an economic and technical point of 
view, it is the most suitable solution . This Project  considers the water supply by bulk pipelines to the urban and per i-
urban parts of the corridor, where per capita cost for water distribution are lower, and at the same time stress on 
water availability and demand as well as willingness -to-pay are hig her. The per capita investment costs for drinking 
water supply are comp aratively high with 309 EUR per capita for 395,000 people up to the current design horizon of 
2025. This reflects the additional efforts necessary for Tanzania to ensure safe drinking water in a changing climate 
in Simiyu . Connections are expected to expan d further  after commissioning:  Additional 82,000 people can  be 
connected to the bulk system’s first phase, leading to 477,000 connected people  and investment cost s of 297 EUR 
per capita by 2035. Per capita costs  also include consultancy services, a sanitat ion component, capacity 
development  measures for urban utilities and for Community Based User Associations , land acquisition and 
contingencies. Compared to similar bulk water supply projects for rural and urban areas the costs are in a reasonable 
and accep table range.  
International competitive bidding , and national competitive bidding for some small -scale applications, ensures that 
selection of companies to deliver works and services is quality and cost based, and that funds are spent in an 
economical way.  Small contracts under the community based approach combine as many measures  as possible  in 
the same or neighbouring areas. The effectiveness of the proposed  measures has been  tested in a number of 
projects at varying scale as described in the feasibility studies. Costs of the infrastructure investments have been 
estimated using  comparable benchmarks from other projects . Technical information that was used as basis for the 
financial model was obtained from experiences in the region (Kenya) and in the countr y (e.g. LVEMP, 7 Towns 
Urban Upgrading Programme).  
The demand -driven, community based approach  ensure s cost-effective ness  of the investments  at local level . To 
ensure highest ownership of involved communities, labour is volunteered as an upfront contributi on. The 
communities manage rural projects , thereby reducing the operation and maintenance costs for the government in the 
long term. Water supply in rural and scattered settlements is ensured through public standpipes avoiding the laying 
of long, underutil ised and expensive distribution pipes. For urban settlements , the use of private house connections 
is promoted through a pre -financing of connection costs for about 4,000 connections  by the Project . Customers repay


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST  INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 82 
 
 
 E 
the connection fees in inst alments over t he following years. Water utilities can use the repayments to invest in 
network extension where required. This cost -effective approach avoids investments in areas where the distribution 
network will be underutilised.  Cost covering user fees are being appli ed wherever applicable and possible. Since all 
operations are highly co -financed and dependent on subsidies during the investment phase, there is no risk for 
crowding out private investment.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investme nts (mitigation only)  
Not applicable. For the financing plan, please refer to B.2.  
E.6.3. Financial viability   
For the detailed economic and financial analysis, please refer to section  F.1. While the Project  bears significant 
economic benefits, none of the Project ’s outputs entail s full cost recovery including investment costs and interest. 
Benefits generated by the Project  are used to cover operational costs wherever possible, particularly at the water 
supply system. However, no operational surpluses th at could be channelled back to the national level  are expected 
to occur . 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
As part of the feasibility studies, t he consultants were  tasked  with propos ing best available technologies and 
practices, analys ing lessons lear nt and describ ing how they are used in the Project . The Project  is in line with 
industry best practices. The proposed technologies for water production and distribution are reliable and appropriate 
for the Project ’s environment. The operation of the instal lations is simple and cost -optimized.  
In terms of adaptation of lessons learnt it should be mentioned that the community based planning and decision 
making process chosen for the Project  proved to be decisive for successful interventions in rural areas, e. g. in the 
Hai water supply project financed by KfW and in the case of Ngitili forest -pastoralist  systems. For more details on 
the application of best practices, please refer to section  F.2 and to the feasibility studies included as supporting 
documents.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
Expected volume of finance to be le veraged b y the proposed Project  and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit generated as a result of the Project )


---
*Page 40*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
F.1.  Econ omic and Financial Analysis  
F.1.1 Economic Benefits  
Water Supply and Sanitation  
For th e water supply and sanitation  component , the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) is 10.9%. Due to the 
lack of locally available, reliable surface or groundwater reso urces, the alternative concept foresees that households 
are supplied by tanker trucks that carry drinking water from Lake Victoria. The end user tariff for this solution is 
estimated at 14.80 EUR per m³. In this scenario , the trucks each transport 30 m3 of water over a distance of 80 km 
from Lake Victoria to Bariadi, resulting in specific costs (payload) of EUR 2.55 per km or EUR 6.80 per m³ (according 
to Teravaninthorn, Supee, Raballand, Gaël: Transport Prices and Costs in Africa: A Review of the Main Inte rnational 
Corridors, AICD, July 2008, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6610 ). In addition to this, distribution 
by smaller tankers to households is calculated with EUR 8 per m³, according to prevailing rates in Dar es Salaam and 
other cities in Tanzania. It is assumed that households would only consume the absolute minimum of water demand 
for drinking and cooking of 7.5 l per capita per day according to  WHO  estimates  
(www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/emergencies/qa/emergencies_qa5/en/ ). Personal hygiene, laundry and other 
application s requiring water  of a lesser  quality are estimated to be sourced from local, unsafe sources free of costs. 
Assuming tanker supply exceeds  7.50 l/c/d, the minimum demand according to WHO, this would result  in higher 
benefits and correspondingly in a higher EIRR. Furthermore, this calculation neglects cost of treatment at the lake 
and storage in Bariadi. These estimates, however, do not consider the trucks’  CO 2 emissions. Despite this, a net 
benefit of EUR 40 per capita per year  has been calculated combined with shadow -pricing of cost with a factor 0.9.  
This value of EUR 40/c/a is in line with the results from alternative methodolog ies, i.e. the calculation of benefits, like:  
 Time savings while fetching water, mainly for women and children (Hutton, Guy; Haller, Laurence: 
“Evaluation of the Costs and Bene fits of Water and Sanitation Improvements at the Global Level”, WHO, 
2004 , www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wsh0404/en/ ).  
 Increase of productive working days by reducing incidence a nd fatalities from water related diseases.  
 Increased income through the creation of temporary and permanent jobs and through the development of 
service sector activities . 
 Reduced costs for migration  to other regions,  on individual level and on national le vel. 
Climate -Smart Agriculture  
It is expected that about 200,000 people will benefit directly and indirectly from the climate -smart agriculture 
component.  Double counting of beneficiaries has been excluded with a conservative approach to the highest possib le 
degree. Taking into account all cost and expected (economic) benefits accruing over a period of 20 years, the 
expected ENPV at a discount rate of 10% is 11.6 m EUR, the corresponding EIRR is 19%. The economic viability of 
the Project  is good  due to a nu mber of factors:  
 the construction costs are limited because the storage reservoirs are based on low -cost technologies and the 
main irrigation system will be gravity flow;  
 the operation and maintenance costs are low as the type of irrigation is planned as  a wholly farmer managed 
scheme, implying that no major government management structure will be required for managing the 
schemes after project completion;  
 the benefits are relatively high given that a substantial amount of vegetables and rice for the loc al market is 
expected to be produced;  
 the benefit foregone (opportunity costs of land) is low as the project aims primarily at areas that are presently 
under rainfed crops where very low yields are obtained at present.  
The following economic benefits have been taken into account for this analysis:  
 increased and secured agricultural production by upgrading rain fed agricultur al land into irrigated land on


---
*Page 41*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
1,500 ha , and by introducing adapted species and varieties on an estimated 5,500 ha ; 
 secured and enhan ced agricultural production (staple crops, cash crops, horticulture, fruit) by upgrading 
baseline techniques to climate -smart agriculture techniques  through Farmer Field Schools  (8,800  ha directly 
targeted), with increased opportunities of income generatio n for women ; 
 increased  production of forest products, especially timber and fuelwood , by converting fallow land to wood 
lots (3,700 ha) ; 
 increased production of fuelwood and of cattle fodder  by converting rain fed agriculture land to Ngitili land 
(3,500 ha ); 
 increased and climate resilient agricultural production by multiplying results through spreading of techniques 
among farmers  (estimated 94,200  ha). 
All these benefits contribute to increase  the income of rural beneficiaries’ households. Further benefits , which have 
not been accounted for in the economic analysis as they are difficult to measure financially, are:  
 increased resilience and adaptive capacities of a region ch allenged by climate change ;  
 improved food and nutrition security of rural households  (and thus the country as a whole) ; 
 secured water and fodder for livestock ; 
 reduced pressure on land and water resources by reduced pastoralist migration due to better feed and water 
supply (in addition, travel time saved) ; 
 empowerment of women ; 
 improved e cosystem services of water catchment areas in the Project  region, through restoring  or preserving 
soil and water resources that would otherwise be under pressure due to climate change ; 
 strengthen ed early warning, forecasting and water management systems as  a result of imp roved climate 
advisory services ; 
 strengthened research -extension linkages, established platform for regular contacts between researchers 
and stakeholders of the sector, availability information packages and dissemination through ICT, and 
enhanced extension and climate information services.  
 introduced mechanisms, rules and regulations that improve fund allocation, multi -sectoral steering and 
regulation of actions related to climate adaptation while at the same time strengthening capacities an d 
responsiveness of climate affected, poor households.  
A sensitivity analysis has been carried out and t he following scenarios have been tested:  
 maize price s 20% higher than the current prices, s ince maize outputs are at risk to significantl y decline due t o 
climate change ; 
 increased costs ;  
 number of households that are expected to adopt improved technologies with the Project ’s assistance 
funding reduced from 15% to 10%  annually from PY7 onwards . 
As a result, the sensitivity a nalysis  shows sufficient robust ness, as can be seen from the table below:  
  EIRR ENPV (EUR)  
baseline  19% 11,595,932  
increased maize prices  21% 14,181,783  
project c ost + 5% 19% 11,000,835  
decreased adoption rate  17% 7,957,444


---
*Page 42*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
F.1.2. Financial Analysis  
 
Water Supply and Sanitation   
1. Definition of the base-case  
The investment costs for water supply and sanitation including consultancy, land compensation, operation subsidies 
and 12.5% contingencies amount to EUR 122.2 m. Capital  investment cost s are calculated on the basis of a hydrauli c 
calculation, a simplified bill of quantity and adjusted unit prices for pipes, treatment, pumping stations  and reservoirs 
based on recent bids in Tanzania. Construction is implemented by international lead contractors, largely with 
imported materials and  equipme nt. The financial calculations are  therefore made in Euro and at constant prices of 
2016. Since bulk and retail water operators are local government authorities and not subject to corporate income tax, 
taxes have not been included in this calculati on. Costs during operation are calculated according to the projected 
water production. They mainly include chemicals, energy for pumping and personnel and incur  in local currency.  
The planned investment horizon is the year 2025 for the current first phase  of the Project . The schedule assumes 
commissioning of bulk and distribution schemes during 2020, achieving 82% capacity utilisation at the end of 2021 
and from then gradually increasing to 100%. The population forecasts, assumed per capita consumptions and 
willingness of consumers to pay for water are the determining factors for the dimensioning of the water supply system 
and therefore also a major driver of investment costs. The design manual of the Tanzanian Water Sector 
Development Project  defines minim um capacities of the system, for example 150 l/cd for low density residual areas 
and 50 l/cd for yard taps . Population figures are  calculated based on the results of the 2012 census. Rural water 
distribution concentrate s on rural conglomerations  that have been identified using a complex GIS -database and a 
marginal cost function (inputs: settlement area, density, and distance to nearest main reservoir). Urban water 
distribution costs are estimated with respect to similar projects in the Mwanza region.  A deta iled survey to assess 
willingness and ability to pay has been carried out as part of the feasibility study with the result that the suggested 
tariffs between 0.62 EUR/m3 for rural areas and 0.80 EUR/m3 for urban areas will have the broad  acceptance 
require d for financial sustainability of the water supply system.  However , the expected per capita consumption is 
assumed slightly below the design capacity for the financial analysis because actual consumption in Tanzania is still 
below the design parameters. Th e same applies to rural areas where the design manual indicates 25 l/cd. The 
following population figures and reduced specific demand figures are taken into account  while proving the financial 
viability and calculating required tariffs for the base scenari o:  
 Population  Demand  Consumption  
Urban  95,000  5,300 m³/d  75 l/c/d  
Rural  300,000  6,000 m³/d  20 l/c/d  
 
2. Major results of the base case  
While the financial analysis shows that the water supply system is able to cover operation and maintenance costs 
from own revenues, it is not possible to apply cost covering tariffs  that include investment costs . If investment costs 
were included, t ariffs would remain way below total unit costs per m³ and the res ulting Financial Internal Rate of 
Return (FIRR) would even  be negative with -1.45%. Thus, the Project  depends  on subsidies for the investment . The 
financial analysis takes into account a scenari o where the bulk water supplier, the urban water utilities and the 
Community Owned Water and Sanitation Organizations rec eive grant subsidies to cover investment cost for 
construction and to support the initial phase of operation.  
The national regulator EWURA and KfW financing standards require bulk and retail water operators to achieve full


---
*Page 43*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
recovery of operation and mainten ance cost  as well as  a modest self -financing capability for capital development  
once fully operational . The Project  achieve s this after the third operative year, with planned and decreasing deficits 
during network extension and capacity building. Proposed tariff rates accept initial operational deficits, but in the mid 
and long -term perspective shall achieve full O&M cost recovery with a 1.10 safety factor.  
The financial model is based on constant tariff rates even though the large part of fixed cost with an initially small 
customer base would require initially high and then  decreasing tariff rates  to cover operational costs at every point in 
time. However , as this  may discourage customers to connect as early adopters , government subsidies amounting to 
500,000 EUR are required for the first three years. The proposed and required retail water tariffs of 0.50 to 0.65 EUR 
per m3 for rural settlements are in the range of prevailing water tariffs in Tanzania. The Project  focuses on urban and 
peri-urban  areas that  currently show  the highest stress on existing, local and free water resources and high 
willingness to pay.  
The proposed retail tariffs are affordable in line with  the OECD suggestion that a maximum of 3% to 5% of household 
income should be spent o n water and sanitation services , and according to the results of the household survey.  Rural 
and poorer urban ho useholds are assumed to use public taps and to consume 20 l per capita per day . The proposed 
tariffs lead  to monthly expenditures of EUR 2.70 for rural households, and of EUR 3.51 for poor urban households 
with 9 persons . Assuming that the aforementioned figures correspond to 5% of income , we can calculate a theoretical 
income of urban households to 70 EUR/month and of r ural households  to 54 EUR/month . These figures would still 
allow for expenditures for sanitation services and even for slightly increased tariffs.  
Richer urban households having a house connection with an average of 6 persons  per household  should , according 
to the same calculation , dispose of a theoretical income of at least 175 EUR/month; this corresponds to the results of 
the household survey and proves the affordability of the proposed set of tariffs.        
The existing water operator in the Project  area, BARUWASA,  opera tes inefficiently and at a very small -scale (250 m³ 
per day ) with a current annual deficit of EUR 70,000. During investment and prior to commissioning  of the Simiyu 
water supply scheme , with concurrent capacity building and recruitment of additional key personnel , this defi cit is 
reduced to EUR 40,000 in the first year and EUR 10,000 in the second year . After the bulk water schemes’ third 
operational year , existing and new water operators are planned to fully cover operational costs . By 2025 the proposed 
tariff rates will achieve the 10% surplus and from then growing surplus over O&M cost. Urban and rural water supplier 
can invest smaller amounts in the extension of distribution networks which allows for  increasing the number of 
connected customers. It is assumed that during operation water utilities will regularly adjust tariffs to domestic 
inflation. For more information on the capacities of the water utilities and the COWSOs, please refer to section C.7.  
3. Sensitivity analysis  
For various reasons , actual water demand and sale s may fall below expectations: lack of awareness and regular 
disposable cash income, competition with free water in particular during the rainy season, delays in implementation of 
yet non -existent urban and rural distribution schemes. The cash flow model t ests sensitivity to an overall reduction of 
sales by 20% and a 50% , as well as sales decrease by 50 % for rural areas only.  
General inflation in Tanzania was and likely remains in the range of 5 % to 7% p.a. , with an inherent risk of inflation 
shocks cause d by extreme climate events (refer to section  E.4.2) . Vice versa the Tanzanian Shilling devaluates 
against international key currencies with lower inflation, i.e. 0 -2% p.a. in the Euro zone. This puts water operators 
under constant pressure to economise or  to apply for tariff adjustment. The national energy mix comprises imported 
crude oil, natural gas and hydropower which are sensitive to fluctuations in commodity and forex markets  as well as 
to climate change . Hence the model tests a 5% p.a. increase of e lectricity tariffs.  
In any sensitivity case, the operational margin of a 1.10 safety factor will not be maintained. While tariffs would still 
cover operational costs for the electricity cost increase scenario, the sensitivity analysis shows that there is a  high 
vulnerability towards delayed connection of customers. The scenario “ -50%”, meaning an overall reduction of sales by


---
*Page 44*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
50%, would require  heavy complementary operational subsidies to prevent a further decrease of sales and even of 
revenue. For a genera l decrease on sales of 20% and for the 50% delay scenario for rural households  only, the 
financial model shows significant stress. This is taken into account in the design by emphasising a  quick urban 
connection and strong capacity development to promote the establishment of COWSOS (refer to risk analysis in 
section G). For urban settlements , the use of private house connections is promoted through a pre -financing of 
connection costs for about 4,000 connections . These households are selected on a first -come , first-serve d basis for 
those areas where a critical minimum number of households/ha has submitted an application and paid a defined 
upfront contribution to connection costs.  
Scenario  Subsidies required with 
base case tariff  Break even with 
base case tar iff  Adjusted tariff  
 2018 -19 2020 -2025  after  rural  urban  
Base Case  €0.2m  €0.5m  3 years  €0,50/m³  €0.65/m³  
“power tariff +5% p.a.”  €0.2m  €0.8m  4 years  €0.56/m³  €0.73/m³  
“water sales -20%”  €0.2m  €2.2m  >10 years  €0.62/m³  €0.80/m³  
“water sales -50%”  €0.2m  €5.8m  >15 years  €0.96/m³  €1.25/m³  
“water sales -50% rural”  €0.2m  €2.5m  >15 years  €0.64/m³  €0.84/m³  
 
4. Adjusted base case  
There is a considerable risk that the actual per capita consumption may fall below the design capacity of the WSDP 
design manual in th e initial phase. The “minus 20% ” scenario is therefore being discussed with EWURA right from the 
beginning. The approved tariff is designed in a manner to allow for quick adaption of the 20% delay scenario if the 
need arises. The resulting tariffs are curr ently estimated at about 0.62 EUR/m3 for rural areas and 0.80 EUR/m3 for 
urban areas . Customers would still be willing and able to pay this tariff  according to the survey and market study .  
A further reduction of the rural design population increase s overa ll per capita investment costs and per m³ cost of bulk 
water supply ( reduced economies of scale), but also reduce s per capita investment cost of rural water distribution. 
The adjusted, further downscaled scenario  remain s vulnerable to cost or demand variat ions. The even stronger focus 
on concentrated, rural or rather peri -urban settlements with higher stress on existing  water resources reduce s the risk 
of an overestimated  demand. However, since this approach would significantly reduce the number of benefici aries, it 
has not been pursued  further . 
 Population  Demand  Consumption  
Urban  95,000  5,300 m³/d  75 l/c/d  
Rural  150,000  3,000 m³/d  20 l/c/d  
 
5. Conclusion  
Planning involved multiple stages with revised , up and downscaled options. The Project ’s obvious cos t drivers and 
challenges are distance from source to relatively small and disperse d urban or peri -urban settlements combined with 
a substantial overall pumping head. The proposed base and adjusted case represent a “sweet spot” where cost per


---
*Page 45*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
capita and aff ordability or willingness -to-pay per capita meet.  
Climate -smart Agr iculture   
Agricultural measures are implemented following an open approach . All measures under the agricultural component 
help to improve climate change resilience and adaptiveness as well  as the income situation of rural households, 
particularly women. As a prerequisite for funding fro m the Project , they have to result in  a positive cash flow for the 
participating communities and/or households. Eligible project applications have to include  a state of the art concept 
for the operation of the dams, fields or forest lots, which is technically viable and shows sufficient profitability and 
cash flow on the household level. A consultant support s communities together with the LGAs and ensure s that 
financial viability is taken into account from the planning of the investment, including dimensioning and other technical 
aspects.  
Financial analyses were carried out to assess the net benefit to households participating in the Project . Several 
typical (r ainfed and irrigated) crop models and Ngitili models were developed using detailed technical input and output 
prices as well as  investment and running cost assumptions. The purpose of elaborating typical crop and farm models 
is to ensure that the proposed activities and associated risks are viable and that they are likely to attract the interest 
of beneficiaries. They have to secure enough additional income for the beneficiaries, and costs and risks must be 
bearable. The models show good profitability outc omes and attractive net incomes. However, they also show that 
upfront costs for adapted practices “with project” are higher than without  in any case . To ensure that vulnerable parts 
of the population (which often have lower incomes) are participating in the  Project , a number of measures are taken. 
This includes intensive awareness raising, subsidies, field schools and demonstration plots that are specifically 
targeted to the vulnerable. Finally, early adopters are expected to show that Project  measures lead to viable financial 
benefits and more secured income.  
As a conclusion of the economic and financial analyses, w hile the Project  bears significant economic  and 
sufficient financial  benefits, n one of the Project ’s outputs entail s significant revenue generat ion or cost 
recovery through fees or taxes from the Project ’s beneficiaries to the Government. Any loan repayment from 
benefits generated by the Project  and channelled back to the national level is therefore assumed to be 
impossible.  
F.2.  Technical Evalua tion  
The Project  comprises inter -related technical solutions in the fields of climate resilient water supply, sanitation and 
agriculture. The technical concept is a flexible approach which allows responding to changes in demand and 
requirements due to un predictable developments like climate change , population growth  and economics . The 
capacity of the water supply system can easily be increased by extending the modular -built treatment plant and by 
adding  twin pipes to meet future demand. This open approach  applies also to the climate -smart agriculture 
component which is based on a set of proposed investment measures to be chosen by Community Based User 
Associations , according to their respective adaptation needs and local technical (geographical, agro -ecolo gical, agro -
economic ) potential. According to the demand and requirements of each community, appropriate measures are 
outlined  in the detail ed designs . It is the idea of the Project  to combine  water supply , sanitation  and agricultural 
measures on village l evel through creating responsibility for prioritization, decision -making  and operation of new 
infrastructures by the users. The technical solutions are selected based on cost -effectiveness, sustainability and 
optimization of operation costs. They  are simpl e, well known and corresponding experiences are available in 
Tanzania . However, the combination of these technologies within one expandable water supply system and the 
combination of several sectors in one community driven approach has pilot character.   
The water supply system  is designed to serve 300,000 rural and 95,000 urban beneficiaries  at the planning horizon of 
the year 2025 . The overall capacity of the system is 15,000 m³ per day and would even allow to cover the water 
demand of 477,000 people in 2 035 without major extension. It mainly consists of the following technical elements:  
 water i ntake  at Lake Victoria  in 3 m depth with an inlet pipe of 250m length ,


---
*Page 46*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
 water treatment plant with coagulation, flocculation and filtration , 
 pumping station and rais ing main of 15 km length up to the command reservoir at Shigala Hill  or one of the 
neighbouring hills,  
 gravity main with 80 km length from Shigala command reservoir to the towns of Bariadi and Lagangabilili , 
 secondary reservoirs along the transmission main  allowing the water supply of rural settlements which are 
located within a corridor of 12 km from both sides of the pipeline , 
 urban distribution networks in Nyashimo, Bariadi and Lagangabilili , 
The inlet pipe at the water intake is laid in a depth of 5 meters. It could still  be used even if the water level of Lake 
Victoria decrease d by 2 meter s. This would be about 3. 5 meters below the average  water  level over the last 100 
years and about 2 meters below the historic minimum level and is therefore regarded t o be sufficiently resilient to 
changes in the lake level due to changing climate and future uses. Furthermore, the inlet pipe could be extended if 
the need arises. For more information on the projected future development of the level of Lake Victoria, plea se refer 
to Section F.2 .  
The treatment process through coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation and filtration can easily and timely be 
adjusted as a function of the raw water quality  which depends on climate change and future uses of Lake Victoria . As 
a result of the treatment process with aluminium sulphate,  the quantity of sludge is reduced to only 200 kg  per day  on 
average. Residing  sludge from the water treatment process is  digested and dried on -site at a sludge drying plant . The  
dried sludge is disch arged on the  existing  land fill site of the municipality of Mwanza Town.   
Pumps and pipe diameters are dimensioned and designed to optimize energy  consumption  and pump costs. Ductile 
iron as material for the main transmission pipe is adequate in view of co sts, soil conditions and operational aspects.  
Water is pumped up to the command reservoir  over the first 1 5 km only. From there, it flows by gravity over the main 
part of the transmission main into the supply areas . Hence,  the system is optimized regarding  the reduction of friction 
losses and energy supply.  
Rural settlements along the pipeline  are supplied through secondary reservoirs and secondary networks by gravity. 
This reduces  the number of connections on the main pipe  and is critical to reduce water l osses and to minimize the 
operation costs for the secondary networks. For more remote areas where the pressure in the secondary reservoirs is 
not sufficient , smaller booster stations powered by solar energy are installed. Solar technology is well known in 
Tanzanian rural areas and increasingly  used for wells and individual households.  
For the distribution netw orks, uPVC and HDPE pipes  are used. This is in line with international and national 
standards and allows the construction of house connections and fu rther extension s. The urban networks are 
designed in a way to avoid long or doubled house connection pipes (known as “spaghetti pipes”). C ommunity driven 
planning and implementation leads to an optimization of investment and operating costs. Isolated  rural settlements 
located far from the transmission main are not connected since wells with pumps are technically feasible and 
economically more viable for such small settlements. However, the Project  foresees tanker filling stations at each 
secondary reservoir  to supply remote communities by tanker during dry spells.  Gender -sensitive criteria are taken into 
account when planning the  location and design of water ta ps as described in Section E.3.  
The Project  bring s water to settlements that currently barely  have  any sanitation infrastructure. Therefore, a  
comprehensive sanitation component  is a prominent part of the Project . It includes the whole cycle of wastewater, 
from the construction of public and school toilets  and the improvement of household latrines  up to  faecal sludge 
transport, a  sludge treatment plant and hygiene awareness campaigns.   
In view of the increasing scarcity of water resources for the region, low actual water consumption and intense 
management requirements of piped sewerage systems, the Proje ct promotes locally adapted on -site sanitation rather 
than water toilets and high water usage , which would be  a prerequisite to make a sewerage system viable . Volume of 
water consumed per household is comparatively low in Simiyu since the majority of  the urban population can not


---
*Page 47*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
afford to use water to flush toilets. Only  about 62,000 people  in the three towns  will have house connections  within 
the investment horizon of 2025 , and only a small  fraction of  those with a house tap will have in -house plumbing, 
bathrooms, showers, water toilets and would qualify  for piped sewerage or for a septic tank . At least  100-350 
connected users  (not people) per hectare  would be required to make a conventional sewerage  system economically 
viable.  
The Project  promotes s mart dr y toilets that have a removable  superstructure or use dual pits, and either do not need 
trucking at all or only rarely. Since it cannot be completely avoided that i nfiltration even from dry latrines modestly 
reaches  the groundwater , the government usually enforces closure of all shallow wells in urban areas. This has not 
been done in Bariadi and the other towns in Simiyu so far, since the government is currently not able to provide 
alternative water to the people. Shallow wells are currently used to a large  exten t in Bariadi and are a dangerous 
health hazard to people. The government will enforce closing of these shallow wells as soon as it succeeds to deliver 
appropriate water to the people. W ith bulk water rather than urban groundwater  for direct human con sumption, 
improved toilets will not cause health and hygiene risks  for the urban population.  
The future quantity of sludge  from the five urban centres in Simiyu is estimated at 38.000 m3/a. If a truck does about 
4-8 trips per day,  one or two vacuum trucks  equipped with a 30 m long hosepipe to access urban settlements  are 
needed to handle this quantity . The sludge is treated at sludge treatment plants through anaerobic ponds and 
constructed wetland s and then used as fertilizer for agricultural purposes. Slu dge treatment plants are foreseen in 
Bariadi, Lagangabilili and Nyashimo. Three decentralized locations are required to facilitate local marketing and 
usage of the fertilizer and to reduce the risk of fraudulent dumping of the sludge.  
Another aspect of utm ost importance is the hygiene campaigns on why and how to improve  traditional pit latrines, 
appropriate hygiene behaviour a nd the reuse of  stabilized faecal sludge. They are integrated as part of the 
community mobilisation and planning process. The Project  raise s awareness that climate resilience is only possible if 
it goes along with improved health conditions . Women are important change agents and a crucial target group for 
hygiene sensitization measures , since they are the principal caretakers for new -borns and children . Improved school 
toilets and so -called sanitation clubs in schools are a promising approach to improve the awareness and needed 
behaviour changes that are crucial according to impact studies on sanitation initiatives in Tanzania.  
The climate-smart agriculture component improve s the climate resilience of 300,000 beneficiaries  through water 
supply for agricultural (irrigation of food and cash crops, horticulture) and livestock watering purposes, climate -smart 
agricultural practices (support to provision of adapted seeds and seedlings, Farmer Field Schools) and improved 
natural resource management (Ngitili, fuelwood plantations). The set of interventions comprises technically 
appropriate and locally known measures as well as the introduction o f new or innovative approaches, namely  
 construction/rehabilitation of small earth dams (max. 8 meters high) and so -called charco dams (max . 5 
meters high) , 
 support to the provision of irrigation equipment (e.g. drip irrigation kits, solar pumps) , 
 support t o the provision of improved/adapted seeds and seedlings (food and cash crops, locally adapted tree 
varieties) , 
 support to the implementation of Farmer Field Schools through LGAs , 
 Ngitili development  and establishment of fuel wood plantations with adapted t ree varieties, incl. land 
registration , 
 ICT knowledge platform for information and dissemination purposes , 
 provision of funds for a system of contests and awards . 
Small earth and charco dams provid e water mainly for irrigation and livestock watering purpos es. This is a suitable 
approach to reduce the vulnerability of the b eneficiaries who are exposed  to volatility of rainfall and who depend on 
the availability of water a t crucial times during the cropping. Availability of water for off -season horticulture secures


---
*Page 48*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
income, especially for women, who are often involved in horticulture. It also secures the availability of vegetables on 
local markets and  improve s diets  and nutrition security for all local consumers . Women are involved in planning and 
selection of technologies to ensure that their specific needs are met. The irrigation equipment and technologies used 
by the Project  greatly improve water use efficiency (“more crop per drop”), thus  they potentially reduce  water stress 
for crops over longer periods. The use of s olar pumps is fostered since they are more environmentally friendly, 
economically viable and reduce operation and maintenance costs. In addition to small scale irrigation, dams will 
provide  water for livestock . This alleviate s pressure on pastora lists who now migrate as far as even to the shores of 
Lake Victoria  and contributes to reduce conflict potential between pastoralists  and arable farmers along migration 
routes. Existing small dams in the region where mostly designed solely for cattle uses,  even though a big proportion 
of the communities and of the individual farmers are involved in both cattle herding and farming. As a result, at those  
dams  where the initial concept did not cater for small scale irrigation , informal micro irrigation systems  where often 
established only a few meters away from the cattle troughs, which unavoidably lead to conflicts. Communities will be 
encouraged during community based planning to select dams that accommodate for both uses. This includes advice 
and support for  the establishment of an appropriate operational concept. The technical design shall facilitate both 
uses without interference . This shall serve as a role model.  
Adapted  seeds and seedlings help to increase the overall amount and reliability of  yields. Col laboration with n ational 
and regional research organisations ensures that adequate, adapted species and varieties are being used.  
The Farmer Field Schools help farmers make best use of improved  and adapted inputs. They are a powerful measure 
to introduce good agricultural practice, environmentally sound farming and build up resilience to  climate change. They 
also have  the potential to become the basis for upscaling climate smart agriculture within neighbouring, agro -
ecologically similar regions. Additional ly, Farmer Field Schools are breeding grounds for enhanced participation in 
civil society organisations, thus contributing to an enabling environment.  
Ngitili provide s additional fodder resources for livestock during dry seasons. Both Fuelwood plantations and Ngitili 
have the double benefit of acting as a carbon sink (if managed properly) and of minimising encroachment into natur al 
vegetation and habitats, especially  the neighbouring Serengeti area . Project  activities are c ontingent  on proper  land 
registrat ion, especially for women. The concepts of sustainable forest and Ngtili management increase awareness of 
the importance of land rights and related regulatory aspects  among local communities and administrative entities.  
They reduce  pressure on vegetation  and soil and improve ecosystem services .  
The ICT knowledge platform is an information hub for researche rs, regional administrative bodies, local communities, 
individuals and decision makers . It inform s its users about current  weather facts , future projecte d climate  trends and 
adaptation potentials, thereby acting as a catalyst for learning, change and knowledge management. It includes 
features like text messaging to mobile phones to ensure that people in remote areas benefit from and participate in 
the plat form.  
Experience s with contest and award systems all over the world show  that they incite people to develop  and 
implement  ideas on how to improve their environ ment, livelihood s and well -being . However , it is a new approach for 
the Simiyu Region and not yet  established in Tanzania. They are a particularly promising tool for climate adaptation 
activities since ideas may cover  and merge a broad variety of topics  from sanitation to  health, agriculture, soil and 
water conservation, storage and processing  up to i deas for the management of public water taps . Locally organised 
juries help to keep the contests and awards transparent, and media coverage makes ideas and results accessible to 
a broader public . This may initiate  changes ev en beyond the Project  region.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
1. Environmental and Social Risk Category (A)  
The Project  entails significant social and health benefits. The re is a high  demand for access to reliable and safe water 
supply as well as climate -smart agricultural techniques,  and the Project  is expected to greatly increase climate 
resilience in the serviced areas. However, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) recognizes that 
some of the potential impacts are considered signi ficant, particularly the resettlement of households and commercial 
establishments, impacts on cultural heritage, and potentially cumulative impacts from other projects in the area if 
implemented.  Due to the large size of the planned infrastructure, the wat er extraction from Lake Victoria and the 
necessary resettlements and loss of livelihoods which is likely to affect more than 200 people, the Project  was 
screened and designated as environmental and social risk Category A . MoWI rated the Project  accordingly . 
However, t he anticipated impacts are seen as localized and within the Project ’s influence area, largely reversible, and 
can be mitigated through the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESIA report presents a 
project -level grievance and r edress mechanism that utilizes a traditional conflict resolution process.  
2. Applicable Performance Standards (PS) for the Project . 
Performance Standards of IFC   Justification of PS Applicability  
PS 1:  Assessment and Management of 
Environ mental and Social  Risks and 
Impacts  X An ESIA incl. an ESMP and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared for the water supply scheme for the management of environmental and 
social performance during the planning, construction and operation phase. For the 
climate -smart agriculture component an ESMF has been prepared.   
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions  
X Safe and appropriate working conditions will be assured during construction and 
maintenance. The ESIA has reviewed the applicable policies and legislation, a nd 
included labor and working condition requirements in the ESMP.  
PS 3:  Resource Efficiency and Pollution 
Prevention  X The ESIA has evaluated the existing levels and sources of pollution within the 
Project . Resource efficiency and pollution prevention hav e been addressed as part 
of the ESMP based on the World Bank Group’s EHS Guidelines for Water and 
Sanitation.  
PS 4:  Community Health, Safety, and 
Security  X During construction , community H&S may be an issue . Contractors are obliged to 
protect community H &S, especially  through  HIV prevention and awareness  
campaigns which are an integral part of construction contracts.  
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary 
Resettlement  
X Necessary resettlements and land acquisition will be determined with the final design  
of the pipeline. The detailed design will adopt recommendations from the ESIA to 
minimize resettlement impacts. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is currently being 
prepared and will be implemented prior to the beginning  of the construction works. 
Planning  and implementation of the RAP will be guided by the RPF that is developed 
in accordance with IFC’s PS 5 and by national legislation.  
PS 6:  Biodiversity Conservation and 
Sustainable Management of Living 
Natural Resources  X A baseline inventory of biodiver sity and living natural resources has been 
established as a result of field investigation and secondary information sources.  
PS 7:  Indigenous Peoples  
n/a There are no indigenous peoples in the Project  area. The Hadzabe people, who 
identify themselves as indigenous peoples, predominantly live around Lake Eyasi, 
southeast of the Project  area. Therefore, PS 7 is not applicable to the water supply 
scheme.  
PS 8:  Cultural Heritage  X One potential reservoir site is on a sacred hill that is worship ped by the loc al 
community. Whether this site will be used is still under evaluation.  
The Project  is in compliance with IFC Environmental and Social Standards. Overall, the reviewed ESIA, ESMP and 
RPF provide a good overview of the risk s and impacts associated with the  water and sanitation supply measures and 
propose adequate mitigation measures. The ESMF for the agricultural component was published in September 2016. 
It includes references to the water component. Since the ESIA and ESMP for the water component and the ESMF for


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
the agricultural component are now both in place, possible cumulative impacts in these studies are being evaluated  
before their finalization. Currently , the environmental studies are under review by national authorities who will disclose 
the docum ents after approval. The first draft of the ESIA was disclosed by KfW on 23rd of June  2016 . The ESIA 
provide s mitigation measures to address  identified key negative impacts and to enhance  positive impacts. These will 
be further detailed in each phase of th e Project , e.g. during construction  (Construction ES Management Plan ), 
operations  (Operational ES Management Plan ) and similarly for decommissioning. For more details, please refer to 
Annex 8: Summary of the Environment and Social Impact Assessment and the  supporting  documents delivered.  
3. Consideration of gender aspect in the Project  
The Tanzanian National Strategy on Gender and Climate Change recognizes a strong interlinkage between gender 
issues and climate change and states that climate change may worsen  gender  inequalities. Men and women  are 
differently affected by and able to adapt to impacts of climate change due to their specific socio -economic roles and 
responsibilities. Therefore, contributing to g ender equality is a significant objective of the Project and a gender -
sensitive approach is conducted in each component.  The Project  has set out six fundamental principles on gender 
consideration:  
1) commitment to gender equality and equity;  
2) inclusiveness in terms of access and applicability to all the activ ities;  
3) accountability for gender and climate change results and impacts;   
4) improvement of n ational policies and priorities, and inclusive stakeholder participation;  
5) equal competencies throughout the institutional framework; and   
6) equitable resource alloc ation so that women and men benefit equitably from the adaptation measures.  
The following, mostly interlinked key issues on gender have been identified for the Simiyu Region:  
(1) Female -headed households (FHH) : About 38% of the households in the Simiyu r egion are female -headed 
households (Census 2012), a figure which exceeds the national average (33%) and is the second highest rate in the 
country. Since FHH are bigger than male -headed households (MHH) in Tanzania  according to statistics , the high 
number o f female headed households may partly explain the relatively big household size of 6.9 persons per 
household in Simiyu . The national average is 4.7 persons per household. C ountry -wide statistics show, that a majority 
of FHH in Tanzania are headed by widows  (47%), followed by divorced or separated women. The common belief that 
FHH are more prone to poverty is not necessarily the case: Statistics show that rates of incidences of poverty are 
higher in male -headed households (MHH  40.2%, FHH 38.3%) . However, looking at the depth of poverty , FFH often 
suffer more deeply. One reason  may be, that members of FHH are general ly less educated . Another, that FHH often 
do have less workforce . According to the Tanzanian National Gender Profile , FHH tend to suffer more from  food-
insecurity than MHH. The Project ’s components consider specific needs of FHH that are also related to the following 
points 2 -4 (please also refer to section E.3.1 .)  
(2) Lack of education:  74% of the respondents of the baseline study conducted in  the Simiyu region mention lack of 
education opportunities for women as one of three gender -related problems faced by a family. Low level of education 
among women is therefore considered during planning and implementation of awareness -raising and sensitisation  
campaigns.  
(3) Lack of participation:  Although women make up the majority of the labo ur force , especially in  agriculture, they are 
not adequately involved in planning and decision -making. One problem making it particularly difficult to implement 
collecti ve soil protection measures or farming systems by women groups is that women traditionally do not have land 
ownership rights. Customary practices that restrict a woman’s prope rty rights are still widespread although the 1999 
Land Act gives Tanzanian women the right to obtain access to land, including the right to own, use and sell it, and 
mandates joint titling of land. Men are still seen as the natural head of a family and have control over the household 
budget. Additionally, w omen are still underrepresent ed in village councils that are often responsible for settling land 
conflicts. The Project  promotes women's participation in decision -making, especially in the context of Community


---
*Page 51*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
Based User Associations. Property for the family rather than the family hea d is promoted.  Women and women’s 
groups are especially consulted during Project  preparation and implementation to ensure that the needs of women 
and men are equally considered.  
(4) Division of labour and gender -specific time budget:  Economic empowerment of women is among the main 
objectives in the Tanzanian National Strategy for Gender Development . The baseline study shows that both men and 
women in the Simiyu region contribute almost equally to the household income.  There are tasks that are still 
traditio nally assigned to women - and more and more often  to children - , e.g. fetching water . However, men start to 
participate which may be explained by a lack of reliable resources. While men on average spend around 11 -20 
minutes per trip to fetch water, women spend around 30 min and sometimes even up to one hour or more. 
Consultations with ward leaders hip and the communities reveal  that in some areas, women spend  up to 6 hours of 
their productive time in search for water  – especially i n the driest months . Apart  from that they are responsible for a 
large number of high -frequency tasks such as child care, food preparation etc.. Clean and safe drinking water supply 
in a short walking distance or even via household connections in urban areas has a positive impact on  food security 
and the health situation – especially of (new born) children. It saves time which can be used for other activities, for 
instance for educational purposes. This gives particularly girls the opportunity to increase their school attendance. 
Girls’ school attendance will rise due to improved s chool toilets, since many girls  do not go to school during 
menstruation, if no proper sanitation facilities are in place. The agricultural component considers women’s gender 
specific time budget (due to thei r domestic obligations) to give them the opportunity to participate in the component’s 
activities. The promotion of labour saving technologies  is also considered.  
For more information on gender considerations in the Project , please refer to Section E.3.  
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement  
In line with the general arrangement s as described in section C.7 and Annex es 5 and 6 , procurement and financial 
management will be implemented as follows:  
 
Procurement  
Goods and services are procured and assigned  by the involved Tanzanian entities according to Tanzanian standards . 
However, as defined in the AMA between GCF and KfW, KfW procurement guidelines on international competitive 
bidding  apply and i n the event of any differences in policies, KfW’s guideline s prevail . KfW assesses adherence of 
submitted documents with Kf W pro curement regulations at defined stages in the process. The procuring entity is 
required to receive prior no -objection from KfW before executing these steps, e.g. the signing of the final contract. 
KfW is not a contracting party for goods and services procured under the Project . For an overview of procurement 
arrangements, please refer to Annex 9. 
Consultancy Services  are procured by MoWI upon international competitive bidding in line with KfW’s prior no -
objection procedure. A Tender Agent financed by the German Government supports MoWI during the tendering 
process.  
Works and Services above 350.000 EUR  are procured upon international competitive bidding. KfW must issue prior 
no-objection at defined stages as described in the KfW procurement guidelines. For water and sanitation 
infrastructure, i t is proposed to launch one tender that includes  water supply works, the faecal sludge treatment plan, 
the vacuum truck and public toilets.  T o facilit ate contract management, supervision and overall quality control, MoWI 
is the procuring entity  for this lot . FIDIC Red Book standards are applied . However, the contract includes a FIDIC 
Yellow Book component for the construction of the water treatment plan t. This allows for better controll ing and if 
necessary correcting  the requested outcome parameters , such  as energy consumption, chemical costs, sludge 
quantities and water quality. Furthermore, as part of the programmatic approach on climate smart agricult ure, LGAs 
are expected to procure 2 contracts for small dams above the threshold of 350.000 EUR.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 82 
 
 
 F 
A large number (> 100) of small contracts for Works and Services below 350 ,000 EUR  in the field of climate -smart 
agriculture are procured by the LGAs upon nat ional competitive bidding. National tenders are launched, which are 
open to regional bidders from the East African Community. The PMU at the Regional Secretariat prepares a 
procurement manual for these contracts on the basis of Tanzanian procurement rules and KfW procurement 
guidelines. The procurement manual is elaborated with the support of the Implementing Consultant and requires 
KfW’s approval. It defines a procedure for post -approval for small contracts through KfW in the Project  as follows: In 
princip le, the PMU collects annual procurement plans developed by the LGAs on the basis of the communities’ 
proposals, compiles them and submits them, countersigned by the Implementing Consultant, to KfW for no -objection. 
Following this, LGAs procure the goods an d services in line with the plan. Annual procurement reports supported by 
independent procurement audits are submitted to KfW for review and post -approval.  
 
Financial Management  
Recipient of the funds is the United Republic of Tanzania. The Ministry of Fin ance and Planning signs the Financing 
Agreement on behalf of the United Republic of Tanzania and is defined as the Executing Entity, whereas the 
implementing entity is the M inistry of Water and Irrigation . The details of procurement and financial managemen t are 
defined in a Separate Agreement between MoWI, the Regional Secretariat and  KfW.  Annual financial audits of the 
Project  in line with International Auditing Standards are performed by independent external auditors. The 
Management Consultant is tasked t o assign independent auditors upon competitive selection. The audit is financed 
from the Management Consultant’s reimbursable budget.  
Proceeds from the GCF are kept at a separate trust account at KfW. As a general principle, KfW disburses funds to 
the reci pients in accordance with the progress of the project . The Implementing Entity and the implementing 
consultant have to approve the proper use of funds and the defined progress as a prerequisite for any disbursement. 
In addition, KfW staff carries out regul ar on -site checks of the proper physical implementation and bookkeeping.  
Disbursements for consultancy contracts and for works contracts above 350 ,000 EUR  are done according to the KfW 
“direct disbursement procedure”, meaning that KfW disburses funds dire ctly to the contractors on request by the 
contracting entity. All disbursement requests for works contracts need to be countersigned by the Implementing 
Consultant.  
For contracts up to 350,000 EUR , the Regional Secretariat sets up a special account for dis position funds in EUR 
with a corresponding sub -account in TZS. The Regional Secretariat request s KfW for down payments  into the 
disposition fund on the basis of the annual investment and procurement plans and the actual use of funds. Together 
with each req uest for replenishment of the disposition fund, documentation on the evidence of the use of funds, 
reconciliation of accounts and statements of expenditures  must  be delivered to KfW . In line with KfW’s financial 
management standards and to support the  internal control  system  of the Regional Secretariat , all this documentation 
must be countersigned and all disbursements must be authorized by the Implementing Consultant. The Regional 
Secretariat also commissions  independent annual audits of the disposition fu nd and submits them  to KfW . Audits are 
financed out of the Disposition Fund.


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Institutional Challenges   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
A set of i nstitutions at local level (urban utilities, 
SIMWASA, LGAs, COWSOS, local user groups for 
agricultural measures) needs to be newly established 
or strengthened considerably to ensure sustainability 
of the Project . They need to be staffed within the 
required  time frame and with qualified personnel, to 
implement the Project  as planned  Technical 
and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  High  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Project  contains comprehensive capacity building measures  to strengthen  the Regional Secre tariat,  Water 
Utilities, LGAs and local user groups . The Government commits to ensure inclusion of sufficient funding for staffing 
in line with staffing schedules  and means of work in the government budget . If it turns out to be difficult to find 
adequate staff, topping up of salaries may need to be financed from contingencies . The involved institutions  are 
furthermore supported by a consulting team  during project implementation. It is expected that these risks are 
reduced to  medium  with the proposed measur es. 
Financial Sustainability   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Reduction of the amount of water sales could lead to 
cash flow problems of the operators.  Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  High  
Mitigation Meas ure(s)  
Thorough planning has been carried out during the feasibility stage and will be continued during detailed design to 
reduce the risk of cost increases. Sensitivity analyses of the cash -flow models show  sufficient robustness for delays 
in water sales  if appropriate measures are being taken . Those measures include  increasing the speed of connecting  
especially urban areas  and thorough planning of water tariffs. Regular follow up on the number of costumers and on 
the projected financial performance based  on the financial model help to monitor the water providers’ cash flow. 
According to sensitivity analyses, an increased tariff of 0.63 and 0.80 ct/m³ may be necessary if demand turns out to 
be 20% below current projections. Applying this tariff would still  be possible without overloading individual household 
expenditures , as described in Section F.1. In addition, the Project  finances household connections in urban centres 
as well as public taps, to initiate water consumption . Capacity building is carried ou t for districts and local 
communities for the formation  of COWSOS. With the mentioned  measures we expect that positive cash flow is 
achieved from the third year on. Financing is contingent on the commitment of the government to subsidise 
operational costs until enough connections are in place to cover operational costs from revenue. With these 
mitigation measures, the risk is reduced to medium . G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
The main risks of the Project  relate to the need to create and significantly strengthen institutions on all levels, the 
sensitivity of the financi al viability of the water supply system to the  amount of water sales and the speed  of 
connecting new customers, the introduction of  a paradigm shift and the success of community driven planning. 
Overall, taking into account the mitigating measures as descr ibed below in G.2, the level of impacts of risks to the 
Project  is medium with a medium probability.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
Paradigm shift  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
The Project  pursues new approaches in many regards, 
from the national level where cross -sectoral planning 
and implementation is introduced, to the local level 
where people will be required to change their daily 
habits and to form local user associations. Introducing 
these changes  will be a major challenge.  Other  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  High  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The high needs of the recipients at the local level and the broad ownership within the government will be a good 
basis to introduce the paradigm shift. Thorou gh planning and a participatory and holistic approach that ensures 
stakeholder engagement right from the beginning is expected to mitigate this risk. Furthermore, a Strategic Support 
Consultant will be assigned to support the MoWI and the Steering Committe e in these aspects of the Project . We 
expect to mitigate this risk to a medium level . 
Community driven planning may lead to unforeseen results  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Community driven planning of measures related to 
climate -smart agriculture, rural water supply and rural 
sanitation may not take place as planned, resulting in 
not enough and even qualitatively unacceptable 
investment proposals.  Technical 
and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Mediu m 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Household surveys show  sufficient demand.  Risks are mitigated by i nformation campaigns about the Project , as well 
as support to local communities  in project identification , to be delivered by the LGAs in collaboration with the 
Implementing Consultant . Thereby, we expect to  reduce this risk to a low to medium  level . 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Increased and uncoordinated abstraction of raw water and pollution of Lake Victoria could impact the Project . A 
programme to addre ss this issue on a transnational level, combined with strategic investments is currently under 
preparation by East African Community, Lake Victoria Basin Commission and Member States with financial support 
from Germany (KfW) and potentially the European Un ion. It includes investments in sanitation infrastructure for 
riparian towns and polluters, as well as enhanced monitoring systems for the water quality of the lake and 
strengthening of corresponding institutional structures.  
Regarding the long -term devel opment of the level of Lake Victoria, p redictions foresee a stronger variability, but also 
an overall slight increase of the cumulative amount of rainfall in the Lake Victoria region. According  to projections of 
the Climate Service Centre of the Helmhol tz Zentrum  in Germany  in 2013 , the climatic water balance  in Tanzania  
will increase by  18 percent by 2100 . It also projects similar values for Uganda and Kenya. However , it has to be 
noted that the projected future climatic water balance shows a rather high b andwidth, because it is calculated by 
accumulating effects of the different precipitation and evaporation scenarios. Over the past 100 years, the level of 
Lake Victoria varied by about three meters . A rise of lake level by  2.5 meters in the 1960s was mostl y assigned to 
climate effects . However,  the current decrease of 2.5 meters, bringing the lake back into the range of its original 
level, is said to be correlated about half to human activities and about half to climate effects. In 1954, as part of the 
Owen ’s Fall hydropower project, Egypt and Uganda agreed to ensure that the releases from Lake Victoria will


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
correspond to the natural flow of the river before damming through the so -called “Agreed Curve”. Since then, 
Uganda has been controlling  the outflow fro m Lake Victoria. However, the estimation of lake rainfall, tributary inflow 
and evaporation is not easy and there have been intensive discussions on whether Uganda left the “Agreed Curve” 
between the years of 2001 and 2006. With the commissioning of the Bu jagali hydropower station in 2012, the 
Government of Uganda can now produce twice the quantity of power with the same amount of water released from 
Lake Victoria and has been able to significantly reduce  pressure on their power system. The Bujagali hydropo wer 
station was financed by a consortium of international financiers, among them KfW.  As described in Section F.2 , the 
water intake has been designed to accommodate a potential drop in lake level of up to 2 meters. If the need arises, 
the intake can be mod ified at a later stage.  
 
H.1.  Logic Framework    
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level  
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate  resilient 
sustainable development   
The objective of the Project  is to increase climate resilience  of rural and urban households, 
particularly small scale farmers and women living in the Simiyu Region , and to improve 
policies and regulation for cross -sectoral action towards climate adaptation.  
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Fund -level impacts  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions  A1.2 Number of men 
and women 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options  
 Household 
survey (mid-
term and 
upon 
completion 
of the 
Project )  
 0 men  
0 women  238,000 men 
257,000 
women  Institutions at 
regional, LGA and 
local level are 
strengthened 
sufficiently to plan, 
implement and 
complete the 
infrastructure and 
to manage i t 
sustainably .  
Communities have 
been successfully 
mobilized. They 
demand the 
services as 
predicted on the 
baseline of the 
household survey 
and possible A2.0 Increased 
resilience of health and 
well-being, and food and 
water security  extracted from A2.1: 
Number of additional 
improved public 
sanitation facilities to 
prevent climate -
induce d waterborne 
diseases  
A2.2 Number of 
people with year -
round access to Annual 
Reports  on 
projec t 
status, 
household 
survey (mid-
term and 
upon 
completion 
of the 0 public 
sanitation 
facilities  
 
 
 
7,000 people  50 public 
sanitation 
facilities at 
market places, 
bus stops or 
schools  
 
238,000 
women,


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
reliable and safe 
water supply despite 
climate shocks and 
stresses  
A2.3 Number of 
additional food  
secure households 
in periods at risk of 
climate change 
impacts  Project )  
  
 
 
0 257,000 men  
 
 
28,900 
households  upcoming conflicts 
over water and soil 
sources have 
been prevented or 
mitigated . 
The population is 
willing to pay cost 
covering tariffs for 
climate adaption 
infrastructure . 
A3.0 Inc reased 
resilience of 
infrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change  A3.1 Number and 
value of 
infrastructure or 
physical assets 
made more resilient 
to climate variability 
and change  Technical 
information 
contained in 
Annual 
Reports , 
ecosystem 
survey (mid-
term and 
upon 
completion 
of the 
Project ) 0 
 
0 1 water supply 
system worth 
88.9 m EUR  
4 small dams 
and irrigation 
systems and 
15 charco 
dams worth  
3.1 m EUR  
A4.0 Improved 
resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services  A4.1 Scale of 
additional 
ecosystems 
protected in 
response to climate 
change  Annual 
Reports , 
ecosystem 
survey (mid-
term and 
upon 
completion 
of the 
Project ) 0 7.200 ha


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project  level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verificati on 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Project  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development  A5.1 Number of key 
targeted institutions 
with evid ence of 
their strengthened 
capacity and 
coordination 
mechanisms to 
mainstream climate 
resilience  
 
A5.2 Number of 
effective 
regulations/policies 
introduced/adjusted 
to address climate 
change  Project  
reports , 
Annual utility 
performance 
assessment 
report by 
EWURA, 
COWSO 
Competency 
assessment 
Framework, 
Joint 
Supervision 
missions of 
Water Sector 
Development 
Programme  
and 
Agriculture 
Development 
Programme II  0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 regulations 
or policies 
adopted 
following 
recommenda
tions of the 
Steering 
Committee  50 
(includi ng 
community 
based 
organisa -
tions)  
 
 
 
4 regula -
tions or 
policies 
adopted  
following 
recommend
ations of the 
Steering 
Committee  Trained staff 
remain at related 
positions/posts . 
Targeted entities 
continue to commit 
themselves to 
multisectoral 
planning and 
implementation 
procedures as 
developed within 
the Project  under 
SC supervision . 
A6.0 Increased 
generation and use of 
climate information in 
decision -making  A6.1 Number of 
generated climate 
information products 
tailored to decision 
makers  
 
A6.2 Evidence 
showi ng that climate 
information 
products/services 
are used in decision 
making in climate 
sensitive sectors  Project  
reports, esp. 
reports of 
Steering 
Committee , 
user statistics 
on ICT 
network , 
household 
survey  (mid-
term and upon 
completion of 
the Project ), 
see also 
results of A5.0   0 1 ICT 
network on 
climate 
change  
 
On national 
level 
qualitative, 
on 
household 
level 77,000 
people 
(agriculture)  Interested parties 
actively participate 
in developing 
concepts and 
contents of ICT 
platform on climate 
change . 
Technical layout of 
platform allows for 
wide access of all 
identified user 
groups .


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  A7.1 Exten t to which 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and 
public sector 
services use 
improved,  fund-
supported tools, 
instruments, 
strategies and 
activities to respond 
to climate change 
and variability  Project   
report s, 
Annual utility 
assessment by 
EWURA, 
Budget 
performance 
analysis, Joint 
Supervision 
missions of 
Water Sector 
Development 
Programme,  
Steering 
Committee  
Reports , 
household 
survey  (mid-
term and upon 
completion of 
the Project )  On national 
level 
qualitative, 
on 
household 
level 
495,000 
people  Sufficient number 
and qualification of 
extension workers 
to disseminate 
climate -smart 
techniques a nd 
tools, wide 
accessibility of ICT 
platform on climate 
change and 
adaptivity . 
Farmers adopt 
disseminated 
techniques and 
practices . 
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk -
reduction processes  A8.1 Number of 
women and men 
made aware of 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses  Project  
reports , LGA 
reports on 
extension work  0 257,000 
women, 
238,000 
men Sufficient number 
and qualification of 
extension workers 
to disseminate 
climate -smart 
techniques , wide 
acces sibility of ICT  
plat-form on 
climat e change 
and adapt ation  
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions  M9.1 Additional 
hectares of forests 
or land under 
improved 
management 
contri buting to 
emission reduction  Project  
reports, 
household and 
ecosystem 
surveys  (mid-
term and upon 
completion ) 0 7,200  ha
  Farmers are willing 
to convert land into 
Ngitili/woodlots, 
and accept the 
proposed deposit 
account scheme .  
Project  outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Refined  mechanisms 
for implementa tion of 
adaptation activities  The Project  serves as a role model. A Steering Committee uses experiences from the 
Project  to initiate improve ment of procedures  and regulations for cross -sectoral 
coordination and implementation  of further climate adaptation activities  
2. Improv ed water 
supply infrastructure, 
agricultural practices and 
sanitation services  Reliable and safe drinking water for 395,000 people , reduced vulnerability to water borne 
diseases for 300,000 people, 60% (1 80,000 ) of them being women , improved food and 
income security for 200,000 people


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
3. Communities are 
engaged and operate 
and maintain their 
projects properly  Community Adaptation Plans formulated, contests and awards carried out, communities 
propose proje cts and establish Community Based User Associations, communities operate 
and maintain their projects  
4. Capacities enhanced  Farmer Field Schools established , awareness on climate threats strengthened , increased 
capacities and improved processes to implem ent risk - reduction measures , infrastructure 
operated sustainably, adaptive capacities of the most vulnerable enhanced.  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1 Establish and 
improve mechanisms 
towards cross -sectoral 
planning and 
implementation  Establish a Steering Committee with a 
defined agenda and ToR for 
facilitating paradigm shift and 
introducing new regulations and 
procedures for implementation of 
cross -sectoral climate adaptation 
measures  Involvement of 
line ministries, 
government 
entities and  CSO,  
Consultancy  Discuss and adapt  standard 
procedures, organizational 
structures and regulations on 
the basis of experiences 
made in the Project  
Review lessons learnt  
Initiate and advocate for 
replication in similar cross -
sectoral adaptation projects  
1.2 Establish an ICT 
platform  Web-based and/or mobile phone -
based system of communication and 
interaction, addressing researchers, 
extension officers, farmers and 
decision makers  Consultancy  Design a platform concept 
and TOR for the prospective 
provider  
Identify suitable academic or 
non-profit organization 
hosting the system and 
managing content  
Identify relevant institutions 
and establish cooperation 
agreements  
Develop a systematic data 
collection, processing and 
management system  
Manage website and content  
in line with capacities and 
needs of user groups  
2.1.1 Construct bulk 
water system  intake, treatment plant, pumping 
stations and transmission main  Works and 
services, 
consultancy     
2.1.2. provide operation 
subsidy in  year 1 -3 of 
operation  Subsidy from central government to 
UWSas trough payment of salary bills 
and electricity costs  Budget Funds  Only year 1 -3 of operation. 
After wards , the Project is 
expected to cover 
operational costs from 
revenue in line EWURA 
standards and the tarif f 
model based on  cash flow


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
projection  
2.1.3  Construct urban 
water distribution  incl. 
public water tabs  Distribution pipes and public 
standpipes  Works and 
services, 
consultancy     
2.1.4  Finance household 
connections  Distribution pipes and mai nly public 
standpipes  Works and 
services, 
consultancy    Partial pre -financing through 
the Project  on a first -come 
first serve basis to 
accelerate new connections  
2.1.5 construct rural 
distribution incl. public 
water tabs  Distribution pipes and public 
standpipes  Works and 
services, 
consultancy    On the basis of community 
driven planning, 
establishment of COWSOs  
2.2.1  construct 
wastewater treatment 
plants and purchase 
exhauster trucks  Anaerobic ponds, sludge drying beds 
and constructed wetlands  Works and 
services, 
consultancy     
2.2.2 carry out hygiene 
awareness campaigns 
and promote improved 
household latrines  Promotion of water saving and 
affordable on -site solutions esp. in 
vulnerable low income urban areas .  Consultancy, 
provision of 
construction 
mater ials Sanitation clubs for schools, 
radio shows, distribution of 
subsidized materials 
(concrete slabs and 
ventilation pipes), with 
support of local NGOs  
2.2.3 Construct public 
toilets  On-site sanitation solutions  Works and 
services, 
consultancy    At publi c places, like 
markets, bus stations and in 
schools , with support 
through local NGOs  
2.3.1 Construct and 
rehabilitate dams and 
small scale irrigation 
systems   15 charco dams, plus either i.) 3 new 
valley dams, or  alternatively ii.) 1 new 
dam and the rehab ilitation of 4 
existing dams, thus upgrading an 
estimated 1,000 ha to irrigated  land Works and 
services, 
consultancy    Selection of sites according 
to transparent technical and 
socio -economic criteria  
 
2.3.2 Provide adapted  
equipment and seeds  Introductio n of System of Rice 
Intensification (SRI) as a climate -
smart irrigation technology for rice , 
drip irrigation for horticulture 
production , high yielding, fast 
maturing, and drought -tolerant seeds 
for horticult ure and maize production, 
“Push -pull” intercropp ing technology 
and other conservation agriculture 
technologies  Consultancy, 
direct financial 
contribution  Contribution to provision of 
irrigation equipment (e.g., 
pipes, drip irrigation kits, 
solar pumps)  
Support and subsidies to 
procurement of adapted 
seeds 
Disbursement via disposition 
fund 
2.3.3 establish Ngitili and 
forest plots  Put in place climate -smart and 
sustainably managed fuelwood and 
fodder supply through Ngitili 
enrichment/development (in case 
fodder is the main produce) or forest Works and 
services, 
consultancy   Supply of adapted seedlings 
and training via e.g. ICRAF  
Incentive to farmers via 
deposit accounts


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
 
 plantations with spacing allowing 
pasture use (in case fuelwood is the 
main produce)  Disbursement via disposition 
fund 
3.1  Develop ope rational 
manual for community 
driven appoach, 
Facilitate development of 
community adaptation 
plans and establishment 
of community based 
user associations  Describes the procedures of the 
community driven approach includ ing 
a user’s manual for communities . 
Communities are encouraged to 
define priorities. Women are explicitly 
encouraged to involve  and have to be 
represented in the boards of the 
associations  Consultancy  Facilitated by the extension 
officers of the LGAs. 
Consultants capacitate LGA 
staff for this  task and work 
together with CSO, user fees 
have to cover operational 
costs and maintenance 
wherever applicable  
3.2 Carry out contest 
and award  Communities or individuals develop 
ideas and receive a premium upon 
realization  Consultancy, 
direct financial 
contribution  Consultants capacitate LGA 
staff for this task and work 
together with CSO  
4.1 Capacity building to 
Regional Secretariat, 
water utilit ies, LGAs  and 
MoWI  Training of involved government 
entities  Consultancy  Training (workshops, on -the-
job) by im plementation 
consul tant, government 
entities (MoWI , MALF , 
LGAs, bulk water supplier ) 
and contingently by 
national/regional research 
institutions  
4.2 Establish Farmer 
Field Schools  integrated approaches are promoted 
that secure and increase yields 
through  soil protection practices, plant 
and seed variety selection, 
fertilization, weed control, integrated 
plant protection and climate -adapted  
harvesting techniques. The plots of 
the Farmer Field Schools allow a 
comparison of production of the 
treated soils wi th traditionally 
cultivated soils.   Consultancy  Consultants capacitate LGA 
staff for this task and work 
together with CSO  
H.2.  Arrangeme nts for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements will comply with the relevant GCF policies (MAF, AMA, etc) .  
KfW undertake s semi -annual reviews  to assess progress of Project  implementation and compliance with covenants and 
Project  agreements, to monitor progress in achieving Project  outputs  and to monitor evidence of use of  funds.  
A mid-term review  is carried out in  year 3 of the Project  being effective or at any time that KfW, MoWI and/or the 
Steering Committee consider necessary. The Strategic Consultant competitively selects and assigns an independent 
consultant for this  task. The mid -term review is financed from the reimbursable budget of the Strategic Consultant. It 
includes (i) review of the institutional, administrative, organizational, technical, environmental, social, economic, and 
financial aspects of the Project  based on the assumptions and risks included in the design and monitoring framework; 
(ii) review  of covenants to assess whether they are still relevant or need to be changed, or waived due to changing


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 82 
 
 
 H 
 circumstances; (iii) review of the achievement of interme diate impacts in the framework of a rapid household and 
ecosystem survey (iv) assess ment of  the need to restructure or reformulate the Project  and the effects of this on the 
immediate objectives (purpose) and long -term goals of the Project ; (v) update  of the Project ’s design and monitoring 
framework if restructuring or reformulation is necessary or its immediate objectives will change.  
Upon completion , KfW carries out a project completion mission, where the satisfactory implementation of the Project  
within  the agreed framework and good financial and engineering practices, the delivery of outputs and the achievement 
of Project  targets is monitored.  
2-3 years after physical completion , the Project becomes part of KfW’s pool of independent ex -post evaluations , where 
a sample of 1/3 of all projects, selected on a random basis, are evaluated.  
Furthermore, the Implementing Entity regularly reports to KfW. The details are defined in a Separate Agreement to the 
Financing Agreement. MoWI with the Support of the Imp lementing Consultant report s to KfW quarterly and annually on 
the progress of the Project  (progress reports), including the fulfilment of the implementation agreements and on the 
development of all othe r important general conditions. Actual performance ind icators are reported and compared to the 
expected results. Wherever necessary, adaptation of operational structures is proposed, discussed and implemented. 
The Regional Secretariat with the support of the Implementing Consultant reports to KfW on the imple mentation of the 
community driven approach and the disposition fund as described in Sections C.7.2 and F.4. In addition, MoWI and the 
Regional Secretariat are tasked to report on all circumstances that might jeopardize the achie vement of the overall 
object ive or  the purpose and the results  of the Project . At the time of the physical completion and commissioning of the 
Project , and before the expiry of the guarantee period at the latest, MoWI  submit s a final report on the measures 
carried out.  All reports m ust have been received by KfW not later than 4 weeks after the end of the period under 
review. All reports are countersigned by the  Implementing Consultant .  
After completion of the Project , MoWI  report s on its further development . However, the water utili ties, MoWI, the LGAs 
and the Community Based User Associations are responsible for monitor ing and ensuring  due operation of their 
systems.


---
*Page 63*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the appl icable supporting 
documents.  
 
List of Annexes:  
Annex 1 indicative Term Sheet  
Annex 2 Maps  of the Project  area 
Annex 3: Investment options and criteria for climate -smart agriculture  
Annex 4 Flow chart for community driven planning  
Annex 5 Flow c harts of contractual arrangements  
Annex 6 Flow of f unds  
Annex 7 Institutions i nvolved  
Annex 8 Summary of the environment and social impact assessment  
Annex 9  Procurement plan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
☒ Feasibility Study  
☒ Integrated Financia l Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (If applicable)  
☒ Project  Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbu rsement schedule,  etc.) – 
see the Accredi tation Master Agreement, Annex 1  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 (If applicable)  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the Project  
☒ Timetable of Project  implementation


---
*Page 64*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex 2:  Maps of the Project  Area  
  
Water Supply System
Semi -arid 
Northern
Tanzania


---
*Page 65*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex  2: Maps of the Project  Area  
 
Map of S imiyu Region and its Districts


---
*Page 66*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex  3: Investment options and criteria on climate -smart agriculture  
Item Units  Investment 
contribution in EUR 
per unit (incl 
contingencies)  Comments  
 
Construction of small earth 
dams  24 Up to 675 ,0005  Specification: m ax 800 m long and max xx (tbd 5 
or 8) m high  
Restrictions:  
 availability of land for irrigation of min 250 
ha  
 max investment cost of EUR 3500/ha;  
 ESIA approval;  
 no diversion of river water; min water 
outflow to ensure ecological downstream 
functions;   
 no tenure conflicts;  
 existing local user group with good internal 
cohesion and proven basic management 
capacity as confirmed by focus interviews; 
women representation 25% ; 
 viable management concept (including 
transparent water tariff structure, 
manageme nt responsibilities, user rights, 
etc.) and opening of an O & M account;  
 beneficiary commitment to organize and 
finance O & M ; 
 beneficiary up -front contribution in -kind of 
5% of the projected net cost of 
construction . 
Selection criteria:  
 communities m ost vulnerable to climate 
change projection;  
 watershed size, soil conditions;  
 distance to construction material (gravel, 
stones);  
 political commitment to discretionary 
decision -making of the LGA and 
community . 
Rehabilitation/finalization of 
existing dam structures  26 Up to 337.5002 Specification: contingent on existing structure 
and condition  
                                                             
4 Alternatively, the construction of 1 new dam and the rehabilit ation of 2 existing dams  
5 incl 20% earmarked for detailed design, tender documents, construction supervision, and excl 20% in -
kind contribution  
6 Alternatively, the construction of 1 new dams


---
*Page 67*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Restrictions:  
 cost of rehabilitation 50% below the cost of 
a similar new construction;  
 ESIA approval if applicable ; 
 max investment cost of EUR 3500/ha;  
 existe nce of local user group with good 
internal cohesion and proven basic 
management capacity as confirmed by 
focus interviews; women representation 
25%; 
 readiness of LGA to transfer dam 
operation/management to irrigation 
organization;  
 viable management concept  (including 
transparent water tariff structure, 
management responsibilities, user rights, 
etc.) and opening of an O & M account ; 
 beneficiary up -front contribution in -kind of 
5% of the projected net cost of 
construction .  
Selection criteria:  
 communitie s most vulnerable to climate 
change projection;  
 watershed size, soil conditions;  
 distance to construction material (gravel, 
stones);  
 political commitment to discretionary 
decision -making of the LGA and 
community . 
Charco dam  15 Up to 57 ,0002 Specification : dam max 150 m long and 5 m 
high 
Restriction s: 
 ESIA approval as required;  
 no tenure conflicts;  
 existing local user groups with good 
internal cohesion and proven basic 
management capacity as confirmed by 
focus interviews . 
Selection criteria:  
 comm unities most vulnerable to climate 
change projection (Southern Districts);  
 soil conditions;  
 beneficiary up -front contribution in -kind of 
10% of the projected net cost of 
construction;  
 beneficiary commitment to organize and 
finance O & M;  
 LGA written commi tment to transfer dam


---
*Page 68*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
operation/management to farmer group .  
 
 
 
 
Irrigation equipment (pipes, drip 
irrigation kit, solar pumps)  1700 ha7 of 
irrigated field  Up to 550/ha8 Specification: technical specifications in line with 
regional capacity for repair and  maintenance  
Restriction: equipment to comply with quality 
criteria from the South African Irrigation Institute 
or ISO standards 
(http://www.icid.org/res_irri_.isie.html)  
Selection criteria: existence of functioning 
irrigation organization; 20% upf ront in -cash 
contribution by beneficiary  
Climate resilient  seeds for 
horticulture, maize and rice  Lump sum  Up to 100 ,000 Specifications: TOSCI (Tanzania Official Seed 
Certification Institute) certification, suitability for 
agro-ecological zones in the Simiyu Region  
Restrictions: up to 30% of area cultivated by 
interested farmer p.a. and max 2 ha per farmer; 
Project  to subsidize supplementary costs only 
(costs of climate resilient  seeds minus costs of 
ordinary seeds)  
Farmer Field Schools  200 schools  Up to 25 ,000 Specifications:  
 capacity to accommodate min 10 and up to 
30 people (participants at least 30% female 
farmers and at least 30% below the age of 
25);  
 equal distribution throughout the region, 
starting with the Southern districts;  
 LGA to provid e 10% of running cost and 
support by 1 full -time staff per district; 
quality control by R egional Secretariat . 
ICT knowledge platform  1 Platform  Up to 135 ,000 Specifications:  
 separate sections for i.) farmers, and 
ii.) extension staff; content wording in 
                                                             
7 Assuming 300 ha of irrigated fields per dam (1200 ha) plus 50 0 ha irrigated by Charco dams.  
8 excl 20% in -cash contribution


---
*Page 69*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
line with users’ technical  
capacity/understanding;  
 sections ta ilor-made to the needs of 
women and youth;  
 technology to be accessible by mobile 
phone . 
Ngitili development9 incl land 
registration  10,000 ha   Up to 260  Specification:  
 min 2 ha, max 10 ha p er year and per 
individual application;  
 planting of min 4 native tree species;  
 particular support to young and/or women 
farmers . 
Restriction s:  
 not in areas recently deforested/logged or 
wetlands;  
 agreement to terms and conditions (saving 
accounts, CCRO);  
 20% in -kind contribution by beneficiary  
 undisputed land tenure/ownership . 
Fuelwood plantation5 3,700 ha  Up to 930  
 Specification:  
 min 1 ha, max 5 ha per year and individual 
application;  
 min spacing of plantation 4 x 4 m to allow 
for grazing betwe en trees;  
 seeds from TTSA ; 
 particular support to young and/or women 
farmers . 
  
Restriction s:  
 20% in -kind contribution by beneficiary ; 
 undisputed land tenure/ownership . 
Financial awards for contests  400 awards  Up to 1,000 Specifications: procedures an d safeguards to be 
defined during inception phase, but in line with 
existing and ongoing Best Practice cases 
(Caucasus)  
 
 
 
                                                             
9 excl 20% in -kind contribution and incl . land registration


---
*Page 70*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex 4: Flow chart for community driven planning  
Main Actor   Process step  
   Regional Secretariat   Opens disposition fund in EU R and TZS for KfW/GCF funds, prepares procurement manual with 
support through Implementation Consultant  
   
LGAs   Mobilize “Local User Groups” (e.g. farmer cooperatives, water user associations, Ward 
Development Committees, schools, village authorities)  
   
Local User Groups   Discuss climate change, develop community development plans and submit proposals to LGA  
   
LGA  Screens proposals in accordance with district development plans, and submits annual work plan, 
budget and procurement plan to the Project  Management Unit at the Regional Secretariat  
   
Regional Secretariat 
(RAS) / Project  
Management Unit 
(PMU)   Compiles annual investment plans including:  
1. Collect proposals and information needed for evaluation according to evaluation criteria  
2. Check el igibility  
3. Evaluation of feasibility  
4. Prioritization  
Submit Annual Implementation, Financing and Procurement Plans to KfW, countersigned by the 
Implementing Consultant  
   
KfW  No-objection  
   
LGAs   Procure services/works/equipment in accordance with a greed procurement guidelines and with 
support through the Implementing Consultant, support formation and gazette of user groups  
  
Contracts > EUR 350,000                                   Contracts < EUR 350,000  
(KfW, only above 
350,000 EUR)   KfW recei ves requests for prior no -objection 
from LGAs in accordance with KfW 
procurement guidelines. Requests for no -
objection  countersigned by the consultant   
   
LGAs   Supervise implementation in cooperation with local user groups, endorse invoices for goods and 
services  
   
Implementation 
Consultant   Effect disbursements from Disposition Fund to service providers on behalf of the Regional 
Secretariat  
   
PMU   Assigns annual procurement and financial audits and reports on the use of funds


---
*Page 71*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
 
 
     
KfW  Receiv es financial and procurement audits within 3 months after the end of each financial year  
   
Regional Secretariat   Prepares Withdrawal Application for replenishment of disposition fund endorsed by the consultant  
   
KfW  Disburses into Disposition Fund


---
*Page 72*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex  5: Flow Charts of Contractual Arrangements


---
*Page 73*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex  6: Flow of Funds


---
*Page 74*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex 7 Institutions Involved  
 
Vice President’s Office  
The VPO has the mandate to oversee all envir onmental matters in the country, including the climate 
change agenda . The Division of Envir onment is the National Climate Change Focal Point (NCCFP) for 
the UNFCCC . A National Climate Change Steering Committee (NCCSC) , an inter -ministerial committee 
comprised of  Permanent Secretaries  from different ministries,  is establish ed to facilitate coordination . The 
NCCSC  provide s guidance to the focal point to ensur e effective participation of different institutions from 
various sectors. A National Climate Change Technical Committee (NCCTC) to oversee the general 
implementation tech nically is in place under the VPO mandate.  
Ministry of Water and Irrigation  
The implementing entity for the Project  will be the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MoWI) on behalf of the 
United Republic of Tanzania. It will ensure the due execution of works and services and the required 
institution building in the fields of water supply and sanitation. Furthermore, it is responsible for the overall 
coordination of Project  activities. It has been assigned to take over the leadership for all required 
interactio n and interlinkages with different Tanzanian partners related to the Project , especially the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. It will also be responsible for coordinating the process of 
enabling replication and paradigm shift on the basis of lessons learnt in the Project  and chair the Steering 
Committee.  
MoWI’s vision  is to ensure sustainable management and development of water resources for the social 
and economic development of the country. Since the start of the national Water Sector De velopment 
Project  (WSDP) in 2007, the ministry has continuously and successfully transformed its structures and 
strengthened its planning and implementation capacity. Staff numbers have been increased to 2 ,300 
people (FY 15/16), staff has been trained and a comprehensive capacity development plan has been 
implemented. The approved budget for the FY 2014/2015 compiled by MoWI was about 200 m EUR. 
Challenges in the flow of payments from the Ministry of Finance and Planning through the Bank of 
Tanzania have be en a major burden to development of  water supply in the country and the new 
government shows strong commitment to overcome this barrier. MoWI initiated the Climate Change 
Dialogue Forum in 2012 to provide a platform for stakeholders to exchange experiences  and best 
practices. Since then the Ministry has successfully initiated 11 forums with great participation of 
stakeholders from various backgrounds, including different Ministries, local government institutions, 
NGOs, universities, private sector and devel opment partners. Accordingly, MoWI already plays a 
coordinating role concerning climate  change -related activities and in the dialogue in multi -sectoral and 
institutional settings.  
The employees of the responsible Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Division show great commitment to 
the Project  and are highly motivated. Despite these strengths, it has to be considered that staffing levels 
are still low and there is room for improvement of training efforts and empowerment , especially of young 
professionals. Thi s shall be addressed by delivering capacity building on specific topics and on overall 
management through the Strategic Support Consultant. Since there is no urban water utility in the Simiyu 
Region with sufficient capacity to manage the procurement proces s and supervise the large consulting 
and works contracts required for the water supply and sanitation component  currently, these task shall be 
implemented by the Ministry of Water and Irrigation in the initial Project  phase. The Ministry of Water and 
Irrigation is expected to ensure  a smooth handing over of contract management and the operation of 
water supply and sludge management to bulk water supplier s and urban utilities at  a later stage.  
The Ministry is experienced in the implementation of large scale projects  and thus well prepared to guide 
the Project  in a holistic manner. KfW and the Ministry of Water and Irrigation have an excellent and close


---
*Page 75*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
working relationship due to the long -term engagement of German Development Cooperation in the 
Tanzanian wate r sector. The Strategic Consultant shall support MoWI in facilitating a paradigm shift, 
institutionalisation of lessons learnt and replication. It shall furthermore support MoWI in reviewing the 
documents prepared by the Implementing Consultant (e.g. detai led design, procurement and supervision 
of works contract), support adherence to KfW and national standards and support a coordinated 
monitoring of the Project  implementation process.  
Regional Secretariat  
The Regional Secretariat is tasked to oversee and s upervise LGA operations. The autonomy of LGAs, 
and their continued reliance o n the transfer of funds from central government for operational and 
development activities, calls for the establishment of a central government body at regional level to 
undertake  the tasks of oversight and supervision of LGA finances and operations. The Regional 
Secretariat reports to PO -RALG and to sector Ministries on national development activities and monitors 
the overall economic development in the region. It furthermore advi ses LGAs and assists them in the 
realization of their targets by securing the enabling environment for their successful performance. In 
particular,  it accounts for recurrent and development expenditures of LGAs as approved in the national 
budget, based on the submission of quarterly reports by LGAs, and provides assistance to LGAs in 
planning and budgeting.  
The Regional Secretariat will be tasked to support the LGAs in all their functions and oversee and 
consolidate their activities under the Simiyu Climate  Adaptation Project . This relates to all activities that 
will be implemented on the local level, e.g. climate -smart agriculture, rural water supply and rural 
sanitation. To ensure their smooth implementation, the Regional Secretariat shall host a Project  
Management Unit (PMU). The PMU will compile and endorse annual work plans, procurement plans and 
budgets prepared by the LGAs . Additionally, it will monitor and report on implementation of the Project  on 
the basis of information provided by LGAs. It will al so coordinate and/or carr y out the different capacity  
building measures, deploy short term experts on specific topics, organize training of trainers, 
conceptualize the contest -award system, ensure a conducive framework for community  driven planning, 
and en able upscaling and replication of lessons learnt on regional level. The PMU  will also be the holder 
of the Project ’s disposition fund for climate -smart agriculture, carry out audits and send request s for 
disbursements to KfW for funding under the dispositi on fund.  
The Simiyu Region established  its Regional Secretariat in 2012. Overall,  the Secretariat is able to 
execut e its functions  today . However , administrative structures are still developing, skills are low and 
there seem s to be only little if any expe rience with overseeing larger projects. Finding adequate staff is 
seen as a significant challenge due to poor basic services in the Region, e.g. clean and reliable drinking 
water. An international consultancy firm shall deliver capacity building support to  the regional and local 
structures and shall support the PMU at the Regional Secretariat in executing their tasks. The consultant 
shall countersign all relevant documentation on financial management, reporting, withdrawal applications, 
and requests for no -objection to KfW and shall also countersign all documentation prepared by the LGAs 
on procurement , contract management and supervision of construction works. With the consultancy 
services provided, we expect the Regional Secretariat to be capable to implem ent its tasks under the 
Project . For a map of  the Simiyu Region with its Districts and urban centres, please refer to Annex 2.  
Local Government Authorities (LGAs)   
The Simiyu Region consists  of 6 LGAs, namely the Districts of Busega, Bariadi, Itilima, Mas wa and Meatu, 
and the Municipality of Bariadi. The geographic area of the Project  covers the northern Districts Busega, 
Bariadi and Itilima as well as  the Municipality of Bariadi. LGAs are tasked to facilitate the maintenance of 
peace and order and to furt her the social and economic development of their area of jurisdiction. The 
most important areas of local service delivery are primary education, secondary education, health, water


---
*Page 76*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
supply, rural roads and agriculture & livestock production as well as ensuri ng democratic participation, 
revenue collection and financial accountability.  With the new legislation , LGAs are authorized to levy 
charges, fees and local taxes. Neve rtheless, recurrent grants from the central government still constitute 
the bulk of fina ncial resources available to LGAs. LGA  staff includes the District Executive Director and 
heads of departments, technical staff, school teachers  andhealth personnel. All of them report to the 
District Executive Director and are civil servants. Since local revenue is limited, staff salaries are largely 
funded through the transfer of recurrent grants from the central government to the LGAs. While the 
annual national budget is prepared in accordance with national priorities , as outlined in the National 
Strateg y for Growth and Reduction of Poverty II, the various sector strategies, including the National 
Climate Change Strategy and the Medium Term Expenditure Framework, a bottom -up approach of 
planning is maintained at local level. Thus the villages and urban ne ighbourhoods’ plans are consolidated 
and coordinated by the Ward Development Committee, which handles 3 – 5 villages or neighbourhoods.  
LGA capacities are still relatively low. About 50% of the staff posts are vacant. While budget execution of 
recurrent ex penditures is relatively high, it is surprising that the execution of overhead cost is low for the 
LGAs in Simiyu. Overhead cost for the agriculture and livestock sector represent onl y 5-10% of personal 
emoluments. Lack of such funding severely limits the mobility of staff, distribution of printed materials, 
purchase of inputs for demonstration plots and other basic requirements for extension work. Most likely 
this reflects late release or non -release of funds by the Treasury. Due to their pivotal role for any 
development that takes place at local level, strengthening LGAs will be critical to improve the currently 
limited adaptive capacities and to build community resilience in the long term. The Project  design  takes 
this into account  by giving high priority  to capacity building and training to LGAs in delivering their 
services to communities. Training and support is carried out through the Regional Secretariat with the 
support of the Implementing Consultant.  
SIMWASA (Simiyu Bulk Water Supply Authority)  
Due to the significant investments and the geographical spread of the transmission mains, a bulk water 
supply authority  will be established  under the Water Supply and Sanitation Act 2009. The Simiyu Bulk 
Water Supply Authority (SIMWASA) shall own, operate and maintain the water treatment plant, pumping 
stations, transmission mains, the command reservoir and secondary reservoirs along the pipeline. 
SIMWASA shall be responsible for  the sale of bulk potable water to BARUWASA and COWSOS along 
the transmission mains  as well as to the urban utilities of Nyashimo and Lagangabilili. The MoWI in 
collaboration with the Regional Secretary will be responsible for establishing  the bulk water supply 
authority.  
SIMWASA shall receive considerable training and capacity building measures throughout the Project . 
Capacity development interventions shall be comprise d of three components. The first component is 
recruitment of sufficient  qualified staff soon after it has been legally established. This shall be the 
responsibility of MoW I working in close collaboration with the Regional Secretariat of the Simiyu Region. 
SIMWASA is to be headed by a qualified and experienced engineer and supported by about 18 staff, 
including 2 engineers responsible for infrastructure as well as technician s in electromechanical 
engineering, plumbing and laboratory services, staff with degrees in business administration, accounting 
and database management, a public relation s and community mobilization expert as well as supportive 
staff. The second component shall include  the provision of kick -start basic working tools and office space. 
This shall create a conducive environment for the staff of the Bulk Water Supplier to work efficiently. The 
third component, in form of operation training, shall be provided as  part of capacity building  interventions. 
All components will be implemented with the assistance of a consultant.


---
*Page 77*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
BARUWASA (Bariadi Urban Water and Sanitation Authority) and Urban Water and 
Sanitation Authorities (UWSAs) of Lagangabilili and Nyashimo town s 
The Bariadi Urban Water and Sanitation Authority (BARUWASA) was legally established in 2002 . It is 
responsible for  water supply and sanitation services in Bariadi town. Since Bariadi was a District capital 
at that time, BARUWASA was originally a distric t utility under the supervision of the LGA and PO -RALG. It 
became a regional UWSA with effect from 1st January 2013, following the establishment of the new 
region of Simiyu . Now it is under the supervision of the Ministry of Water and Irrigation.  
In Tanza nia, Urban Water and Sanitation Authorities (UWSAs) are legal entities that are responsible  for 
providing  potable water supply and sanitation services in towns. The Electricity and Water Regulatory 
Authority (EWURA) grades UWSAS in categories as follows: c ategory ‘A’ comprises of UWSAs with water 
service coverage of more than 75% of their area of service and which meet all operational and 
maintenance costs as well as  depreciation; category ‘B’ comprises of  UWSAs with water service 
coverage of more than 65% and which  meet all operational and maintenance costs; and category ‘C’ 
comprises of  UWSAs with water service coverage of less than 65% and which meet operational costs 
except part of plant electricity costs and salaries as shall be determined in the Memora ndum of 
Understanding (MoU).  
BARUWASA is a category “C” UWSA and is considered to suffer from a number of institutional 
weaknesses, including missing infrastructure like very limited available water and no functioning 
treatment facilities, a low customer base, limited physical coverage, poorly maintained infrastructure, high 
levels of unaccounted for water, low skill levels of staff and poor customer relations. BARUWASA has 
been recently staffed with a new and qualified Managing Director, but the utility s ees itself continually 
confronted with the above mentioned factors , which inhibit their capacity to better perform in the provision 
of sustainable water and sanitation services. Additionally , the inadequate working environment makes it 
difficult to fill op en posts with capable staff. Capacity building under the Project  therefore takes into 
account institutional (the legal and regulatory frameworks that govern the activities and the mandate of an 
organization), organizational (work ing environmen t factors, ra nging from the quality of systems, structures 
and processes in place to the suitability of work space and access to work equipment) and individual 
needs (skills, knowledge, competencies and attitudes of staff members).  
The District capitals of Nyashimo an d Lagangabilili currently do not have UWSAs. The Ministry of Water 
and Irrigation will set up autonomous UWASAs for these two District towns in line with the Tanzanian 
rules and regulations. The two new UWSAs will be overseen and regulated by EWURA and wil l receive 
considerable capacity building support through the Project . There is a process of clustering of utilities 
going on in the country and following this, BARUWASA will deliver  certain services to the two other 
utilities particularly the Legal Departm ent, Personnel Department and Financial Management Department.  
COWSOS (Community Owned Water Supply Organisations)  
According to the National Water Policy (NAWAPO) of 2002, the Water Resources Management Act No. 
11 of 2009 and the Water Supply and Sanitatio n Act No. 12 of 2009, communities shall be registered and 
become the legal owners of their water supply schemes. Roles, responsibilities, rights and limits of 
authority of water user entities are clearly defined. LGAs shall support and facilitate communiti es in 
acquiring technical and management skills. They are furthermore responsible for ensuring that the 
services offered by any COWSO meet required level of satisfaction.  
For the villages located within the 12 km corridor of both sides of the transmission  line from Nyashimo to 
Lagangbilili, COWSOs shall be formed around water supply tanks, meaning that COWSOS will be 
clustered serving more than one village. In the long run , it is expected that about 29 COWSOs will be 
formed. For the formation  of COWSOS, wa ter users in each of the villages elect representatives who will


---
*Page 78*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
then elect a board to oversee the day -to-day activities of the COWSO. The Project  will seek to ensure 
gender balance in the board. For example , in the very successful rural water supply syste m in Hai in 
Tanzania that was set up in the 1990s with the support from KfW, half of the trusts elected by the 
communities were women. These experiences will be used in the presented Project . The board will 
assign a manager  that will be  in charge of the op erations of the COWSO and who will report to the board . 
Additionally , it will assign  one water technician to oversee operators at village level, one accountant and 
one office supervisor. Each village will select a local operator who shall be responsible fo r operation and 
maintenance within the particular village. The local operator shall be assigned with a performance 
agreement elaborating on tariff, setting, revenue collection and payment procedures and submission of 
the collections to the bank account to be maintained by the board.  
In cooperation with a competent consultant the LGA will assist in the formation and registration of the 
COWSO as well as the  preparation of the constitution, regulations, performance agreements, guidelines 
for tariff setting, a nd operational guidelines.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
Annex 8 Summary of the environment and social impact assessment  
 
PS 1 – Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts  
While investments in drinking water security follow the predefined design of infra structure components, 
agricultural components are implemented through a programmatic approach, where measures are 
determined in the course of implementation in a participative approach with affected communities and 
according to detailed procedures and crit eria. Using these two approaches in one Project  results in 
different timing of the environmental studies of the components. Therefore, an ESIA has been prepared 
according to the national requirements of Tanzania as well as IFC Performance Standards for the  water 
supply and sanitation components. As part of the ESIA a Scoping Exercise with broad Stakeholder 
Engagement has been performed in the Project  region. For the climate -smart agriculture component an 
Environmental and Social Framework has been prepared that outlines the potential impacts and 
mitigation measures and frames the process of how environmental and social risks will be addressed and 
managed in the implementation phase.  
The ESIA states that the Project  is environmentally feasible. Since drinking  water is a basic need and 
human right, use of the shared water sources of Lake Victoria for drinking purposes is undisputed and 
receives highest acceptance even by the neighbouring countries. Water abstraction for the Project  will 
amount to 1.6% of the Ta nzanian share of water abstraction from Lake Victoria. The amount abstracted 
would lead to a decline in sea -level of 3 cm over 100 years, which is evaluated by the ESIA as negligible 
impact especially when compared to abstraction for other usages, e.g. irr igation or industries. Tanzania, 
Kenya and Uganda signed the Protocol for the Sustainable Development of Lake Victoria Basin on 
November 29th, 2003. In line with this Protocol and the World Bank Operational Policies including OP 7.50 
(Projects on internati onal waterways), the MoWI already notified riparian states of the planned Project  
and will share the final ESIA and the feasibility study with them for comments. Two protected areas that 
are bordering the Serengeti National Park are located near the planne d water supply corridor. The Project  
is not expected to put additional pressure on these areas, or to impact the ongoing conservation 
programme. Water supply is limited to drinking water supply and public water points in rural areas so that 
it is not expec ted to cause an overall shift in settlement patterns. Furthermore, the climate -smart 
agricultural measures are expected to prevent deterioration of land productivity in the changing climate 
and to conserve available water resources, thus to enhance ecosyst em services in the vicinity of the 
Serengeti Ecosystem.  
Regarding the economic and physical displacements, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared that explains principles, compensation and eligibility criteria for the future resettlement and 
compensation as currently the exact alignment is still under evaluation. Further the RPF provides an 
implementation for the, to be developed Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).  
A preliminary Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared which outlines 
costs, timeframe and responsibilities to implement appropriate mitigation and enhancement measures for 
the Project . The ESMP will be refined during the detailed design phase and once the construction 
contractors have been selected. It will be revi sed and updated  continuously. A Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan has been prepared as a guiding document for ensuring proper coordination and management of all 
the stakeholder interests and concerns in a prompt and well -coordinated structure.  
Negative impacts o n some groups of people are inevitable during preparation, construction and operation 
phase. In order to avoid conflicts, the Ministry of Water and Irrigation will implement a grievance 
mechanism to allow the public and affected people to voice concerns ab out the Project  and related 
activities. A community -based system for grievance redress already exists within the sub -village structure


---
*Page 80*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
and will be used if necessary. Additionally, other higher authorities such as (among others) the Ward 
Tribunal, the Distr ict Land Housing Tribunal and the High Court, are proposed to follow up on unresolved 
cases.  
To ensure that the views of vulnerable groups are taken into account in the planning of the Project , ESIA 
consultations were held at community level to solicit fo r their opinions and contributions on how the 
Project  is likely to affect them, and proposals for mitigation. The results of these consultations were used 
as input to the ESMP as well as the detailed design consideration. Opinions of vulnerable groups will  also 
be taken into account in future stages of the Project  through, e.g. informal discussions at the existing 
water supply facilities, formal discussions with community -based women’s associations or Non -
Governmental Organisations (NGOs).  
During the execut ion of the ESIA stakeholder opinions were sought through interviews, group discussions 
and public meetings. Feedback from these consultations has been taken into account when preparing the 
ESIA. A proposed Stakeholder Engagement Program at the responsibili ty of MoWI, the new bulk water 
supplier (SIMWASA), the urban water utilities and Community Owned Water Supply Organisations 
(COWSOs) targets the time period beyond the ESIA, including the operation phase and will majorly focus 
on engagement with lower leve l stakeholders that are not part of the organisation of the Project , 
especially on ward and village level. Possible formats are community meetings, information brochures, 
meetings with leaders, school information campaigns, public health outreaches, newspa pers, posters, 
radio, non -technical summary documents, joint meetings and brain storming sessions in regards to 
matters that affect communities collectively. MoWI will establish a Community Liaison Unit headed by a 
Community Liaison Officer to ensure the s uccessful implementation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan.  
The MoWI will ensure monitoring through the standalone Environmental and Social Monitoring Plan which 
involves the continuous measurement or periodic review of mitigation activities and their eff ectiveness. 
The Monitoring Programme has been divided into a Construction Contractors’ Monitoring Programme, 
which mainly includes monitoring of construction practices and mitigation measures based on visual 
inspections at the construction sites, and MoWI’ s Monitoring Programme, which includes construction 
monitoring, community health, safety and security monitoring, resettlement monitoring, and stakeholder 
engagement monitoring. This plan states clearly that it must be part of the construction and maintena nce 
contracts to ensure it will be implemented. For the resettlement, a completion audit will be carried out in 
line with the final Resettlement Action Plan.  
Cumulative impacts were also considered in the ESIA and the requirement of a cumulative impact 
assessment with respect to a planned nickel mine nearby is recommended. The respective mining 
company holds a retention license for a nickel mining in the vicinity of the Project  area. Explorations 
including environmental and social studies have been carried out, but the project has currently been put 
on hold due to the declining nickel prices. The company still holds a retention license that is valid for 
another three years. It is not clear if and when the project will be pursued in the future. KfW will ensur e 
that a cumulative impact assessment of the Project  and the nickel project will be carried out if it resumes.  
The environmental and social impacts of the climate -smart agriculture component are considered limited 
and site specific and range between enviro nmental and social risks categories B and C. For B projects an 
ESIA will be conducted to assess any risks and develop an adequate ESMP that shall also take into 
account possible cumulative impacts of the water supply and the agriculture components. Measure s with 
potential risks are the irrigation system since it may involve minimal land -take and construction health and 
safety may be an issue, the construction or rehabilitation of small dams due to the same risks on a slightly 
larger scale as well as fertili zer usage for different agricultural purposes. The implementation is governed 
by the ESMF and close monitoring of site selection and construction as well as the development of pest 
management plans. Therefore, the residual risks are considered to be covere d and managed.


---
*Page 81*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
PS 2 – Labour and working conditions  
In order to mitigate negative impacts, the Project  will provide labour opportunities for local residents, 
especially directly affected households, women and youth. Best practice health and safety provisio ns are 
an integral part of construction contracts in KfW financed projects. Opportunities for sub -suppliers and 
sub-contractors will be awarded to suitable local firms which in turn employ local labour. Every 
construction contractor and MoWI as supervisor will ensure that adequate labour and working conditions 
are provided to all workers through:  
 Provision of first aid facilities and regular check of worker health and vaccination;  
 Training provisions for workers and supervisors on first aid, health and saf ety procedures;  
 Maintaining proper medical aids and medicines by establishing temporary stock during 
construction;  
 Training of construction workers in general health and safety matters and on specific hazards of 
their work especially fire safety, traffic s afety, personal protective equipment, emergency 
preparedness and response;  
 Provision for workers with appropriate personal protection equipment (PPE), such as safety 
boots, helmets, gloves, protective clothing, goggles and ear protection;  
 Provision of safe  drinking water to all workers, as confirmed by independent water quality 
testing and submission of lab results to the engineer; and  
 Traffic safety instructions for workers and contractors.  
Monitoring of the labour management will include inspections of:  
 The proportion of local population in the workforce;  
 Proportion of women and youth employees in the workforce;  
 Evidence of written contracts and paid salaries;  
 Number of worker grievances;  
 Age of workers;  
 Quality of worker’s accommodation;  
 Proportion of un skilled workforce that have had their skills upgraded.  
PS 3 – Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention  
The following impacts and risks are mostly on -site and construction related. A variety of mitigation 
measures has been identified in the ESIA. In sum mary:  
 Water pollution (at the water intake) during construction and operation phase. Mitigation 
measures include enforcement of protection of the 60 m buffer zone around the lake shore at 
the water intake; establishment of a protective zone, marked with bu oys, in the lake; and 
selection of construction methods that minimize disturbance on the lake’s bottom;  
 Installation of sanitary water treatment facilities in workers’ camps;  
 Water treatment plant: risk of flooding during heavy rains and wastewater efflue nts draining into 
the lake. Mitigation measure: Consider an alternative location for the water treatment plant at 
Bukabile further away from the lake and at higher elevation:  
 Soil erosion and land contamination. Mitigation measure: Usage of native/excavate d material to 
backfill the trench section around the pipes to minimize the volumes of excess material. 
Disposal of spoil in appropriate approved areas and subject to landscaping.  
In addition to this, with financing from KfW and the European Union, the Lake  Victoria Basin Commission 
is developing a comprehensive programme for the protection of the water of Lake Victoria. It includes 
investments in sanitation infrastructure for riparian towns and polluters as well as enhanced monitoring 
systems for the water quality of the lake and strengthening of corresponding institutional structures.


---
*Page 82*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 82 
 
 
 I 
PS 4 – Community Health, Safety and Security  
The main risk for the community will occur during construction. As part of the ESMP, MoWI and 
SIMWASA will ensure:  
 To adopt a comp rehensive approach to prevent HIV/AIDS and other Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases (STDs) that shall target both workers and the affected communities since human 
interaction will not only be confined to the Project ’s boundaries. The approach will comprise  
awareness raising and peer education, condom promotion, voluntary and provider -initiated 
testing and counselling, awareness campaigns at schools through drama and film shows etc.;  
 To construct communal sanitation facilities at suitable locations such as schoo ls, 
churches/mosques, markets and health centres to aid the camp followers’ access to sanitary 
facilities;  
 That contractors establish traffic rules to be followed by their personnel within and outside the 
Project  area, including establishment of safe work zones and reduction of allowed vehicle 
speeds. MoWI/SIMWASA will collaborate with the local traffic police to ensure enforcement of 
traffic rules.  
PS 5 – Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement  
Since the final routing of the pipeline will be determin ed in the detailed design, the scale of physical and 
economic displacement can only be estimated at this point in time. The RPF indicates that a total of 568 
structures are located within the 10 m wide wayleave for the water mains. Opportunities to minimiz e the 
resettlement impact include:  
 Re-routing of the main pipelines in order to bypass the highly populated areas in Dutwa and 
Nyang’hanga and the urban centre of Bariadi town. This option would reduce the number of 
affected structures and resettlement cos ts by an estimated 35 -40%;  
 Fitting the water mains closer to the road within the boundaries of the former road reserve 
(22.5 m from the centre line) where the Tanzanian National Roads Agency (TANROADS) 
has already acquired the land and relocated all struct ures and where no further road 
extensions are planned.  
The RPF frames the land acquisition and resettlement process and responsibilities, provides eligibility 
criteria and outlines the monitoring requirements. Furthermore, it spells out what will be furthe r elaborated 
as part of the RAP. The recommendations will be considered during the detailed design phase. The RAP 
is currently being prepared and will be implemented prior to the start of the construction works. Planning 
and implementation of the RAP will be guided by IFC’s PS 5 and by national legislation.  
PS 6 – Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources  
In the direct zone of potential impact there is no protected area, therefore no impacts on any protected, 
critical,  or natural habitats are expected. The baseline and the assessment of the terrestrial and aquatic 
flora and fauna reverted that the value in the direct Project  area is quite low and also the impact 
magnitude can be rated as low to insignificant. Neverthele ss, the ESMP proposes some general 
measures during construction , in particular with respect to vegetation clearance and revegetation.   
 
 
PS 8 – Cultural Heritage  
One sacred site was confirmed at the proposed location for one of the water reservoirs, namely  Isenge 
holy hill near Dutwa. However, until the detailed design of the water supply system has been completed, it


---
*Page 83*
---

ANNEX ES 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 82 I 
is not known whether this site is located within the direct impact zone. A chance finds procedure has been 
outlined in the draft ESIA report and the consultant will be asked to include these aspects in the ESMP. 
They will be further refined by the contractors as part of their ESMP/EHS plans in order to create 
ownership and accountability. The siting of the primary reservoir at Isenge holy hill will be agreed with 
traditional leaders or - if possible - be shifted to another suitable location.


---
*Page 84*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 4 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 85*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 4


---
*Page 86*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.0 4 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Simiyu Climate Resilient Development Programme  
Accredited entity  KfW  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) c ategory  Category A  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  
Date of first disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -06-22 
Language(s) of disclosure  English full version and executive summary in Swahili  
Link to disclosure  https://www.kfw -entwicklungsbank.de/International -
financing/KfW -Development -Bank/ Topics/Environment -and-
sustainability/  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  is part of the ESIA 
Date of first disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -06-22 
Language(s) of disclosure  English full version and executive summary in Swah ili 
Link to disclosure  https://www.kfw -entwicklungsbank.de/International -
financing/KfW -Development -Bank/Topics/Environment -and-
sustainability/  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) : under preparation;  The RPF is published as follows : 
Date of first disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -06-22 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  https://www.kfw -entwicklungsbank.de/International -
financing/KfW -Development -Bank/Topics/Environment -and-
sustainability/  
Environmental and Social Management Framework  (ESMF)  for climate smart agriculture 
Description of 
report/disclosure  ESMF for the pro grammatic approach on climate smart agriculture  
Date of first disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -09-16 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  https://www.kfw -entwicklungsbank.de/International -
financing/KfW -Development -Bank/Topics/Environment -and-
sustainability/  
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP ) for climate smart agriculture 
Description of 
report/disclosure  SEP for the programmatic approach on climate smart agriculture


---
*Page 87*
---

Page 2 
Date of first disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -11-11 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Link to disclosure  https://www.kfw -entwicklungsbank.de/International -
financing/KfW -Development -Bank/Topics/Environment -and-
sustainability/  
________