=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20170314121134+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20170314121134+09'00'
/Producer: Microsoft® Word 2013
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum III 
Funding proposal package for FP 040 
 GCF/B.1 6/07 /Add. 03 
14 March 2017  Meeting of the Board  
4 – 6 April 2017  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem  11(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled “ Tajikistan: Scaling -up Hydropower Sector Climate 
Resilience ” submitted by EBRD ; 
b) A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and 
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.  
The documents  are presented as sub mitted by the accredited entity,  and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.16/07/Add.03  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point  
 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
OFFICIAL USE  
Project/Programme Title:  Tajikistan: Scaling Up Hydropower Sector Climate Resilience   
Country/Region:  Tajikistan _____________________  
Accredited Entity:  EBRD ________________________  
Date of Submission:  31 July 2015


---
*Page 4*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
OFFICIAL USE  Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
  
  Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all other 
sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they wish to 
present the information. Accredited entities can eith er directly incorporate information into this proposal, or provide 
summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents such  as project appraisal 
document.  
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  B 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Tajikistan: Scaling Up Hydropower Sector Climate Resilience  
A.1.2. Project or programme  Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Tajikistan  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Committee on Environmental Protection  
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  EBRD  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Republic of Tajikistan represented by the Ministry of Finance 
(“Ministry of Finance” ) 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☐  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☒  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  31 July 2015  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Craig Davies  
Organization  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
Email address  DaviesC@ebrd.com   
Telephone number  +44 20 7338 6661  
Mailing  address  One Exchange Square, London EC2A 2JN, UK  
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and  supply chain management, relocation 
of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  B 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Tajikistan is the most vulnerable country to climate change in the Europe & Central Asia (ECA) region. Its energy system is 
dominated by hydropower and is therefore highly exposed to climate change risks. Hydropower is of fundamental importance for 
economi c development and living standards in Tajikistan, and c limate change is a hugely important risk amplifier in this already 
precarious and challenging context. Strengthened governance and institutions are necessary to improve the climate resilience of 
hydrop ower systems. Additionally, the climate vulnerability of Tajikistan’s energy systems also has important social and gender 
dimensions.  
 
In response to these severe challenges, the proposed Project aims to scale up the adoption of climate resilience practices and 
technologies in the Tajik hydropower sector. Enhanced institutional capacities, modern climate resilience technologies and 
adequate technical skills are urgently needed in Tajikistan to address the risks associated with climate change in the fragile and 
highly climate -vulnerable hydropower system. The proposed Project will support the transfer of knowledge and technologies for 
achieving these vital targets for Tajikistan’s strategically important hydropower sector. This will be accomplished th rough a 
Project structure consisting of three closely inter -related components  linked to three targeted Project Outputs . Project 
implementation is structured in two phases.  The funds for P hase I have already been committed  by EBRD and the CIF’s Pilot 
Prog ramme for Climate Resilience (PPCR), as set out in section B.2. This proposal is f or further funding under Phase II . This 
arrangement will allow  for a smoother, gradual implementation of the overall Project.  The phases are intended to be staggered 
and to overlap each other in order to ensure smooth implementation and the effective coordination of project activities. Phas e I 
has now reached a critical stage, with all the procurement arrangements and engineering se rvices (covering both phases) now in 
place, and Phase I physical works about to commence. This means that it is now timely to plan ahead and secure the funding fo r 
Phase II so that the physical works of Phase II can begin smoothly and without interruption,  taking into account the length of time 
needed to secure the funding and all necessary approvals.  
 
The proposed Project will be delivered through a structured approach comprising of technical assistance, policy dialogue and 
facility upgrades in close partn ership with the Tajik authorities.  
The specific objectives  of the Project are the following:   
1. To increase the adoption of best international practices in the assessment and management of climate change risks to 
hydropower operations by Tajik hydropower operators and other associated agencies such as providers of hydromet 
services  (Phase I +II); 
2. To develop institutional capacities and structures needed to ensure effective transboundary management of hydropower 
cascades in order to promote the climate resil ience of hydropower operations  (Phase II) ; and  
3. To scale up the integration of climate resilience approaches, technologies and design standards  into a strategic 
hydropower facility with a powerful demonstration impact  (Phase I + II) .  
Specific benefits will include:  
 The modernisation of a major hydropower facility taking into account projected future climate conditions  
 The p opulation of Sughd region (approx. 2,400,000 people ), in particular women , to benefit from a more secure and 
climate -resilient electricity supply.  
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if 
applicable)  2014 (Phase I)  //2017  (Phase II)  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  Not applicable  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start:  2017 
End: 2023 
Project  lifespan  Investment Period Six Years from start.  
Project  lifetime  is 40 years.


---
*Page 7*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  B 
The design life of the asset is 60 years from completion . 
 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
Overview  
The indicative total financing package is expected to amount to USD 20 8 million , of which USD 75 million have already been 
committed  by the PPCR , EBRD , and EBRD’s trust fund  for Phase I1. Phase I has been approved by EBRD's Board and is in the initial 
stages of implementation. Loan and grant agreements have been put in place between EBRD and Barki Tojik  (the state -owned 
vertically integrated power utility)  and three major consultancy services contracts (imp lementation support) have been put in 
place: i) Support to the Project Implementation Unit (“ the PIU”), ii) Basic Design and Engineering Services and iii) capacity building 
for climate resilience. The remaining USD 133 million  for Phase II  is envi saged  to be made up  of grant and concessional loan 
resources to be provided by the GCF , loans provided by EBRD and EIB (pending approval by EIB management),  and grant 
resources provided by EBRD’s trust fund .  
Tajikistan adheres strictly to IMF restrictions on foreign borrowing and has enshrined this in law. These require that each funding 
package must consist of a grant element of at least 35%, calculated using the IMF methodology2. Therefore, while the use of some 
loan finance in these Programme elements is ju stified in order to e.g. incentivise improvements in approaches towards 
appropriate commercialisation, cost -recovery, and financial sustainability, it is necessary to reduce significantly the financing costs 
of such projects to the Tajik authorities, water  companies and households. This can only be achieved by blending the loan finance 
with a n appropriate amount of grant finance.  EBRD’s experience also confirms that an appropriate blend of loan and grant 
resources is needed due to Tajikistan’s low -income st atus and the severe affordability constraints experienced by very many of 
Tajikistan’s communities and households.  Therefore, while the use of some loan finance in these Project elements is justifie d in 
order to incentivise improvements in appropriate com mercialisation, cost -recovery and financial sustainability, for the above 
reasons , it is necessary to significantly reduce the financing costs to the Tajik authorities and Tajik  households by blending the 
loan finance with a n appropriate amount of grant fi nance.  
Technical Assistance  
It is anticipated that the technical assistance and policy dialogue elements of the Project will be funded using grant resour ces 
amounting to USD 11 million, which will be provided from the EBRD’s Donor Trust Funds (of which USD 4 million have already 
been committed  under P hase I of the project ). These elements will cover skills transfer, capacity building and institutional 
development activities that  will deliver important public goods in the form of an improved enabling environment for the 
integration of climate resilience into the management of hydropower operations. As these elements are not revenue generating , 
the use of grant resources is highly appropriate .  
Investment including Grant Support  
The elements of the Project that support the integration of climate resilience approaches, technologies and design standards into 
the pilot upgrade of a strategic hydropower facility (Qairokkum HPP) will be structured in manner that draws on important pilot 
work launched by EBRD, Barki Tojik and the PPCR. They will be financed using an appropriate blend of loan and grant finance 
amounting to a total of USD 197 million. This is anticipated to include grant res ources of US 23 million from the GCF together with 
grant resources of USD 11 million from the PPCR (already committed), which will be used to finance the upgrade of urgently 
needed components essential for the hydropower plant’s safety. These components ar e essential for the long -term climate 
resilience and safety of the facility, but as they do not generate revenues they would be extremely difficult to finance usin g non -
grant resources, especially considering severe budget constraints  in the sector  caused by relatively low tariffs and affordability 
                                                             
1 http://www.ebrd.com/cs/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395244711494&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument    
2 https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/pdf/dsacr11130.pdf


---
*Page 8*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  B 
constraints across the population.  
The remainder of this part of the funding package is anticipated to consist of GCF concessional loan finance resources of USD 27 
million, together with concessional loan finance of USD 10 million from the PPCR (already committed), EBRD loan finance of USD 
88 million (of which $50 million have already been committed) and loan finance of USD 38 million contributed by EIB. These loan 
finance resources will be used for other c limate resilience upgrade components such as improved turbines and generation 
facilities that will result in increased generation capacity and therefore have the potential to generate revenues. Due to lo w 
energy tariffs and affordability constraints, these  additional revenues are however expected to be limited. Thus GCF’s 
concessional terms are crucial in enabling the mobilisation of additional funding from IFI  loans for the upgrade. Blending these 
(GCF concessional finance and IFI loans) can therefore guar antee the affordability of these components.  
Phase I has covered the renewal of two turbines and two spillway gates plus associated hydro -mechanical and dam safety 
equipment, in addition to the initial phase of the technical cooperation on building capacit y for climate risk management in 
hydropower operations. Phase II will cover the renewal of the remaining four turbines and spillway gates, as well as the 
subsequent phase of the technical cooperation on climate resilience capacity building, which will incl ude improving 
transboundary cooperation on hydropower cascade management. The project has been phased in recognition of the significant 
affordability and absorption capacity challenges in Tajikistan. These two phases are intended to be staggered and to ove rlap each 
other in order to ensure smooth implementation and the effective coordination of project activities. Phase I has now reached a 
critical stage, with all the procurement arrangements and engineering services (covering both phases) now in place, and  Phase I 
physical works about to commence. This means that it is now timely to plan ahead and secure the funding for Phase II so that the 
physical works of Phase II can begin smoothly and without interruption, taking into account the length of time needed to secure 
the funding and all.  
Table 1: Indicative Financing breakdown  for project phase I  (in million US$)  
Phase I              
  EBRD  EBRD Trust Fund  PPCR  
Loan  Grant  Loan  Grant  Loan  Grant  
Component  linked to 
Output 1        
Capacity building with Barki 
Tojik        4     
SUB-TOTAL 1        4     
Component  linked to 
Output 1        
Technical assistance on 
cross -border coordination              
SUB-TOTAL  2             
Component  linked to 
Output 1        
Dam safety            4 
Turbine upgrade  16       10 7


---
*Page 9*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  B 
Generation upgrade  34           
SUB-TOTAL 3  50       10 11 
TOTAL AMOUNT  50     4 10 11 
 
Table 2: Indicative Financing breakdown for project phase II (in million US$)  
Phase II                   
  
GCF EBRD  EBRD Trust Fund  EIB3 
 
Loan  Grant  Loan  Grant  Loan  Grant  Loan  Grant  
Component  linked to Output 1          
Capacity building with Barki 
Tojik     
        2     
SUB-TOTAL  1    
        2     
Component  linked to Output 2          
Technical assistance on cross -
border coordination     
        3     
SUB-TOTAL 2     
        3     
Component  linked to Output 3          
Project implementation related 
technical cooperation     
        2     
Dam safety  5 23             
Turbine and generation 
upgrade  22  38        38   
SUB-TOTAL 3  27 23 38     2 38   
TOTAL AMOUNT  27 23 38     7 38   
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Breakdown of Expenditure  in USD million  
Expenditure by type  Indicative 
cost 
estimates  Of which 
already 
Committed  
1. Goods  
2. Works  
3. Services, including consultants  
4. Travel  148 
48 
11 
1 53 
17 
4 
1 
 
  
                                                             
3 Pending approval by EIB management


---
*Page 10*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  B 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  
(Phase II only)  (a) = (b) + (c)  133 million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing  to 
recipient   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable grants 
* 
(vi) Grants *  
 27 
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
23 million USD 
($)  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) 40 yrs  
 
 
 
 
 
 0%  
[Service fee4:  
0.25%  
Commitment fee: 
0.5%] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to provide, 
particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing a nd that of accredited 
entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the project/programme’s expected 
performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  50 million USD 
($)  
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of Institution  Seniority  
 
Senior Loans  
Grant  
Senior Loans  
 38 
7 
38 million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  EBRD  
EBRD  
EIB3  
senior  
Options  
senior  
 
Lead financing institution: European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
A letter of commitment is provided as part of this application . 
PPCR Approvals are appended  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between GCF 
and AE (if 
applicable)  The funding will be passed direc tly to the Ministry of Finance from the EBRD . Financial terms between GCF and 
EBRD will be governed by the Funded Activity Agreement based on the AMA . EBRD has carefully assessed the 
Executing Entity’s  financial capacities  in terms of its internal control systems and processes for this project (and 
indeed previous EBRD projects) through detailed  project -level due diligence including thorough credit analysis 
by EBRD's Credit team to ensure that the client an d the project meet EBRD's strict sound banking criteria. These 
                                                             
4 GCF commitment fee on the undisbursed amount, becoming due following the signing of the Loan Agreement with the client


---
*Page 11*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  B 
findings are reviewed and approved by EBRD's Operations Committee and B oard before Board approval of the 
project . 
GCF resources are expected to cover t he following:  
1) A loan/l oans  to the Ministry of Finance , to be comprised of an EBRD -financed tranche and a GCF -
financed tranche, either on the same or on separate loan agreements. The GCF resources will be made 
available through the GCF loan sub -account of the EBRD GCF Special Fund. Loan tr anches financed with 
GCF resources are expected to have maturities of up to  40 years with grace of up to 10 years .  
2) Grants  provided to the Ministry of Finance  to cover non -revenue generating CAPEX components and/or 
technical assistance and capacity building necessary for the successful implementation of the project , 
and to ensure overall affordability . The GCF grant resources will be made available through the GCF 
grant sub -account of the EBRD GCF Special Fund. Grants will be non -repayable.   
The GCF Loan and the GCF Grant may be disbursed at the beginning of the implementation of the 
Project, before the EBRD Loan.  
3) Fees requested by EBRD. The requ ested accredited entity fee is 5 % of the requested GCF total financing. 
The fees are not included in the re quest outlined under Section B.2 above. They will amount to USD 2.5  
million.  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable


---
*Page 12*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C 
Please fill out applicable sub -sections and provide additional information if necessary, as t hese requirements may vary depending on 
the nature of th e project / programme.  
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
As set out in Tajikistan’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (2001), hydropower provides approximately 98% of Tajikistan’s electrici ty, 
making it fundamentally important for the country’s economy and development, and for the livelihoods and well -being of its 
population. Yet this critically important sector faces a number of challenges that are severely exacerbated by the threat of climate 
change. Demand for electricity varies considerably throughout the year – a ph enomenon shared by most countries with extreme 
temperatures in summer and winter. However, Tajikistan’s winter electricity demand is unusually high. Unlike most countries t hat 
are affected by extreme temperatures throughout the year, the Tajik population r elies mainly on electricity for heating, rather 
than natural gas and coal which is why the residential sector accounts for such a large share of total electricity demand (44 %) 
according to the World Bank’ s 2012 report ‘Tajikistan’s Winter Energy Crisis’. This is due to limited heating options and relatively 
low electricity prices. Unfortunately, the high electricity demand in winter coincides with the minimum availability of elect ricity 
generation from hydr opower, due to hydrological conditions. River flows are lower in winter, reaching their minimum in March, 
and this reduces the output of all hydropower plants, in particular those without storage capa city. The situation of chronic  
electricity shortages has  manifested itself further since 2009 when electricity imports though the Central Asian Power System 
(CAPS) came to a halt. The CAPS originated in the 1970s under the USSR. Covering five Central Asian countries, it was designe d to 
meet the needs of the reg ion and reduce the overall cost of supply, without taking national borders into account. Following the 
collapse of the USSR, the member states sought to achieve energy independence in terms of generation capacity and fuel supply . 
At the same time, the diff erences in the resource base for each country meant that the systems became unbalanced which 
caused dispute amongst member states.  
 
In this context, climate change is a serious risk amplifier for the Tajik hydropower sector. Tajikistan’s hydropower plants depend 
on river basins fed by glacial melt water and snowmelt. However, as the climate warms, most climate models predict significan t 
changes in the dynamics of the Tajik precipitation patterns as well as alterati ons to the country’s glaciers. Projections by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) indicate that average temperatures in Tajikistan have increased by about 1.2oC 
since the 1950s, with most rapid warming occurring in winter. Higher winter temperatures mean that smaller fractions of t he 
precipitation fall as snow. Rainfall has declined by approximately 20% since the 1950s. Changes across the country’s glacier 
volumes are also significant. Tajik Hydromet suggests that since the mid -1960s, the Fedchenko glacier (northwest Pamir) shrank 
by 14 km2 or 6% and is now retreating by approximately 16 meters per year. Over the same period, glacier area reduced by more 
than 25 -30% in the Vandj basin (western Pamir) and by 30 -40% in the Murghab basin (eastern Pamir). Glacier retreat and thinning 
are also observed in the Garmo and Skogach (Obihingou basin), the GGP (Iskanderkul basin) and Diahandara (Karatag basin). 
These trends may lead to an increased water supply from enhanced glacier and snow melt in the near to medium future followed 
by a drastic  reduction in water supplies as the mass of glacial ice and accumulated snow shrinks. These climatic impacts have 
serious implications for river hydrology and introduce additional uncertainty. Thus, the hydropower sector is in need of improved 
capacities t o understand and forecast current and future hydrology and infrastructure is in urgent need of rehabilitation. Most of 
the country’s hydropower plan ts were constructed during Soviet times and have seen limited rehabilitation ever since. Not 
surprisingly, m any are not in a condition to adequately deal with the projected impacts of climate change especially with extreme 
weather events. The International Commission on Large Dams (ICOLD) has therefore emphasized the urgent need to adapt older 
dams, especially t heir spillway capacities, to cope with the new climate conditions, including an increase in severe floods. For 
many years, the Tajik power utility managed to keep its hydropower stations functioning under difficult conditions. However, 
increasing demand, a ging equipment and the predicted impacts of climate change – which have the potential to change the rules 
under which Tajikistan’s hydropower sector operates - are making Tajikistan’s energy systems even more fragile. The extreme 
vulnerability of Tajikista n’s energy sector to climate change impacts and the need for scaled -up investment in climate -resilience 
energy infrastructure upgrades are explicitly set out in Tajikistan’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC (2014) and i ts 
Independently Determined  National Contribution (2015).  
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
Baseline  
A comprehensive Feasibility Study was carried out by EBRD as part of the preparation of this project (see Annex II  for the full 
report). This informed the assessment of the baseline against which the project was designed, as follows:  
Ageing infrastructure  
Tajikistan’s hydropower plants were constructed during the Soviet era and have seen few upgrades since. Consequen tly, most of


---
*Page 13*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C these facilities have been in operation well beyond their useful economic life, and upgrades are urgently needed in order to avoid 
the risk of major technical failure that would jeopardize the supply of electricity to all customers and cause e normous damage to 
Tajikistan’s economy. Tajikistan is one of the least energy -efficient countries in the world, which only exacerbates the severe 
strains on the country’s energy infrastructure. This also applies to Qairokkum HPP (the proposed demonstration  HPP covered by 
this proposal), where most of the electric and mechanical equipment has reached the end of its lifetime and a major 
rehabilitation including the replacement of the turbines is needed. The Feasibility Study found that the electric installati ons need 
to be renewed since they have reached the end of the lifetime. Specifically, new and improved turbines able to operate over a  
greater range of flows are needed in order for the facility to cope with the projected increases in hydrological variabil ity that are 
expected as a result of climate change. Consequently, new generators are also needed so that the increased turbine capacity c an 
translate into greater installed capacity. A new automatic control system will have to be installed and the monitor ing and 
surveillance system, including an alarm system for the embankment dam, will be integrated. The power house and weir structure  
also need upgrading and repairs where the surface concrete is eroded and armour steel is exposed. The embankment dam 
requi res rehabilitation and upgrading, specifically the construction of an impervious layer, in particular a concrete -slurry cut -off 
wall.  
Impacts of climate change on hydrology  
At the same time Tajikistan is among the countries that will be severely affected b y climate change, with the hydropower sector 
especially vulnerable for the reasons set out in section C.1. As a result, many HPPs are poorly placed to cope with the proje cted 
impacts of climate change. Although they were able to be kept running under diffi cult conditions for many yea rs, HPPs now need 
to be able to cope with new climatic conditions and inc reasing hydrological variability. Studies undertaken in the preparation of 
the Project (Annex XXI)  indicate d annual mean temperatures have risen by 1.2°C, and rainfall has fallen by ~20% since the 1950s. 
Most rapid warming has occurred in winter, in the north and east of the country. Winter rainfall is largely unchanged, but sp ring 
and autumn totals have fallen, especially in the Pamir. Observations suggest that, across Tajikistan as a whole, glacier volume has 
decreased by approximately one third since the 1930s. Climate models used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) Fourth Assessment suggest further warming of ~2.5°C by the 2050s, and ~ 4°C by the 2080s. The frequency of frost days are 
expected to decrease. There is much greater uncertainty about future changes in precipitation. The same group of models shows  
a mean annual increase of ~4% but has a range of -10% to +20% by the 2050s. On a verage, precipitation could increase by 17% in 
winter, and decrease by 11% in summer by the 2050s. The incidence of heavy rain days increases in all models. Climate model 
results for individual locations show very large biases. For example, some models are  ~15°C too cold compared with observed 
temperatures in north Tajikistan. Models with larger temperature biases also tend to show greater warming in the future. 
Statistical downscaling can correct some of the gross biases in climate model output, so the add itional effort of constructing local 
scenarios via this technique – as will be conducted for this assignment – is worthwhile, assuming that necessary calibration data 
can be procured for river basins of interest. Historic and projected trends in temperatur e, precipitation and extreme events imply:  
• Higher winter and spring air temperatures mean that a smaller fraction of the precipitation total falls as snow;  
• The altitude of the snowline increases, changing the local albedo (reflectivity) of the landscape, thereby amplifying regional 
warming;  
• Long -term wastage and reduced mass balance of glaciers (assuming no change in winter precipitation);  
• On average, less snow cover and snowpack storage at the end of winter, especially at lower elevations;  
• Earlier thaw of permafrost and melting of snowpack and glacier ice;  
• Earlier incidence of avalanches, landslides and flooding;  
• Earlier (and potentially larger rain with snowmelt) peak inflows to reservoirs;  
• Lower summer minimum inflows to reservoir s; 
• More intense summer storms enhance soil erosion and conveyance of sediment.  
(For more details on the analysis , please  see Annex XXI.)


---
*Page 14*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C  
These  observed and projected climatic trends have significant implications for hydrological conditions in Tajikistan, and are 
projected to result in increased hydrological variability. Some scenarios forecast increased surface runoff and snowmel t in the 
near to medium future, potentially followed by longer -term reduction s in surface runoff as the mass of glacial ice and 
accumulated snow recedes. These climate change trends and the consequent increase in hydrological variability have  serious 
implications for  the hydropower sector . The overlapp ing effec ts of the se multiple climatic factors introduce greater uncertainty to 
the hydrological system. This is why i n the case of Qairokkum HPP, the detailed studies  carried out by EBRD indicat e that annual 
inflows into Qairokkum reservoir will be subject to incr easing variability and may change significantly in the future. As part of the 
Feasibility Study, a range of hydro -climatic scenarios were used to explore options for the rehabilitation of Qairokkum HPP  to 
ensure that the power plant can continue to operate  efficiently and safely under the projected broadening range of possible 
hydrological conditions.  
Management regimes a nd practices  
Hydro -meteorological information services in Tajikistan are typically weak and poorly resourced, having suffered significant  
under -investment and neglect since the collapse of the Soviet Union. In addition, h ydropower operators in Tajikistan still use dam 
operating rules and safety procedures that were developed during the Soviet era based on hydrological and meteorological 
observations dating from 1970s or even earlier. Now, rising demand, ageing equipment and projected climate change impacts  and 
the related increased uncertainty in hydrology mean  that the use of such static approaches is increasingly inappropriate. Models 
of extreme flood events and corresponding emergency response measures particularly need to be updated  and better capabilities 
to understand climatic conditions and forecast their impact on river flows are crucially needed . This means taking into account the 
new hydrological and m eteorological data as well as the projected climate change impact. Furthermore, Soviet -era structures and 
mechanisms for hydropower dam cascade management and coordination have deteriorated or disappeared since the collapse of 
the Sovie t Union, with river systems such as the Syr Darya and Amu Darya being fragmented across the now independent 
countries of Central Asia. As a result, official systems for coordinating dam operations and sharing hydrological and 
meteorological information acr oss borders are lacking, with informal, ad hoc practices taking their place in some cases. . In light of 
the growing challenges that climate change poses for hydropower operators, there is therefore an urgent case for improving 
transboundary coordination o n dam and cascade management and building new mechanisms and structures for coordination and 
information sharing.  These should build on existing and emerging initiatives such as the Central Asia Regional Economic 
Cooperation (CAREC) Strategy for Regional Cooperation in the Energy Sector, the Scientific -Information Centre of the Interstate 
Commission for Water Coordination of Central Asia (SIC -ICWC), and the World Bank -led Climate Adaptation and Mitigation 
Program for the Aral Sea Basin (CAMP4ASB).   
Links to economic development and poverty reduction  
Poor energy security, which is expected to be worsened as a result of climate change, has serious implications for economic 
activity, poverty and vulnerability. At present, approximately 70% of the Tajik popula tion suffers from extensive electricity 
shortages during the winter. These are estimated at 2,700 GWh which is equivalent to a quarter of  the winter electricity demand. 
With demand expected to rise and without major investments in the near future, shortage s are projected at 4,500 GWH in 2016, 
which would be close to one third of the electricity demand in winter. Electricity shortages in winter impose economic losses  of 
approximately USD200 million per year, or 3% of GDP. According to the World Bank’s Busine ss Economic Environment Survey, the 
frequent cut -offs and the poor quality of electricity is considered the main obstacle to doing business in Tajikistan. The social 
impacts associated with chronic electricity shortages in winter are severe and include ind oor air pollution from burning coal and 
wood in homes , and health impacts from extreme winters.  
Project Objectives  
In response to the above challenges, the proposed Project Tajikistan: Scaling Up Hydropower Climate Resilience  will improve the 
climate resil ience of Tajikistan’s strategically important but highly climate -vulnerable hydropower sector, which provides 98% of 
the country’s electricity. This will support the scaling up of the transfer of improved climate resilience technologies, tech nical skills 
and institutional capacities that are urgently needed in order to build the capacities of Tajikistan’s fragile and highly clim ate-
vulnerable hydropower systems to cope with the risks associated with climate change and to build resilience to these impacts.  
This will be achieved through a Project structure consisting of three  closely coordinated components. The specific objectives of


---
*Page 15*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C the Project are the following:  
1. To increase the adoption of best international practices in the assessment and management of climate change risks 
to hydropower operations by Tajik hydropower operators and other associated agencies such as providers of 
hydromet services;  
2. To develop institutional capacities and structures needed to ensure effective transboundary management of 
hydr opower cascades in order to promote the climate resilience of hydropower operations; and  
3. To scale up the integration of climate resilience approaches, technologies and design standards into a strategic 
hydropower facility (Qairokkum HPP) with a powerful d emonstration impact across the sector.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
The proposed Project will have  three complementary components with targeted project outputs  as described below:  
 Output  1: Increasing the adoption of international best practices in climate risk management in the hydropower sector  
 Output  2: Develop institutional capacities and structures for effective transboundary management of hydropower 
cascades  
 Output  3: Scale up the integration of climate resilience measures into a strategic hydropower facility (Qairokkum HPP) 
with high demonstration impact across the sector  
Output  1: Increasing the adoption of international best practices in climate risk management in the hydropower sector  
Climate change has serious implications for hydropower operations all over the world. Consequently, hydropower utilities from  
many different countries are developing approaches to help them understand the implications of climate change for their 
operations. Two of the most advanced countries in this respect are Australia (Hydro Tasmania, Snowy Hydro) and Canada (British 
Columbia Hydro, Hydro Quebec). A good example of the kinds of approaches being developed is provided by Hydro Quebec. 
Quebec, like T ajikistan, is heavily reliant on hydropower for its energy needs, and energy output is influenced by climatic 
conditions. Hydro Quebec has conducted analyses of hydrological regimes that have helped them to make forward projections of 
hydrological conditio n and to understand the potential direction of climate change over the coming decades. Analysis of this kind 
enables Hydro Quebec to determine appropriate non -structural measures, such as modifying dam operating rules in response to 
shifting hydrological c onditions, and structural measures such as adjusting turbine and spillway capacity. Evaluations are made at 
the watershed level using simulation and optimization tools that take into account the existence of other structures througho ut 
the watershed, globa l productivity objectives, as well as environmental, agricultural and other objectives and constraints. A key 
consideration is to ensure the adaptability of key assets and operations.  
 
In order for Tajik hydropower operators such as Barki Tojik to align with these best international practices, there is a significant 
need for capacity building for energy sector institutions in order to enable them to integrate climate resilience into the operations 
of hydropower facilities. In particular, the regime of dam operating rules needs to be revisited in the light of updated info rmation 
meteorological and hydrological conditions, including the about impacts of climate change. At the moment, hydrop ower dams in 
Tajikistan are still using operating rule regimes that were put in place during the Soviet period, and are based in hydro -
meteorological observations from the 1980s or earlier. Linked to this, dam safety procedures including the modelling of e xtreme 
flood events and corresponding emergency response measures also need to be updated taking into account up -to-date hydro -
meteorological data and the projected impacts of climate change.  
 
In response to these priorities, for Output 1 t he proposed Pro ject cover s the following activities:  
 Strengthen national capabilities in climate risk assessment  ensuring gender assessment s are included when relevant and 
pertinent and adaptation in Barki Tojik through the development of partnerships, short -term co -location and two -way 
exchange of technical staff;  
 Strengthen capabilities within Barki Tojik on  data management and record keeping:  
 Build long -term collaborative links with international partners in research, engineering and academia;  
 Run technical works hops on climate diagnostics, climate risk assessment, and seasonal forecasting with accredited 
institutions to encourage professional development;  
 Conduct study tours for Barki Tojik staff to visit hydropower facilities in an OECD country in order to gain  first-hand 
experience of best practice in managing climate risks to hydropower operations;  
 Build the capacity of Barki Tojik and hydropower plants to develop modifications to dam operating rules based on 
improved hydro -meteorological forecasts in order to  optimise dam safety, maximise energy productivity, and minimise


---
*Page 16*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C spill (i.e. wasted water not used for energy generation);  
 Build the capacity of Barki Tojik and relevant national authorities to understand and manage impacts of dam 
management regimes on do wnstream water users.  
 Build the capacity of Barki Tojik and hydropower plants to improve flood emergency responses including modelling of 
peak maximum floods and response procedures, together with gender -sensitive disaster preparedness, response and 
contingency plans  that respond to the specific needs and concerns of men and women (and ensure when pertinent that 
all data collected are sex disaggregated);  
 Build the capacity of the Tajik national designated authority responsible for managing Tajikistan’ s engagement with the 
Green Climate Fund to monitor and disseminate information about project activities and outcomes.  
 
The total cost of  activities for  Output  1 is US$ 6 million,  which will be provided by EBRD’s Donor Trust F unds. 
Output  2: Develop institutional capacities and structures for effective transboundary management of hydropower cascades  
As explained in section C.2 above, hydropower cascade management in Central Asia has deteriorated since the collapse of the 
Soviet Union. In respo nse, t his Output  will focus on improving transboundary coordination of h ydropower cascade management 
the Syr Darya . This work will take place strictly within the boundaries of the existing international agreements that govern the 
management of the Syr Darya basin. Every effort will be made to set this work in the context of transboundary cooperation, for 
example by exploring collaboration with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), the Scientific -Information 
Centre of the Interstate Coordination Water Commission of the Central Asia (SIC ICWC), or other relevant transboundary bodies, 
while paying close attention to the political context and realities that influence transbound ary issues in Central Asia. The activities 
under  this Output  will take the form of carefully structured technical assistance and policy dialogue activities that will address the 
following priorities:  
 Policy and institutional review of existing structures and mechanisms for tra nsboundary river management in C entral 
Asia and the identification or establishment of  an appropriate forum for transboundary co -operation where the benefits 
can be understood and shared between the riparian countries ; 
 Exploration and establishment of transboundary collaboration and data sharin g opportunities, including the usage of 
public domain datasets. Targeted c apacity building to the various national institutions invol ved in river basin 
management will aim to  improve the operational systems, monitoring and knowledge sharing related to the 
transboundary coordination of hydropower facility management; and  
 Supporting the professional development on technical climate risk management for young/mid -career professional from 
the hydropower operators and hydro -meteorological institutes in the ripari an countries  
Specifically, it is envisaged t hat this Output  will provide targeted technical support, alongside and in coordination with existing 
regional cooperation initiatives, to enable  hydropower operators and hydro -meteorological agencies to work together more 
effectively on cascade management, coordination of dam operations (e.g. operating rules), the sharing of relevant hydrologica l 
and meteorological information, and w here possible common approaches in the use of climate information, forecasting  and 
modelling . The assignment will leverage existing ties between EBRD  and hydropower operators on the Syr Darya cascade (through 
existing investment projects in Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan). It will also build on the fact that Tajikist an and the 
Kyrgyz Republic are both involved in the Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR) and will explore opportunities to serv e as 
a string framework for cooperation on climate resilience. While the primary focus of these activities will be on Ta jik partners they 
will also reach out to relevant partners in other Central Asian countries, operating through existing networks established by  
CAREC, SIC -ICWC, PPCR, WB etc.  
The total cost for activities under  Output  2 is US$ 3 million, which will be provided by EBRD’s Donor Trust F unds. 
Output  3: Scale up of the integration of climate resilience measures into a strategic hydropower facility (Qairokkum HPP) with 
high demonstration impact across the sector  
This Output  covers the rehabilitation of Qairokkum hydropower plant in northern Tajikistan in order to integrate climate change 
analysis and climate resilience measures into the rehabilitation of a major hydropower facility that is sensitive to the impa cts of 
climate  change. This will build on existing pilot work launched by EBRD, Barki Tojik and the PP CR, and will have the following 
objectives:  
 To demonstrate how climate change analysis can inform project design and investment decisions in the hydropower


---
*Page 17*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C sector to o ptimise climate resilience;  
 To provide concrete benefits in the form of a more reliable, sustainable and climate -resilient power supply that will 
improve energy security in the face of a changing and more variable climate;  
 To provide valuable lessons for  subsequent investments in hydropower plant rehabilitation and construction that 
are expected to be financed in the coming years (and which may also provide useful lessons to other countries facing 
similar challenges); and  
 To further develop the capacity of the Tajik authorities to incorporate climate change analysis into hydropower plant 
investment planning and operations.  
Specifically, the activities under this Output  will build upon detailed analytical work on the implications of climate change for 
hydropower operations in Tajikistan that has been carried out with the support of the PPCR. This included detailed climate chang e 
modelling and hydrological modelling that informed the Feasibility Study for Qairokkum hydropower plant rehabilitation, carri ed 
out by EBRD. The Feasibility Study was an extremely strong and innovative piece of work from a climate resilience perspective.  It 
took the outputs of climate change and hydrological modelling studies conducted with PPCR support and used them to identify 
robust options for improving the safety of the dam in the face of anticipated hydrological variability driven by climate change.  It 
involved a thorough economic analysis of a range of possible turbine refurbishment scenarios taking into account the 
uncertaint ies over future hydrological conditions, resulting in the identification of the optimal turbine scenario that will best be  
able to cope with the projected range of hydrological conditions. As climate resilience has been mainstreamed so thoroughly i nto 
the design of this investment, the entire Project is a ‘climate resilience investment’ in the sense that it will make the facilit y more 
resilient, productive and safe in the face of anticipated climatic change and variability. Specific project components that are 
especially relevant to the promotion of climate resilience include dam safety measures and equipment that will improve dam 
safety in the face of projected greater hydrological variability as a consequence of climate change, and turbine refurbishmen t 
using a scenario identified as the optimal option in the face of the projected range of climatic/hydrological scenarios. It is 
important to note d uring the refurbishment of the dam (including the replacement of turbines), no more than one 
turbine/spillway wi ll be worked on at a time. This means that at least five remaining turbines/spillways will be fully 
operational at  all times during the refit,  which  will  allow  the  flow  through  the  dam  to  be  properly regulated and  
power generation only marginal ly affected during the refit.  
 
The specific activities of Output  3 include the following:  
i) The full rehabilitation of Qairokkum hydropower plant based on an upgrade scenario designed to optimise resilience to 
climate change and entailing a capacity increase  from 126MW to 174MW, building on the initial upgrade measures (i.e. 
first two turbines, spillways and generators) undertaken under Phase I .  
ii) The full rehabilitation of the power plant dam (again building on initial upgrade measures undertaken under Phase I) in 
order to raise safety levels to international standards and improve the resilience of the plant to extreme weather events, 
which are projected to increase in frequency and severity as a consequence of climate change. Improving dam safety is 
of paramo unt importance as dam failure could have devastating consequences on the downstream areas, including parts 
of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. As these project activities are non -revenue generating, there is a case for using grant  
resources to finance these esse ntial upgrades.  
iii) To install a comprehensive suite of modern monitoring and safety instrumentation, in order to improve dam safety in the 
face of the projected increased frequency and severity of extreme weather events as a consequence of climate change.  
Output  3 will result in the full upgrade of Qairokkum HPP in order to improve its productivity in the face of projected climatic and  
hydrological variability. In addition, the rehabilitation will include priority works on improving the safety level of the em bank ment 
dam in order to strengthen the plant’s capacity to cope with adverse impacts of climate change. The expected results will inc lude 
additional electricity supply for northern Tajikistan, which is currently experiencing chronic electricity shortages, esp ecially during 
the winter season, causing human hardship and economic losses.  
 
The total cost of  activities under  Output  3 is US$ 19 9 million, which is funded by the GCF, the EBRD, the PPCR , EIB and EBRD’s  
trust fund . 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)


---
*Page 18*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C The Executing Entity is the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Tajikistan.  
Under the Law on Sovereign and Sovereign Guaranteed Loan and Debt the role of the Ministry of Finance is to  
(i) develop annual public investment programme based on long -term prognosis of economic development  
(ii) make proposals to Government on the need for attracting loans, participates in loan negotiations, keeps records of sover eign 
loans  
(iii) receive, use and return (pays back) sovereign loans under limits set by the Government, if applicable  
(iv) manage state debt  
 
Under this law no other institution in Tajikistan (except  for the National Bank of Tajikistan) has the right for public borr owings.  
 
The Minis try of Finance will pass on the funds for project implementation under subsidiary financing agreements to Barki Tojik. It 
is a state -owned vertically integrated power utility, responsible for generation, transmission and distribution of electricity in the 
entire country except for the remote Gorno - Badakhshan region where Pamir Energy supplies less than one per cent of total 
country’s demand. Barki Tojik is currently managed by a Chairman and six deputy chairmen who hold portfolios of generation, 
distribution, transmission, sales, finance, and other activities. These portfolios have a geographical focus rather than a fo cus 
based on business segments. The C hairman is appointed by the President of Tajikistan and reports to the President’s Office, with a 
Supervisory Board consisting of senior government ministers and chaired by the Prime Minister. The Supervisory Board 
represents the Government as the sole sha reholder. Barki Tojik  employs approximately 13,328 staff. As part of the ongoing  
corporate restructuring, the Government approved a new organizational structure based on which BT is being reorganized into 
four business units, i.e., generation, transmission , distribution and corporate services. BT is aware of the potential impacts of 
climate change on its generation assets and is committed to incorporate climate resilience measures as part of its operations  and 
future developments.  
Barki Tojik has operationa l responsibility for the great majority of Tajikistan’s hydropower facilities and is therefore fully equipped 
to work alongside EBRD in the implementation of large -scale upgrades of energy infrastructure. BT staff have comprehensive and 
extensive operation al, engineering, financial and strategic planning expertise that EBRD and other MDBs such as the Asian 
Development Bank have has worked with successfully on past large -scale investments such as Sughd Loss Reduction Project 
(EBRD) and Nurek Switchyard (ADB) . BT has prioritised as a key part of its strategic and operational planning the rehabilitation of 
existing generating capacity in the Tajik system as vital to meeting demand. Most of Tajikistan’s hydropower plants have been  in 
operation for an average of 45-50 years without major investments in upgrade or rehabilitation. This compares with the industry 
norms of economic lives of 25 years for hydropower equipment and 50 years for civil works. Ageing plants require rehabilitati on 
or replacement of turbines, generators, transformers and other key electromechanical equipment. In line with the strategy to 
rehabilitate existing hydropower plants, the Government of Tajikistan has prioritized the rehabilitation of three large hydro power 
plants: Qairokkum (126MW), N urek (3,000MW), and Golovnaya (240MW). BT owns and operates 4,377MW of generating 
capacity comprising eight large and a few small hydropower plants, and two fossil -fuel combined heat and power plants 
(318MW). Barki Tojik  generated on average 14.8TWh/year i n the last five years out of which Nurek hydropower plant with 
capacity of 3,000MW contributes approximately 70% of the annual output. The amount of electricity generation has decreased as  
the available capacity has reduced each year over the last several years (from 70% in 2006 to 57% in 2012). This indicates the 
critical need for rehabilitation of generating equipment as BT’s plants are ageing and are in need of substantial investments  to 
ensure their safe and reliable operation. BT also owns and operates  55,096 km of transmission and distribution power lines and 
sells electricity to approximately one million customers in Tajikistan.  
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)  
The energy intensity of Tajikistan remains high, about 2.5 times greater than the EU-28 average. The main energy resource in the 
country is hydropower, from which more than 90 per cent of the country’s electricity supply is derived. Tajikistan is conside red 
one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change in the EBRD region, with its principal economic sectors such as energy and 
agriculture/agribusiness dependent on water resources and therefore expo sed to climatic variability. Over 70 per cent of the Tajik 
people suffer from shortages of electricity during the winter  and women see m to suffer disproportionately as a result of their 
primary responsibility for household chores, including firewood collection, heating preparation, cooking, childcare, washing and 
cleaning (UNDP, 2012). These tasks become considerably more onerous without  access to reliable electricity and significantly 
increase women’s time burden.  Therefore, the country faces challenges that will require increased energy efficiency, climate 
resilience actions and support for energy security. Volatility of water flows as a result of climate change is likely to significantly 
impact the country’s hydro based energy system, and putting in place plan s to address this volatility remains a key priority over


---
*Page 19*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C the next years. Heat supply is another major issue for the country as th e availability of natural gas, oil and diesel fuel is no longer 
sufficient meet the rising demand of the country. In particular, natural gas is no longer supplied from Uzbekistan and the Ta jik 
power system was disconnected from the Unified Central Asian Po wer Grid in the end of 2009. As the high dependency on such 
resources is essential for the provision of centralised heating, in order to heat their homes and energy inefficient building s, many 
people had to shift to electricity instead.  
 
The limited capaci ty and obsolete condition of existing energy infrastructure is an increasing problem, especially as the demand of 
the end user sector is continuously growing. Energy efficiency improvements across sectors are needed in order to keep up wit h 
the population’ s increasing demand for electricity and to support sustainable economic development. However, electricity tariffs 
are very low in Tajikistan and tariff increases, while necessary, need to be implemented in a way that is sensitive to the se vere 
affordabilit y constraints faced by the population. Although hydropower currently provides around 98% of Tajikistan’s electricity, 
at present only about 10% of the country’s total hydropower potential of 40 GW is being utilized. In addition to expanding 
hydropower expl oitation, there is also potential to explore solar as well as other energy sources such as wind. However, the 
inefficient use of energy and water resources is a major challenge and a priority for policy dialogue. These issues are expec ted to 
be prioritised  in the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy that the Tajik authorities are currently preparing with the 
support of international development partners.  
 
Tajikistan’s power system has an installed capacity of c. 5.2GW, consisting of eight large and a few small HPPs (4.9GW), and two 
fossil fuel CHPs in Dushanbe (0.3GW).  The largest hydropower plants in the  country are Nurek (3,000MW), Sangtuda -1 (670MW), 
Baipaza (600MW), Golovnaya (240MW), Sangtuda -2 (220MW) and Qairokkum (126MW).  In 2015, the count ry’s net power 
generation amounted to c. 15,758GWh with domestic consumption of c. 12,016GWh. Hydropower generation accounts for over 
96% of the total output.  
 
Barki Tojik is currently responsible for most of the power generation, transmission and distrib ution in Tajikistan, except for the 
Gorno Badakshan region, where a private company, Pamir Energy, operates majority of the power infrastructure under a 
concession agreement.  In addition, two recently constructed IPPs, Sangtuda -1 HPP (670MW) and Sangtuda -2 HPP (220MW), sell 
electricity to Barki Tojik, and Barki Tojik, in turn, transmits and distributes this electricity.  In the domestic market, el ectricity is 
sold at regulated tariffs established by the Government; the latest c. 16.5% tariff increase for m ost consumer groups became 
effective on 1 November 2016. The largest consumer groups refer to the population, TALCO, pumping stations and other 
consumers. From the consumer perspective, the demand for electricity is high in Tajikistan because of limited al ternative options 
for heating, especially in urban areas. Electricity use by the agricultural sector is largely restricted to the summer months . 
The Government’s strategy and objectives in the sector are informed by the following constraints and barriers t o development:  
 Seasonal mismatch between electricity supply and demand - Tajikistan has excess capacity in the summer and 
electricity deficit with power shortages in winter, which impose large economic losses;  
 Disconnection of Tajikistan from the Central Asian Power System since late 2009, which exacerbates winter deficit 
issue in the Tajik power system;   
 High consumer demand for electricity in Tajikistan, because of limited alternative options for heating, especially in 
urban areas;   
 Obsolete power sect or infrastructure;  
 Commercial and financial viability of the country’s power utility;  
 The power sector is subsidized, and consequently tariffs for electricity in Tajikistan are low.  
 
The sector objectives pursued by the Government refer to improving domestic energy supply to satisfy the needs of households 
and industries, improving sector performance tackling regulatory, operational, commercial and other issues; and developing 
export markets to realize the significant potential of hydropower exports. The actions being implemented by the Government 
refer to:  
a) New investment in generation and infrastructure capacity, to balance seasonal mismatch, increase thermal and hydro power 
generation, increase safety and ensure reliable and uninterrupted service of the existing hydro power facilities  
 Construction and launch of thermal generation - 100 MW Dushanbe 2 CHP was commissioned in 2014, the next 
phase under construction shall increase the capacity to 400 MW;  
 Construction and launch of new hydro power generati on facilities – Sangtuda -1 HPP (670MW) was launched in 2008


---
*Page 20*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C and Sangtuda -2 HPP (220MW) was launched in 2011 -2014. The country also pursues a large Rogun hydro power 
project;  
 Rehabilitation of existing hydro power generation facilities – on-going rehabilita tion of Qairokkum HPP (126 MW) 
and Golovnaya HPP (240 MW) as well as target rehabilitation of Nurek HPP (3,000 MW) with a support of the 
IFI/donor community;  
b) New investment into transmission and distribution with a support of the IFI/donor community, with supply and installation of 
new electricity meters, meter reading systems and billing systems to increase revenue collections and introduce commercial 
business practices whereby addressing energy efficiency and increasing the reliability of power supply  
 On-going energy loss reduction project in Sughd region financed by EBRD, EIB and the European Commission IFCA 
(about 100,000 meters to be installed along with a billing system);  
 On-going wholesale metering and transmission reinforcement project (installation  of 2,700 wholesale meters and 
billing system and 90 km of new 220kV transmission line interconnecting the Panjakent and Ayni regions), financed 
by the Asian Development Bank (ADB).  
c) Leveraging the available hydro power potential to sell available summer el ectricity  
 As a result of the CASA -1000 project in implementation (financed by EBRD, EIB, the World Bank and IsDB) Tajikistan 
and the Kyrgyz Republic  shall benefit from the currently limited opportunity to sell available summer electricity 
surplus while A fghanistan and Pakistan shall access the much needed sources of reliable electricity supplies.  
d) Reform and restructuring in the sector  
 Barki Tojik, the national power utility, undergoes the corporate restructuring programme with regards to the 
separation of  the generation, distribution and transmission functions.  
 Corporate Solutions has been engaged by ADB to assist the Ministry of Energy with defining and planning future 
steps beyond the commercialisation of Barki Tajik, including unbundling, by defining a nd agreeing a sector reform 
plan that addresses key issues of future sector structure, tariff structure and legal and regulatory framework.   
 EBRD has launched a comprehensive regulatory technical cooperation program.  
 
Under the current challenging macro -economic conditions, the energy sector  is facing financial difficulties. Despite the latest tariff 
increases,  domestic tariffs  do not suffic e to cover  the full operating cost  of the sector . The repayment capacity of the Barki Tojik  is 
constrained by low revenue collection rates and high leverage. The implementation of financial and operational recovery 
measures and cost-reflective tariffs  are key for improving the financial sustainability of the sector. Currently, t he rep ayment 
capacity strongly depends  on the support of the Tajik g overnment.   
 
The Government has expressed support and commitment to restructuring of Barki Tojik  and necessary sector reforms as 
described above, which should result in improving the standing o f Barki Tojik.  Further to the reform agenda, tariff was increased 
by 15% in 2014 and by c. 16.5% on average for several consumer groups in 2016; revaluation of Barki Tojik ’s fixed assets and 
accounts receivable was completed and Barki Tojik  demonstrated progress with IFRS implementation; Barki Tojik ’s restructuring 
plan (unbundling into generation, transmission and distribution) was approved by Barki Tojik ’s Supervisory Board and its 
implementation is under way. A new tariff methodology is b eing developed. Other financial and operational recovery measures 
being discussed with Barki Tojik include reduction in technical and commercial losses through rehabilitation of transmission and 
distribution grid, as well as investments in metering and bil ling systems; improvement in payment discipline of Barki Tojik ’s 
clients; debt restructuring program.   
EBRD is acutely aware of the need to ensure that improvements in the electricity supply benefit all sections of the populatio n, 
including the poorest and  most vulnerable.  As one in every five households is now headed by a woman and the number of 
female -headed households is on the rise in Tajikistan due to the high levels of male out -migration, women in particular are 
expected to benefit from reliable elect ricity supply.  This is why EBRD has conducted affordability and tariff analysis, so that the 
policy dialogue on electricity tariff reform that is being carried out by EBRD and other MDBs takes into account the income l evels 
of the Tajik population and the  consequent implications for the affordability of any electricity tariff increases , including an analysis 
of gender differences in terms of affordability . It is important to be aware that at present in Tajikistan, most of electricity 
generation and almost all transmission and dis tribution are carried out by Barki Tojik, vertically integrated, with a Supervisory  
Board which includes the representatives of a number of ministries. This means that energy generation and 
transmission/distribution are coordinated under the same structure, and also that decisions that affect the population’s access to 
electricity are sensitive to political and social concerns. At present, there are three categories of electricity tariffs in Tajikistan:  i)


---
*Page 21*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C residential tariffs at aro und USD 0.02/kWh, ii) private industry at around USD 0.05 kWh, and iii) tariffs for public (government) 
enterprises which are typically lower than the other two categories. This illustrates that the situation is not as simple as might be 
assumed, and it is  not safe to assume that supplying electricity to industry is always more profitable than supplying residential 
areas. This picture is further complicated by low payment collection rates, especially in the public/government sectors, and 
system losses. In a ny case, EBRD and other development partners are already supporting Barki Tojik and the Tajik authorities in 
developing a new tariff policy in line with the international practice, and to adopt measures such as improved metering and a n 
automated billing sy stem, which will enable improvements in payment collection. Gender differences in the use of services will be 
taken into consideration with a view to increasing customer satisfaction from the services provided by Barki Tojik.  
 
EBRD is also very aware of the need for an evidence -based system for ensuring that decisions on the distribution of electricity 
take into account the energy security and climate resilience needs of the population, and dedicated technical work on this pr ecise 
topic is included in this Output  1 of the Project. At present, electricity demand often outstrips generation outputs in many parts of 
Tajikistan (including Sughd province), which means that ‘load -shedding’ or partial disconnection of localised parts of the 
distribution grid has to be carried out. Systems for managing ‘load -shedding’ in order to ensure the optimal distribution of 
electricity to consumers are relatively weak. Regional distribution grids typically include ‘red lines’ which connect generat ion 
facilities with essential facilities such as hospitals and schools, as well as many state -owned industrial facilities. The intention of 
the red line is to ensure that these users are prioritised and that they do not suffer power cuts. Urban populations ( especially 
larger cities such as Khujand) are given higher priority but are still not immune from severe power cuts. However, more perip heral 
parts of the grid such as small towns and rural areas are much more likely to experience more frequent power cuts.  This is 
expected to disproportionately affect women and their ability to benefit from reliable electricity supply, as one in every fi ve 
households is now headed by a woman due to the high levels of male out -migration. Private businesses also report that t hey are 
often not prioritised and as a result suffer frequent power cuts that require them to adopt alternative options such as the u se of 
diesel generators. Another important consideration is the timing of load shedding – for example, residential areas ha ve a great 
need of electricity during the evening and in the morning, whereas industrial consumers have a great needed during the daytim e. 
In response to these needs, this Project includes dedicated technical support to Barki Tojik to support the developme nt of an 
evidence -based framework for energy sector policymaking that will help to optimise the distribution of electricity to consumers in 
a way that addresses their different needs and contributes towards improved energy security and climate resilience. This is 
especially important to ensure that the additional power generation capacity that will be created as a result of Qairokkum 
modernisation will benefit as wide a cross -section of the population of Sughd province as possible , paying particular attenti on to 
women’s needs and preferences . This evidence -based framework will be developed through a programme of household and 
business surveys, which will target households and the business sector separately, in coordination with Barki Tojik. The surv ey will 
aim to gain understanding of energy use and the impacts of climate vulnerability on energy availability at both business and 
household levels. It will also explore gender differences in energy use and climate vulnerability, as these differ between me n and 
women within businesses as well as households. Rural and urban areas will be explored and analysed separately as the quality o f 
electricity service is very different. The survey will be conducted with pre -formulated questions developed after conducting 
rese arch. The topics to be covered in the questionnaires will include:  
 The level of awareness of energy security, both among households and businesses, testing differences between men 
and women  
 Behaviour of energy use  
 Gendered patterns of household energy use (intra -household decision -making, who uses energy for what purposes, 
where, when, and what type of energy) and energy consumption by businesses.  
 Impacts of climate vulnerability for businesses and households (gender differentiated).  
 The most effective communication tools in use (TV, posters, brochures, billboards, newspapers, leaflets, magazines, 
events, meetings, announcements etc.).  
 
As part of the survey, a detailled gender assessment will be undertaken to identify key gender issues, risks, constraints and 
opportunities in relation to energy security, use, consumption and climate vulnerability. In addition to the survey results, the 
gender assessment will include a des k review and analysis of available data. Additional sources of publicly available information 
that are useful for the gender assessment and should be taken into consideration include:  
 The regulatory environment, namely energy policies and other policies i mpacting energy sector activities, budgets, 
as well as energy sector responsibilities and mechanisms for decision -making; whether women are involved in 
decision -making and how these policies influence women and men’s access to and use of energy


---
*Page 22*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C  Policies an d laws outside the energy sector but impacting the energy sector initiatives (such as in the ares of labour, 
industry, land ownerhsip, entrepreneurship, finance etc.)  
 Mapping of stakeholders involved in the Project and an assessment of the institutional ca pacity of institutions that 
are relevant for gender -related decision -making and implementation  
 
Other ongoing programs and initiatives in this area  
Based on the research carried out, the survey will be conducted in a number of towns and rural areas of Sughd Province. In 
selecting the towns, climate zones and the socio -economic development levels of the towns will be taken into consideration.  
This Project has been carefully designed to ensure coordination and synergies with other projects being implement ed by EBRD 
and other development partners in Tajikistan , such as the Sughd Loss Reduction Project (EBRD/EIB/EC IFCA), support for Barki 
Tojik corporate restructuring (ADB), etc. as well as the “Scaling up private sector climate finance through local financ ial 
institutions (GCF -EBRD SEFF co -financing Programme)”. The PPCR programme in Tajikistan provides a strong framework for multi -
agency coordination on climate resilience activities, led by the PPCR Secretariat located inside the PM’s Office, which will greatly 
benefit this project. In particular, the coordination with the above GCF -SEFF programme will build upon the strong synergies that 
have already been established between this Project and the existing EBRD/PPCR project “Small Business Climate Resilience  
Financing Facility”, which has already resulted in the establishment of the Tajikistan Climate Resilience Financing Facility 
“CLIMADAPT”. CLIMADAPT is supporting the climate resilience of Tajik businesses, farmers and households through promoting 
the upta ke of energy efficiency technologies (as well as water efficiency and sustainable land management technologies) in the 
agricultural, manufacturing and residential sectors. As acknowledged by the World Bank’s 2012 report on “Tajikistan’s Winter 
Energy Crisi s”, reducing energy demand through supply -side efficiency improvements is fundamentally important for reducing 
strain on the energy system and making it more resilient to the effects of climatic variability on hydropower generation. Sub ject 
to the successf ul disbursement of the existing resources under CLIMADAPT, it is anticipated that the above GCF -SEFF programme 
will make available resources for a larger extension of CLIMADAPT that could potentially make available large amounts of 
affordable finance for b usinesses, households and farmers to adopt energy  efficiency (plus water efficiency and sustainable land 
management) technologies, addressing the energy demand side directly and increasing its efficiency. At the same time, this 
Project will make a signific ant contribution towards the climate resilience of energy supplies, this ensuring that energy supply and 
energy demand are supported in a coherent and complementary fashion. This means that the two projects have a great potential 
to re -enforce each other’s  impact and lead to a more reliable and resilient energy supply for a wider share of the population and 
an overall more climate resilient economy.  
 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
EBRD  need not obtain any additional licenses or permits to carry out the proposed activities in this Programme. For more 
information, please refer to the Ag reement  establishing the EBRD. The Bank is an international financial institution established 
and acting on the basis of an international agreement known as the Agreement Establishing the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development dated 29 May 1990, as amended (the “EBRD Agreement”). Members of the Bank are parties to 
the EBRD Agreement and are bound by the terms of the EBRD Agreement. As an international organisation, the Bank is 
established and governed on the basis of public international law and, therefore, the Bank is not incorporated under the laws of  
any country and has no company registration in any country.  
Pursuant to the provisions of the EBRD Agreement, the Bank enjoys certain exemption from taxation in the territories of the 
Bank’s member countries. In particular, Article 53(1) of the EBRD Agreement provides that “within the scope of its official 
activities the Bank, its assets, property, and income shall be exempt from all direct taxes.” Accordingly, the Bank’s income arising 
from the Bank ’s official activities in the Bank’s member countries is exempt from any direct taxation in the member countries.  
Further, according to Article 53(2) of the EBRD Agreement “when purchases or services of substantial value and necessary for the 
exercise of the official activities of the Bank are made or used by the Bank and when the price of such purchases or services 
includes taxes or duties, the member that has levied the taxes or duties shall, if they are identifiable, take appropriate me asures 
to grant e xemption from such taxes or duties or to provide for their reimbursement”. Therefore, pursuant to Article 53(2) of the 
EBRD Agreement, the Bank is exempt from payment of VAT or any other tax in its member countries on purchases or services 
made or used by the Bank in connection with its official activities in the member countries.  
Further, according to Article 21.2 of the EBRD Agreement, Members shall not impose any restrictions on the receipt, holding, use 
or transfer by the Bank of currencies obtained by the Bank by borrowing and currencies and other resources administered by the


---
*Page 23*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C Bank as contributions to the Special Funds and currencies received by the Bank in payment on account of principal interest, 
dividends or other charges in respect of loans or inves tments, or the proceeds of disposal of such investments made out of any of 
the currencies obtained by the Bank by borrowing, or in payment of commission, fees or other charges.  
The EBRD provides finance, but does not implement projects per se. As such it need not obtain insurance for any goods or 
services, but rather it verifies that its clients have all the insurance necessary through its regular due diligence process.  
We can confirm that proceeds from the GCF loan and grant will be tax -exempt and no dire ct or indirect taxes will be imposed by 
the Republic of Tajikistan on goods or services procured by the Executing Entity in relation to the Project financed by the G CF and 
EBRD.  
 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
The P roject will be implemented under the FAA that is to be ag reed between the GCF and EBRD. The following agreements 
will be put in place under the proposed financing structure:   
 
(i) Grant Agreement between EBRD and the Government of Tajikistan  
(ii) Loan Agreement between EBRD and the Government of Tajikistan for the proceeds of the EBRD loan  
(iii) Loan Agreement between EBRD and the Government of Tajikistan for the proceeds of the GCF loan  
 
These agreements will specify precisely how the funds will be used for project implementation . 
 
In addition, as set out in Table 2 and in section C.3, the Project will also include a number of Technical Cooperation 
assignments to be funded with grant resources from EBRD Trust Funds.   
For Output  1: Capacity building with Barki Tojik  
 Technical cooperatio n consultancy contract issued by EBRD  
 
For Output  2: Technical assistance on cross -border coordination  
 Technical cooperation consultancy contract issued by EBRD  
 
For Output  3: Project implementation related technical cooperation  
 Grant Agreement between EBRD and Barki Tojik with consultancy contracts to be issued by Barki Tojik  
 
 
In order to accommodate GCF grant and loan resources (including reflows from repayment), EBRD will establish a Special 
Fund (with a sub -account for this project). EBRD establishes this structure to channel co -financing to the beneficiary, with 
Special Funds legally being treated as resources of the Bank and guaranteeing the same privileges and immunities, and 
preferred creditor status. In lending operations the EBRD beco mes the Lender of Records of the co -financed resources 
(similar in structure to ‘Trust Funds’).  
The funds will be passed on by the Ministry of Finance to Barki Tojik for p roject implementation . Physical works  of the 
project  will be managed by the PIU, whic h has a specific mandate to support the implementation of donor/MDB funded 
investments in B arki Tojik’s infrastructure and assets . The PIU has local staff with expertise in procurement, technical 
support, finances, site management supervision, monitoring and evaluation.  The PIU is supported by  technical assistance 
for engineering  and supervision  by a team of independent,  international consultants, embedded in the PIU. This 
programme of support to the PIU has been designed based on a detailed assessment of the capacity development needs 
of Barki Tojik and the PIU that was carried out by EBRD as part of the preparation of EB RD’s Sug hd Loss Reduction project 
in 2011. Specifically, this support to the PIU will cover the development of PIU operating procedures, support  and 
oversight of  procurement processes, support for evaluation processes, and support for contract finalisation , as well as 
assistance with site supervision, monitoring and reporting, testing, commissioning and operational acceptance, monitoring 
and reporting on the implementation of the Environmental and Social Action Plan, and knowledge transfer to B arki Tojik.  
Financial resources for this support have already been confirmed under Phase I and are included under the USD 4 million 
(grant) allocation for consultancy services set out in section B.1. In addition to this support to the PIU, dedicated technical  
assistan ce will also be provided to project implementation  to improve the enabling environment for climate -resilient


---
*Page 24*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C energy security and to understand and manage the implications of climate change and climate variability on hydropower 
operations and move towards i nternational best practice used in OECD countries. During the refurbishment of the dam 
(including the replacement of turbines), no more than one turbine/spillway will be worked on at a time. This means that at 
least five remaining turbines/spillway s will b e fully operational at all times during the refit, which will allow the flow 
through the dam to be properly regulated. In the same way, power generation will by only marginally a ffected during the 
refit (there will be at least five turbines in operation at any given time) and the total operating capacity will increase as  
soon as the first new turbine is installed. Please see Figure 1 below for a presentation of the organisation st ructure of the 
implementation process.  
 
 
Figure 1: Project Implementation – Organigram
 
 
Under Phase I, the following project progress has been made as of  October  2016. Naturally, full project implementation cannot 
commence until Phase II resources have been approved.  
Output  1 – Capacity building with Barki Tojik:  this activity has commenced under Phase I and a dedicated team of international 
and local experts was  appointed in December 2015. This team has established a permanent presence in Tajikistan and has 
conducted a number of initial field missions and consultations with Barki Tojik, Tajik Hydromet, the Ministry of Energy and w ater 
Resources and other Tajik st akeholders. This has resulted in the development (in May 2016) of a details implementation plan for 
the delivery of a comprehensive programme of support for building the climate resilience of the Tajik hydropower sector. This  
entails three workstreams: i) training on climate and hydrological data collection and management, ii) training on climate -resilient 
reservoir operations and iii) analysis and policy support on strategy, governance and institutional arrangements. Under 
workstream (i) the first package of technical training workshops was delivered in Dushanbe in August 2016. Under workstream (ii) 
a study tour to Quebec (Canada ) has taken place in September 2016 as  a key component of twinning Tajik hydropower operators 
with their counterparts in Canada, a  country that is a global leader on hydropower climate risk management. Under workstream 
(iii) a comprehensive programme of household and business surveys is currently being carried out in Sug hd province in order to 
develop an evidence base for energy sect or planning that improves the climate resilience and energy security of the Tajik 
population including vulnerable groups and gender perspectives. Regular newsletters are being sent to all stakeholders, the f irst 
of which was produced in August 2016. It is envisaged that this activity will continue throughout Phase I and Phase II in order to


---
*Page 25*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C progressively build capacity for climate risk management across the hydropower sector.  
Output  2 – Technical assistance on cross -border coordination:  This activity has no t commenced under Phase I and is instead 
envisaged to commence under Phase II once the resources have been approved. However it is intended that this work will build 
upon Output  1 as detailed above, and use the lessons learned and networks developed within  Tajikistan to roll out technical 
support and capacity development activities on a transboundary level.  
Output  3 – Project implementation & related technical cooperation (dam safety, turbine upgrade & generation upgrade):  To 
date, two major and comprehensive procurement exercises have been completed under this Output . Firstly, a dedicated and well -
resourced team tasked with providing Support to the PIU for Qairokkum HPP modernisation has been assembled and mobilised. 
This support will ensure that Barki Tajik has the technical and engineering capacities necessary for implementing this major 
infrastructure upgrade. Secondly, another dedicated and well -resourced team has been mobilised to provide Engineering Design 
Services. T his team is also in place and is already working on the detailed engineering design which will provide the fine blueprint 
for Qairokkum HPP modernisation, building on the Feasibility Study, due diligence work and climate change impacts analysis. T his 
detai led design is expected to be completed during Q3 2016. Once this has been done, and Phase II resources secured, physical 
works will then be able to commence.


---
*Page 26*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C  
 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
 
TASK Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20 Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24 Q25 … Q30 
Output 1                             
Output 2                             
Output 3                              
Evaluation


---
*Page 27*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  C


---
*Page 28*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  D D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
This proposed project sets out a major opportunity for a transformative intervention that will have a huge impact on improvin g 
the climate resilience of the Tajik energy sector and, more widely, in promoting climate -resilient and sustainable development in  
Tajikistan through improving the access to clean energy of thousands of household and businesses. However, this impact can 
only be achieved through the mobilisation of significant amounts of finance of which an appropriate proportion must be 
concessional (e.g. grant)  in order to address the severe affordability and debt sustainability constraints experienced in Tajikistan 
(a low -income country) and to off -set the additional costs associated with the introduction of necessary climate resilience 
measures. Ph ase I has begun this process (with financing from EBRD and the PPCR) but due to the limited ability of Tajik partners 
to access and absorb international finance (taking into consideration Tajikistan’s level of debt) it  has been necessary to structure 
the p roject in two coordinated phases. Additional funding from the GCF is needed to address the additional costs associated with 
climate resilience measures that are needed in the face of the severe climate change threats facing the Tajik energy sector. 
Without  this, the project would run the risk of being a ‘business as usual’ investment that would not factor in projected future 
climate conditions and variability into the design and ongoing management of the facility. Specifically, t his translates into a need 
for grant  finance for specific equipment upgrades needed in order to cope with projected future climate conditions, such as dam 
safety, and higher capacity turbines. Given the scale of the finance required (especially for the larger Phase II of the proj ect), the 
GCF is the only climate finance mechanism t hat is able to mobilise the scale of funding that is needed for a major climate -
resilient infrastructure upgrade of this kind. There are no other financing mechanisms accessible to Tajikistan that could achieve 
this.  
 
More general reasons for the need for GCF involvement in the project include the following .  
(i) Additionality : The rehabilitation of aging hydropower facilities is crucial for Tajikistan’s economy. The challenges of 
a changing climate puts additional burden onto the country. A long -term perspecti ve needs to be taken to address 
these challenges. The GCF involvement guarantees that this long -term investment can be done in a climate -resilient 
way.  
(ii) Scale : After initial pilot projects to include climate resilience in infrastructure, investments need to  be scaled up to 
address the critical challenges that climate change poses. The GCF is the only fund able to address these at the 
scale needed to significantly contribute to the climate resilience of the Tajik energy system and thus the country’s 
economy.  
(iii) Importance of sector : The centrality of the hydropower sector for the economy of Tajikistan in this case and other 
countries more generally make the involvement of the GCF even more important. This Project can show how an 
integrative approach combining cap acity building and infrastructure upgrades can further the climate resilience in 
the sector and in the whole community. Stronger climate resilience translates into higher economic well -being and 
more sustainable societies.  
With the GCF’s involvement the Project can demonstrate a successful implementation and can aid in scaling up climate resilience 
in the hydropower sector in Tajikistan and beyond.  
 
D.2. Exit Strategy  
The long -term sustainability of energy sector infrastructure and indeed the Tajik energy sector overall is a core consideration in 
the design and implementation of this proposed project. The specific investments are being designed for a 60 year lifespan, a nd 
ongoing operations and maintenance considerations have been  factored into project design and associated technical support 
and dialogue with the Governmnet of Tajikistan and Barki Tojik. EBRD is acutely aware of the need for progressive energy tariff 
reforms over the years ahead in order to ensure the sustainability of such investments. EBRD (in close coordination with the 
World Bank, Asian Development bank and other internatio nal partners) is therefore heavily involved in policy dialogue on energy 
sector tariff reform with the Tajik authorities.  Specifically, EBRD has agreed with the Tajik authorities an initial tariff reform 
programme entailing tariff increases of at least 30%  by 2017 . These increases are already in place and have been implemented 
by the end of 2016. They will be  adjusted thereafter in accordance with new tariff methodology to be ad opted by the Tajik 
authorities in  2017. These reform efforts, which are being mo nitored closely by EBRD together with WB, ADB and other 
international partners, are envisioned to contribute significantly to the financial sustainability of Barki Tojik.  Furthermore, 
upgrades and improvements of existing hydropower capacities increase its  ability to generate revenues by improving its 
reliability and increasing its generation capacities. In combination with tariff reform, this will help to make Barki Tojik  financially 
more sustainable and allow for better maintenance and further investments . The inclusion of long -term planning and climate 
change considerations guarantee the resilience and efficiency of the plant in the long run. Furthermore, the capacity buildin g


---
*Page 29*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  D components will further strengthen Barki Tojik in managing the effects of clima te change and coordinating with other operators 
along the river . GCF financial exit will be achieved through the repayment of the loan, as described in the termsheet.


---
*Page 30*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performanc e of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
The impact of the Project is potentially large due to following reasons:  
 Tajikistan is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change; increasing hydrological variability and more frequent and 
severe extreme events are predicted to affect the already ailing hydropower sector in the future;  
 The hydropower sector as the country’s main source of energy is central to the functioning o f Tajikistan’s economy and the 
livelihoods of its people (women and men) . Increasing the energy supply is a priority in improving the livelihoods of people, 
including particularly vulnerable rural and low -income households.  Female -headed households are als o more likely to be 
poor than male -headed households and this disparity appears to be increasing over time (UNDP, 2012).  
 Tajikistan’s hydropower sector with its aged infrastructure has huge investment needs. With a constrained budget the 
most urgent upgrades would be implemented without taking climate change into account, locking in long -lived assets 
highly vulnerable to cli mate change.  
 Additionally, h ydropower is a source of clean and sustainable energy for Tajikistan and instrumental in avoiding 
investments in carbon -intense generation assets. It further has the potential to create opportunities to export energy to 
neighbouring countries in the long r un, reducing CO2 emissions in the region and benefiting the development of the Tajik 
economy.    
Implementing the Proje ct with the support of the GCF can guarantee the  development of the Tajik energy sector in order to 
strengthen the country’s economic dev elopment in a climate resilient and  sustainable way. The project creates additiona l urgently 
needed generation capacity and demonstrates that the  impact of climate change in the long -term can be integrated and  how  
management practices and  infrastructure investments can be well adapted to projected future conditions , creat ing a strong 
enabling environment and a good example for replication.  
 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
  Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience);  
 
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only)  
 Total  The entire populat ion of Sughd region, 
2,400,000 will directly benefit from 
more secure and reliable electricity 
supply. This is based on the fact that 
Qairokkum HPP is the only major 
electricity generation asset in the 
northern Sughd region and thus 
responsible for secure and reliable 
supply to all households in the region.  
 
Through the dedicated capacity 
building of climate risk management in 
the country and with the upgrade of  a 
major genera tion source in the


---
*Page 31*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
national grid, the project  further 
increases the reliability of the regional 
and national power supply, which will 
indirectly benefit circa  8,6 million.  
 
The latest UN ESA census estimates 
the share of women in the Tajik 
population to be 49.3%. It can thus be 
assumed that roughly 1.18 million 
women benefit directly and 4.2 million 
indirectly from the project.  
Percentage 
(%) Approximately 30% of Tajikistan’s  
population benefit directly from the 
power supplied by the plant.  
The effect on the national grid will 
indirectly benefit 100% of the 
population.  
Other relevant 
indicators  
 
 
 
  Expected increase in the number of 
households in the Sughd region with access 
to climate resilient, sustainable energy  
 Expected increase in the number of SMEs in 
the Sughd region with access to climate 
resilient, sustainable energy  
 Expected increase in generation and use of 
climate information in decision -making  
  Reduction of households relying on 
alternative (coal, wood) fuel sources by 50 %  
 
 Increase by 10%  
 
 
 Agreement between Barki Tojik and Tajik 
Hydromet  on protocol on using climatological 
and hydro -meteorological  information in 
hydropower operations  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyse  impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
The potential for scalability  of this project is significant. The development of lasting technical capacity within Barki Tojik for 
assessing and managing climate change risks to hydropower operations, through the integration of best practices and skills, w ill 
open the way for the appl ication of these approaches in the management of other hydropower facilities across Tajikistan and 
beyond. Given the enormous importance of hydropower to the Tajik economy, this will have a strong demonstration effect of how  
investments in climate resilien ce benefit the Tajik energy sector and the population more broadly. For example, these approaches 
will benefit the management of the seven  other large HPPs that are owned and operated by Barki Tojik.  
 
The project has significant potential for replicability  as it is piloting a highly innovative approach to integrating climate resilience 
considerations into energy sector investment planning. This will have an extremely powerful demonstration impact that will 
illustrate how climate resilience can be optimised in a practical manner that delivers direct benefits to the Tajik energy sector and to


---
*Page 32*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
the population more broadly. It would also set a powerful example that could be repeated in subsequent hydropower upgrades in  
Tajikistan (e.g. the 3,000MW Nu rek hydropower plant) and elsewhere, thus creating a replicable investment model for climate -
resilient hydropower upgrades and significantly building the capacity of Tajik institutions to plan, organise and finance cli mate -
resilient upgrades of hydropower plants. In Tajikistan and the neighbouring Kyrgyz Republic alone, the potential for replicating this 
approach could be as high as eightfold (in terms of annual generation) over the next ten years alone5. The other countries in Central 
Asia utilising hydrop ower offer at least the same amount for the application of a similar approach. The approach can be more 
widely applied. Within the EBRD’s region of operations alone, the potential for further replication of climate resilient hydr opower 
development is estim ated to be twentyfold over the next ten years (across countries like Georgia, Armenia, Turkey and Morocco).  
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
This project has the potential to effect  a significant paradigm shift in climate resilience financing in Tajikistan and beyond. It will 
demonstrate how climate resilience – and the use of climate finance – can have a transformative impact on the design and 
management of critical infrastructure a ssets and introducing meaningful and practical climate resilience measures into the 
management of the energy sector more broadly. It will also demonstrate how an emerging economy such as Tajikistan c an benefit 
from and adapt for its own needs cutting -edge climate resilience prac tices that are emerging from adva nced OECD economies such 
as Canada and Australia.  
 
The Project also offers a large potential for learning in several dimensions. The capacity building under Output 1  of the Project 
brings best international practice to the Tajik electricity sector, by twinning Barki Tojik with a leading hydropower operato r from the 
OECD. This presents a substantial opportunity for the Tajik institutions to learn from and integrate lea ding international practices 
concerning climate change adaptation and to build capacity internally. The activities under the seconded Outpu t address  
transboundary coordination of cascading hydropower plants. This has huge potential to improve operations in several countries  and 
encourages cross -border and joint learning, coordinating operations , sharing information and data and developing capacities i n 
climate risk management along  the river system. Implementing the infrastructure upgrade offers further significant learning 
potential to all institutions involved. It will provide Barki Tojik with experience and capacity  to manage a big infrastructure up grade, 
which will certainly prove invaluable for replication projects in Tajikistan.  
 
The Project will be guid ing Barki Tojik in scaling up climate resilience measures in the hydropower sector in the future. This can also 
serve as an example for other cou ntries, demonstrating the success of an integrated approach. The learning and knowledge 
creation process will be monitored and evaluated to ensure the success and better transferability of the approach. See Annex VII for 
an indicative monitoring and evalua tion plan to oversee the process.  
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Building on on -going work the Project will help Tajikistan move towards current best available practices as those used in OECD 
countries where climate resilience is being mainstreamed into energy sector planning and investment, including hydropower 
operati ons. The transfer of skills and best practices will further build capacity and expertise in Barki Tojik and other key institu tions 
in Tajikistan, embedding climate resilience in policy making, sector investment planning and the operations of Tajikistan’s 
hydropower plants.  
 
 
 E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
                                                             
5 Estimations based on the assumption that 25 % of active hydropower assets require rehabilitation over the next decade.


---
*Page 33*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
The engagement of EBRD and other international financial institutions (IFIs) such as the World Bank and Asian Development Ban k in 
the Tajik power sector is conditional on a se t of milestones including adjustment of tariffs and the restructuring of Barki Tojik. These 
milestones include the following:  
Implementation of new tariff methodology for Barki Tojik  which eliminates cross subsidies among consumer categories (2017)  
 Electricty tariffs increased by a minimum of 30% (Q4 2017)  
 Tariffs reach cost recovery ( 2018)   
Adjusted tariffs set incentives for more efficient energy consumption, reducing the demand load for the electricity sector an d 
increasing its resilience. Tariff  reform and restructuring also increase the financial sustainability of Barki Tojik’s operations. More 
sustainable operations allow for improved long -term planning. This is a crucial building block enabling Barki Tojik and other Tajik 
institutions to fully  take advantage of the knowledge and skill transfer and implement long -term, climate -responsive planning and 
operations of the energy sector.  
  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact   
The pr oject is rated ‘B ’ under the EBRD’s Environmental and Social Policy6. The project improves the reliability and quality of the 
electricity supply in Tajikistan and has the potential  for multiple social and economic benefits for women as well as men well 
described in literature7. It also  has wide -ranging environmental, co -benefits.  
 
By addressing the safety of the dam, the Project will reduce the likelihood of environmental impacts s uch as flooding and land 
erosion.  Furthermore, the following benchmarks are provided under the implementation of the Environmental and Social Action 
Plan (ESAP ; see Annex V ), improving environmental safety, reducing the impact on local aquatic life,  which include several 
endangered  species amongst which the Syr Darya Shovelnose is endemic , increasing health benefits to local inhabitants by reducing 
reliance on traditional fuels, and improving the overall approach to management of the plant.  
 
Benchmark s included in the project are : 
1. Development and implementation of environmental and social management system in line with ISO 14001  to improve 
company operational approaches  
2. Installation of oil -free Kaplan turbines (only water used for turbine control  to minimise environmental risk downstream ) 
3. Installation of low fish mortality turbine design  to protect aquatic life  
4. Real -time disclosure of flow and hydrological information in place to enable more integrated management of the resource 
through the cascade  
5. Reduction of number of households in the Sughd region relying on coal and wood by 50 %  
 
Regional integration is furthered by the project through planned disclosure of real -time flow and hydro -metrological data from the 
hydropower plant. This makes the operations of the hydropower plant more transparent for the public and can be beneficial for 
coordinating downstream plants and other activities.  
                                                             
6 http://www.ebrd.com/who -we-are/our -values/environmental -and-social -policy.html   
7 Lipscomb, Molly, A. Mushfiq Mobarak, and Tania Barham. 2013. "Development Effects of Electrification: Evidence from the 
Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants in Brazil." American Economic Journal:  Applied Economics , 5(2): 200 -231 
Dinkelman, Taryn. 2011. "The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence from South Africa." American 
Economic Review , 101(7): 3078 -3108.


---
*Page 34*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
 
In addition to these environmental benefits, the project will also deliver wider social and economic co -benefits, including gender -
sensitive development impacts. More reliable and climate -resilient access to electricity will provide strong co -benefits for gender -
sensitive development and may contribute to better living conditions. Poor energy security, which  is expected to be worsened as a 
result of climate change, has serious implications for economic activity, poverty and vulnerability. At present, approximatel y 70% of 
the Tajik population suffers from extensive electricity shortages during the winter. Thes e are estimated at 2,700 GWh which is 
equivalent to a quarter of winter electricity demand. With demand expected to rise and without major investments in the near 
future, shortages are projected at 4,500 GW h in 2016, which would be close to one third of th e electricity demand in winter. 
Electricity shortages in winter impose economic losses of approximately USD200 million per year, or 3% of GDP. According to t he 
World Bank’s Business Economic Environment Survey, the frequent cut -offs and the poor quality of  electricity is considered the main 
obstacle to doing business in Tajikistan. The social impacts associated with chronic electricity shortages in winter are seve re and 
include indoor air pollution from burning coal and wood in homes and health impacts from  extreme winters  – which is an impact that 
disproportionately affects women. Children are also often affected by a lack of night -time lighting , which can impair educational 
activities. The project will make a direct contribution towards addressing these ne eds. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Energy insecurity is a persistent problem that hinders economic development and social inclusion. Closely linked with climate 
vulnerability, it poses a huge burden on the Tajik population and hinders the realisation of the economic and social potentia l. 
Increasing energy generation and distribution capacity is an impor tant way of addressing energy vulnerability at the community -
level. It further creates more economic opportunities in rural areas and benefits existing businesses through increased relia bility, 
enabling better planning and more efficient production8. This is especially relevant since r oughly 35 percent of the population in the 
Project area live below the poverty level (according to WB data for 2013) and are particularly economically vulnerable.  Gender 
equality is an important dimension as well: energy vuln erability may have specific impacts on women, such as the increased use of 
low-grade fuels for cooking and  heating which leads to health impacts, increased time having to spent on the collection of firewood, 
leading to opportunity costs, and fewer educatio n/income generation opportunities  due to lack of indoor lighting (UNDP 2012).  
According to EBRD’s Life in Transition survey (a representative household survey), more than 3 in 10 households in Tajikistan  are 
headed by women, further emphasising the importa nce of including the gender angle and considering the benefits for vulnerable 
parts of society. According to multiple studies9, improved  and more reliable access to electricity will have strong co -benefits for 
gender -sensitive development and contribute s to better living conditions  for vulnerable rural population s. 
 
The vulnerability of Tajikistan’s energy system to climate change is compounded by prolonged underinvestment, over -reliance on 
aging hydropower assets, policy failures and weak corporate governa nce. This situation has grave economic and social 
consequences. Most power generation facilities have been in operation well beyond their useful economic life. Upgrades are needed 
urgently to avoid the risk of major technical failure that would jeopardize the supply of electricity to all customers and ca use 
enormous damage to Tajikistan’s economy. Large parts of the population and the econom y are already suffering from an unreliable 
power supply and from severe power outages during the winter season. The Tajik people suffer the social costs as well, includ ing 
indoor air pollution from burning wood and coal in homes and health impacts from ext reme winters, impacts with important gender 
considerations. According to the World Bank study10 conducted in 2012 household burning of solid fuels is a major health risk factor 
in Tajikistan and particularly affects women and children . This project will hel p to alleviate this grave situation by contributing 
towards a more reliable and climate -resilient energy supply.  
                                                             
8 Lipscomb, Molly, A. Mushfiq Mobarak, and Tania Barham. 2013. "Development Effects of Electrification: Evidence from the 
Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants in Brazil." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics , 5(2): 200 -231 
9 Dinkelman, Taryn. 2011. "The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence from South Africa." American 
Economic Review , 101(7): 3078 -3108.  
10 World Bank’s Tajikistan Winter Energy Crisis  study (2012)


---
*Page 35*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
 
Tajikistan is among the poorest countries in the world with some 40% of its population living below the poverty threshold. 
Tajikistan’s abunda nt hydropower potential is essentially the only major natural resources that the country possesses, yet the poor 
state of its energy infrastructure, the high investment needs and the serious additional threats to energy security posed by climate 
change mea n that Tajikistan’s high energy potential is not being translated into improvements in living standards and poverty 
reduction for the population. The quality of energy supply is poor with frequent unplanned outages and high system losses.  
 
About 70 per cen t of the population currently suffers from blackouts during the winter, imposing direct costs in terms of (1) foregone 
revenue from economic activity; (2) additional costs due to damage to equipment and interruption of business processes; and ( 3) 
costs fro m household equipment damage. In addition to the economic burdens of an electricity system in crisis, there are difficult 
consequences for Tajikistan’s households as well. The Tajik population experiences frequent and severe electricity shortages,  
especial ly in winter, when power supply falls short of demand. This has severe social and welfare implications taking into 
consideration cold and harsh winters. In rural areas this means that much of the population has very limited access to electr icity 
supply at all, sometimes only one or two hours a day, especially in winter. Urban areas are affected differentially, as although the 
supply is less unreliable, the population does not have access to alternative energy sources such as firewood (as in rural ar eas) and  
most urban residential heating relies on electricity. This means that the urban poor suffer greatly during winter blackouts.  
 
The situation creates grave social costs for the Tajik population, including indoor air pollution from being forced to burn l ow-grade 
fuels inside their homes during winter. Households (especially rural) often have no option but to warm their homes by burning  solid 
fuels (wood and coal predominantly). As a result, the incidence of carbon monoxide poisoning due to indoor air polluti on is high. The 
World Health Organization lists Tajikistan among the 20 worst affected countries for diseases resulting from indoor air pollu tion. 
Household burning of solid fuels is a major health risk factor in Tajikistan and particularly affects women a nd children. Staying warm 
becomes a preoccupation for families and overrides the risks of fire and poor indoor air quality. Gender is an important dime nsion as 
well, as energy vulnerability has specific impacts on women, such as the increased use of low -grade fuels for cooking and heating 
which leads to health impacts, increased time having to spent on the collection of firewood, leading to opportunity costs, an d fewer 
education/income generation opportunities due to lack of indoor lighting at night. Furthe rmore, the increased use of firewood in 
rural areas as a result of the poor electricity supply contributes directly to deforestation, which in turn worsens soil eros ion and  
leads to reduced agricultural productivity and sedimentation in rivers which incre ases flooding risks.  
 
In response, the proposed Project will help to alleviate this grave situation by contributing towards a more reliable and cli mate -
resilient energy supply. This will be achieved through increasing the generation capacity of Qairokkum H PP (the only major power 
generation facility in the Northern Sughd province) to 174 MW, which will address the problems caused by demand exceeding 
supply, as well as enabling the dam operators to anticipate and manage climatic and hydrological variability thus ensuring a more 
reliable energy supply, and developing an evidence -based framework for managing and delivery energy supplies to the population of 
Sughd province in a way that takes account of household and business needs. The improved and more reliabl e access to electricity 
will have strong co -benefits for gender -sensitive development.  The development of the above evidence -based framework will 
include a gender component to ensure that women are enabled to equally benefit from the Project and that thei r specific needs and 
constraints are taken into consideration, along with those of other community views and are then fed in to the analysis.  
 
Qairokkum HPP is the only large electricity generation facility in Sughd province, and is responsible for maintai ning the power 
baseload in the Sughd sub -grid. As a result, the entire population and economy of Sughd province relies to a significant extent on the 
Qairokkum HPP for their electricity supply. Power imports from neighbouring Uzbekistan ended some years ag o when the former 
Central Asia grid ceased to operate. Although a transmission line has now been built to connect Sughd to the southern distric ts of 
Tajikistan, this connection is intermittent and is especially unreliable during harsh winter weather as it runs through inhospitable, 
high -altitude terrain. Therefore, the improvements in the reliability, resilience and power generation capacity that will be achie ved at 
Qairokkum HPP as a result of this Project will directly benefit the entire population of Sug hd province. As stated above, all sections of 
the population are currently affected by power cuts (with the exception of essential public facilities on the priority ‘red l ine’ of the 
grid), especially during extreme weather events such as droughts and hars h winter conditions.  
 
At the same time, the Project is aware of the need to enable Barki Tojik to understand better the energy security and climate


---
*Page 36*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
resilience needs of different segments of the population (including low -income and vulnerable groups) so th at electricity access can 
be better delivered in a way that balances the needs of different groups of consumers, e.g. residential areas, industry etc. For that 
reason, Output  1 of the Project includes support for developing an evidence -based framework for energy sector policy -making and 
service provision, through a detailed assessment of energy usage in the Sughd province. The will consist of household and bus iness 
surveys of energy use and climate vulnerability. These surveys will analyse the energy consumption behaviour of local residents and 
businesses and the way they cope with the impacts of climatic variability on energy availability and use. The results will in form a 
climate change and energy insecurity impact assessment, and will be complemented by an institutional review and technical 
assessment that will assess service characteristics and infrastructure provision. Inequalities in terms of climate vulnerabil ity and 
ener gy security will be assessed in order to identify differentiate gender differences and address the needs of the most vulnerab le 
sections of the population. The surveys will also be designed in a way that allows intra -household gender analysis of energy use  and 
vulnerability as well as differentiated analysis of energy use by male - and female -led businesses). This work will provide an evidence 
base to shape the development of operational and planning responses to the impacts of seasonal/climatic variability on energy use 
and availability. There will also be public awareness campaign based on the findings of this work, in order to raise awarenes s of the 
link between climate resilience and energy security, including the need for demand -side measures and shifts in consumer behaviour. 
A better understanding of the impacts of climatic variability and energy availability on energy usage of vulnerable sections of the 
population can then build a basis for targeted responses.  
 
As stated above, EBRD has conducted afford ability and tariff analysis, so that the policy dialogue on electricity tariff reform that is 
being carried out by EBRD and other MDBs takes into account the income levels of the Tajik population and the consequent 
implications for the affordability of any  electricity tariff increases. EBRD and other development partners are already supporting 
Barki Tojik and the Tajik authorities in developing a new tariff policy in line with the international practice, and to adopt  measures 
such as improved metering and a n automated billing system, which will enable improvements in payment collection and reduce 
losses.  
 
During the Soviet era, the electricity and heating infrastructure of the then Tajik SSR was well maintained and funded by lar ge 
subsidies as well as depen dent on the Central Asian Power Grid. As a result, almost the entire population of the Sughd province 
enjoyed reliable electricity access, including the rural population. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Tajikistan’s ene rgy and 
heating infrastructur e has deteriorated significantly. Rural communities endure poor and unreliable electricity supplies, sometimes 
limited to a few hours a day, and even urban settlements also suffer frequent power cuts, especially during harsh weather 
conditions. In winter t imes, staying warm becomes a priority for many low -income families. Not being able to rely on electric heating 
(or other sources of modern energy sources), forces low -income households to rely on basic and inefficient energy sources (e.g. 
wood, raw coal an d traditional low -grade fuels such as dried cow dung briquettes). This affects both rural and urban communities. In 
rural areas, the reliance on traditional low -grade fuels such as firewood and cow dung briquettes contributes directly towards 
deforestation  and soil erosion (i.e. manure being burned instead of being used to maintain soil fertility and structure). The use of 
such low -grade fuels for indoor heating and cooking also have severe human health implications due to indoor air pollution, which 
has an  important gender dimension as women and girls and disproportionately affected. In urban areas, winter power cuts cause 
considerable distress to the entire population, who do not have access to rural coping strategies such as the use of firewood . The 
stren gthening of the energy supply into the grid will improve the reliability of electricity provision and make electric heating a  
cleaner, healthier and cheaper alternative for heating. Therefore, one of the intended outcomes of the Project is to achieve a 50%  
reduction in the number of affected households using low -grade solid fuels through the provision of a more reliable and resilient 
electricity supply, as was the case during the Soviet era. This benchmark will be monitored through the programme of househol d and 
business surveys that is to be carried out under Output  1 of the Project.  
 
As explained above, the entire population of Sughd province is currently affected by the unreliable electricity supply, and t herefore 
the entire population of Sughd province will benefit from the modernisation of Qairokkum HPP and the more reliable and cli mate -
resilient electricity supply that this will result in. Therefore, the entire population of the Sughd province (i.e. 2.4 milli on people or 
30% of the total population of Tajikistan) will benefit from the Project’s positive impact on the supply of elect ricity in the Sughd sub -
grid directly. Furthermore, the capacity building in managing the climate risk to the Tajik hydropower sector under Output  1 and 
strengthened transboundary coordination under Output  2 of the Project are expected to improve the relia bility of the electricity 
supply in the entire country. This will indirectly benefit the whole population of Tajikistan.


---
*Page 37*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
 
In addition, as stated above, one of the intended outcomes of the Project is to achieve a gradual reduction in the number of affected 
households using low -grade solid fuels through the provision of a more reliable and resilient electricity supply (the benchmarks are 
set at 30% and 50% throughout the project’s lifespan), as was the case during the Soviet era. This benchmark will be monito red 
through the programme of household and business surveys that is to be carried out under Output  1 of the Project.  
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Tajikistan is among the poorest countries in the world with some 40% of its population living below the poverty threshold. Th e 
energy sector plays a vital role in the economy with 98% of power produced by hydropower plants. The vulnerability of Tajikis tan’s 
energy system to climate has grave economic and social consequences. Large parts of the population and the economy already suffer 
from an unreliable power supply and from severe power outages d uring the winter season. This leads to  further  social costs (such as 
the health impacts of indoor air pollution by burning coal or wood, particularly affecting women and children). A reliable energy 
supply will help rural communities as well as relief local businesses of supply constraints. The financ ial sustainability of the Tajik 
energy sector is limited due to low tariffs and operational efficiency.  The contribution of the GCF would help to mobilise a dditional 
loans to cover the full investment at affordable cost. In the context of broader energy s ector reform, the Government of Tajikistan 
has requested the assistance  of IFIs and donors  to help  with  investments,  formulation  and  implementation of  policies  and  
institutional  reforms. This will improve the sector’s  financial sustainability, w hile also enabling the critical climate vulnerability of its 
operations to be addressed.  The Project’s capacity building component will further help Barki Tojik to improve the efficienc y of its 
operations and to take long -term planning better into account . In the realm of the technical assistance Barki Tojik will receive further 
assistance i n improving its operations and planning as well as project implementation capacities.  
 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs and NA Ps 
Tajikistan has ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol in 2008. It is a 
low-income country and is widely recognised as being highly vulnerable to climate change. The proposed Project is country -driven 
and supports the Government of Tajikistan's goal of ensuring that the populati on has access to safe, reliable and sustainable water 
supplies. It is consistent with the priorities of the National Development Strategy, the National Environment Action Plan, th e National 
Action Plan on Climate Change Mitigation, the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCC and the Poverty 
Reduction Strategies. Furthermore, this activity complements the PPCR and the NPD in Tajikistan.  
 
The Project will also make an important contribution towards improving Tajikistan’s preparedness for cli mate change and disaster 
risk reduction, and is therefore focused on preventing adverse impacts on the population, rather than reaction. As well as ma king a 
direct contribution to improvements in the physical infrastructure that Tajikistan needs to become more resilient to climate change, 
it will also help to build the institutional capacity needed for this infrastructure to be managed and maintained in a sustai nable 
manner, including financial sustainability.  
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) was established in 1991 to nurture a new private sector in a 
democratic environment. EBRD provides project financing for banks, industries, and businesses, both new ventures and investments 
in existing companies. It also works with publicly owned companies, to support privatization, restructuring state -owned firms and 
improvement of municipal services. The Bank uses its close relationship with governments in the regio n to promote policies that will


---
*Page 38*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
support the business environment. The Bank also has a strong environmental mandate and is committed to financing projects tha t 
are environmentally sound and sustainable. 11 12 
 
The comparative advantage of the EBRD for the GCF  lies in the Bank’s experience and track record in market creation and 
transformation, and ensuring sustainability through private sector and municipal environmental infrastructure projects at the  
country and regional level in the countries of eastern and central Europe and central Asia. The EBRD recognized from the start the 
strategic importance of municipalities in the transition and in the financing of projects with significant environmental bene fits in the 
district heating, water, and waste sectors. Ove r recent years EBRD has developed considerable expertise in the area of climate 
change mitigation and energy efficiency, for example through its Sustainable Energy Initiative. EBRD has also becom e active in the 
field of climate change adaptation and is int erested in  forming new partnerships with other agencies to address the challenges of 
climate change adaptation in the EBRD region.  Finally, the EBRD recognises civil society as a key stakeholder and partner in achieving 
its mandate and has extensive experi ence in engaging with local and international CSOs13.  
 
The Bank has a strong, well -established presence in the ECA region and is therefore uniquely well placed to contribute to the 
challenge of climate change adaptation in the region. It has a network of around 200 professional staff located across the re gion to 
support project development, implementation and monitoring, together with sustained policy dialogue and business relationship s 
with governments, local institutions, industry, banks, utilities and investors.  
 
The EBRD currently operates i n 37  countries and has at least one resident office within each of these. Some larger countries, such as 
Kazakhstan and Turkey, also have sub -regional offices to bring EBRD staff closer to the business needs. Regional offices are typically 
staffed by a mixture of interna tional and national staff and provide an in -depth knowledge of the social, economic, and political 
conditions within the country and help to generate and implement new projects as well as monitor existing operations, and fac ilitate 
dialogue and business re lationships with governments, local institutions, industry, banks, utilities, and investors.  
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
The process of engaging Tajik hydropower stakeholders began in 2009 in the realm of the development of Tajikistan’s Strategic  
Programme for Climate Resilience, in which hydropower was identified as one of the priority areas of the country. In 2012 a 
worksh op on climate resilience in the energy sector followed, bringing together over 40 national and international experts and 
decision makers. Barki Tojik and the Ministry of Energy & Water, together with a large number of other government agencies an d 
civil so ciety organisations were well represented and stressed the importance of the topic for the future of Tajikistan’s energy sect or. 
The workshop identified the needs and priorities of the energy sector with particular reference to climate resilience. This i nformed 
and helped shape the preparations for this project. The NDA has been personally highly committed in this area of work and has  
contributed to a shared vision across national authorities and EBRD of the significance of the topic and the potential of pr oject -based 
interventions. The NDA fully supports this proposal to the GCF.  
 
EBRD has also been closely collaborating with the PPCR Secretariat in Tajikistan, which engages a wide -reaching CSO network on 
questions of climate resilience. This has facilitat ed a continuous dialogue about the development of this project with a wide range of 
CSOs. Based on this extensive consultation process in preparation for the Project, also including the Environmental and Socia l 
Analysis, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan was d eveloped, which set out how communities and other stakeholders within the projects’ 
zone of influence will be consulted and involved in the development of the project. This will include a gender component to e nsure 
that women are enabled to equally benefit  from the Project and that their specific needs and constraints are taken into 
consideration, along with those of other community views and are then fed in to the analysis. Building on this, a workshop for 
continuous stakeholder consultation is to be held in January 2016 in Dushanbe. This will be a further opportunity to consult with CSO 
actors and include their input in the project and to inform a wider stakeholder base about the project’s aims and broader cli mate 
resilience issues in the country.  
 
                                                             
11 http://www.ebrd.com/strategic -gender -initiative.html   
12 http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/projects -and-sectors/economic -inclusion.html   
13 http://www.ebrd.com/who -we-are/civil -society -overview.html


---
*Page 39*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
These Stakeholder engagement activities will ensure that the views of local communities are adequately reflected and that the 
objectives and results of the project are communicated effectively to ensure local buy -in. G ender -sensitive disaster risk reduction, 
risk preparedness, risk response and contingency plans  that respond to the specific needs and concerns of men and women, will be 
promoted; the adaptive capacities of local stakeholders will be developed.  This will ensure that the Tajik hydropower sector will 
continue to benefit from sophisticated practices in dealing with dam safety and the growing challenges of climate change.  
 
Transboundary context  
 
Qairokkum HPP is located in the highly transboundary Syr Darya river basin, which is shared between four states, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz 
Republic, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. This situation is further complicated by the fact that these state have sometimes compe ting 
priorities for water use, for example the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan prioritise energy generation whereas Kazakhstan and 
Uzbekistan especially prioritise irrigation. Central Asia’s water and energy infrastructure was developed as an integrated sy stem by 
the Soviet Union, with a coordinated approach to managing water and energy resources, and balancing priorities. For example, 
under this system the water -rich upstream countries (Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan) stored water during the winter in retur n for 
receiving winter energy imports from the downstream, fossil fuel -rich countries of Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, and the upstream 
countries released water during the summer for irrigation in the downstream countries. This system broke down after the col lapse of 
the Soviet Union, eventually leading to the disintegration of the Central Asian energy grid. Nevertheless, political and inst itutional 
efforts to maintain transboundary cooperation have persisted during this period despite certain political tensio ns, for example 
through the efforts the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), and the Scientific -Information Centre of the 
Interstate Coordination Water Commission of the Central Asia (SIC ICWC) based in Tashkent with branch offices in oth er Central 
Asian countries.  
In the hydropower sector, transboundary cooperation between hydropower operators exists on a mainly working -level and 
sometimes informal basis. The dam operators on transboundary cascades (e.g. Syr Darya) all know each other fr om university times 
(they almost all trained together at the former technical university in Tashkent) and they share information about dam manage ment 
and river flows with each other on an informal basis, often using mobile phones etc. At the same time, the re are new emerging 
opportunities to strengthen the institutional basis for transboundary cooperation in the longer term. For example, both the K yrgyz 
Republic and Tajikistan are now covered by the CIF’s Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR) and EB RD is actively working to 
coordinate these countries’ respective Strategic Programmes for Climate Resilience (SPCRs) to facilitate transboundary coordi nation.  
The Project will take a very practical and working level approach to strengthening transboundary  cooperation in the hydropower 
sector that will complement and support longer -term improvements at the institutional and political levels. This will entail 
developing fora and mechanisms for encouraging improved transboundary cooperation on hydropower casc ade management and 
climate risk management. It will strengthen assessments and exchange on climate risk management in hydropower operations 
between Tajikistan and neighbouring Central Asia countries, and to develop operational links on climate information exchange 
between hydropower operators on the Syr Darya cascade (e.g. Toktogul HPP (Kyrgyz Republic) and Shadara HPP (Kazakhstan). This  
will involve providing training activities to operators Tajikistan and its neighbouring countries, taking advantage of th e fact that EBRD 
is investing in numerous hydropower facilities on the Syr Darya (e.g. Qairokkum HPP, Shardara HPP) and the fact that both Taj ikistan 
and the Kyrgyz Republic are included under the PPCR, which will provide a strong framework for cooperation  on climate resilience. In 
this way, this activity will aim to put in place a protocol for sharing relevant climate and hydro -meteorological data between Central 
Asian countries. The specific activities will include the following:  
 The identification or est ablishment of an appropriate forum for transboundary co -operation where the benefits can be 
understood and shared by both upstream and downstream countries. This will involve setting out:  
 Fora/mechanisms that are already in place (e.g.  SIC/ICWC, CAMP4ASB ); 
 Benefits for upstream & downstream countries of working in collaboration on cascade management; and  
 Existing models of successful coordination elsewhere in the world.


---
*Page 40*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
o Exploring transboundary collaboration opportunities through the use of public domain datasets. Where 
sharing of data across countries are problematic, public domain datasets can be an effective way of 
overcoming such barriers. The more public datasets can be used, the less friction there is, as everyone is 
drawing from a common source and doesn’t have to rely on each other.  
o Professional development on technical climate risk management issues for young/mid -career 
professionals from Barki Tojik, Tajik Hydrom et and their equivalents in neighbouring Central Asian 
countries. This would take the form of specially developed training activities (e.g. summer schools etc.), 
potentially in coordination with local technical and/or academic institutions, such as the Uni versity of 
Central Asia (under consideration).  
 
Downstream Irrigation for Agriculture  
Hydropower dams in Central Asia are almost always built for the dual purposes of energy generation and irrigation, and this i s also 
true of the dams on the Syr Darya riv er including Qairokkum. For this reason, these dams operate under two seasonal regimes: i) a 
winter regime that optimises power generation while storing enough water for irrigation during the following spring/summer, a nd ii) 
a summer regime that prioritise s the release of water for downstream irrigation. The severe electricity supply and climate resilience 
challenges described above are primarily a problem under the winter regime, and it is the winter season that poses the greate st 
difficulties concerning t he energy security and climate resilience of the population. During the summer season, the electricity 
demand of the population is much lower as there is no demand for electricity for heating (which is very high in winter) and l ess 
demand for electricity f or lighting. In summer the water is spilled instead of being used to generate power due to limited market 
opportunities to export electricity and as the reservoir capacity in the system is inadequate to allow storage of the spilled  water for 
later use duri ng critical winter months. This means that, during the summer, water can be released though the dam for downstream 
irrigation without compromising the energy security of the population.  
Furthermore, there are no reported deficits of water during the sprin g/summer irrigation season and therefore no consequent risks 
to agricultural production. Agriculture is a vital part of the Tajik economy and agricultural irrigation has always been the main water 
consumer in the region. In the coordination between competi ng water usages, agriculture has thus priority. It is expected that the 
Project will deliver further improvements in the optimisation and balancing of competing water uses in the face of a changing  and 
more variable climate. Changing precipitation patterns  and increased hydrological variability are making planning and coordination 
more difficult. Hence, among the main aims of the project is to build a better evidence base, built on observed and forecaste d data, 
for managing river flows and operating hydropo wer plants. Improved understanding of the river hydrology, expected inflows and 
seasonal and short -term forecasts, will enable dam operators to better manage water releases for irrigation and coordinate more 
efficiently between irrigation needs and power g eneration.  
At the same time, EBRD recognises that the most significant threat to agricultural irrigation is the extremely inefficient us e of water 
in downstream irrigation systems, both in Tajikistan itself and in other downstream countries such as Uzbekistan. Although this topic 
is beyond the scope of this Project, EBRD is making significant efforts to improve this situation by promoting the uptake of more 
efficient irrigation techniques (e.g. drip and sprinkler irrigation) through the CLIMADAPT Taj ikistan Climate Resilience Financing 
Facility, which is being financed by EBRD and the PPCR. It is anticipated that a larger extension of CLIMADAPT could in due c ourse be 
launched with the support of the GCF EBRD SEFF programme (approved by the GCF Board i n October 2016), which could support 
further improvements in irrigation water use efficiency.  
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency


---
*Page 41*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
Due to prolonged underinvestment, aging infrastructure and the severe impact of climate change , the Tajik energy sector has large 
investment needs. The grant portion of the GCF contribution will allow  important dam safety components to be financed that are 
critic al in dealing with the increased frequency and magnitude of extreme weather events due to climate change. The concessional 
loan provided by the GCF mobilises two IFI loans and ensures the affordability of the upgrade for the budget constrained Taji k energy  
operator. The blended loans provide the volume necessary for addressing climate resilience at a sizable scale. They remain af fordable 
for the country and at the same time provide incentive to improve the sector’s financial sustainability through tariff re form.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  
The Project will enable the GCF to leverage a significant amount of co -financing, approximately 160% of the amount of the requested 
GCF finance in Phase II of the project only. The volume of funds of the entire project adds approximately 300% to the GCF’s 
contribution.  The ratio of GCF finance to co -financing is 1:1.6 for Phase 2 alone, and 1:3.12 for the project overall. The impact of the 
GCF’s contribution  has goes beyond supporting crucial infrastructure investment needs and mobilises technical assistance 
programmes with a transformative impact on the Tajik energy sector, integrating climate resilience measures in operations as well as 
investment planning and design. Consequently, USD  50 million  of GCF finance leverages at least a further USD  81 million  additional 
co-financing from EBRD and EIB in Phase II of the project.  
 
This Project will elaborate a highly innovative approach to integrating climate resil ience considerations into energy sector investment 
planning. This will have an extremely powerful demonstration impact that will illustrate how climate resilience can be optimi sed in a 
practical manner that delivers direct benefits to the Tajik energy sect or and to the population more broadly. It would also set a 
powerful example that could be repeated in subsequent hydropower upgrades in Tajikistan (e.g. the 3,000MW Nurek hydropower 
plant) and elsewhere, thus creating a replicable investment model for clim ate-resilient hydropower upgrades and significantly 
building the capacity of Tajik institutions to plan, organise and finance climate -resilient upgrades of hydropower plants.  
 
Furthermore, Tajik businesses rely heavily upon electricity for their manufactur ing operations, including the processing of cotton and 
other agricultural produce. The commercial sector is also highly dependent on electricity for heat and lighting, as well as i ndustrial 
processes. However, the quality of supply is poor with frequent un planned outages. About 70% of the population currently suffers 
from blackouts during the winter, imposing direct costs in terms of foregone revenue from economic activity, and additional c osts 
due to damage to equipment and interruption of business process es. These shortages, estimated at about 2,700 GWh, about a 
quarter of winter electricity demand, impose economic losses estimated at over USD 200 million or 3% of GDP. The unreliable 
electricity supply has a negative impact on the development of business o pportunities. For example, the World Bank’s Business 
Economic Environment Survey of 2008 reported that 80% of firms cited power supply reliability as a major obstacle to doing bu siness 
in Tajikistan. A reliable power supply is critical for Tajikistan’s eco nomy and development. Without reliable, affordable electricity 
throughout the year, Tajikistan’s businesses cannot invest, operate and create jobs. Therefore, the proposed project will hav e a 
significant impact on the ability of Tajik businesses to grow an d generate jobs, livelihoods and revenues, while using clean, 
sustainable energy that is resilient to the projected impacts of climate change.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability


---
*Page 42*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
Economic and financial rate of return  
Through the analysis of different design proposals the economically most beneficial option was identified (taking into account 
climatic projections for the lifespan of the asset). The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was calculated as 21.71% and  the 
Financial Internal Rate of Return  (FIRR) as 6.88% in the feasibility study (the full financial and economic analysis is included in chapter 
15 the feasibility study in Annex II).  
Despite the clear financial and economic benefits of the project, affordability c onstraints hinder the realisation of the project, while 
debt sustainability constraints reduce  the ability of the Government to support Barki Tojik in carrying out this important project. 
Furthermore, Barki Tojik  is at present faced with huge investment needs across the network of aging infrastructure. Electricity tariffs 
are very low in Tajikistan and tariff increases, while necessary, need to be implemented in a way that is sensitive to the se vere 
affordability constraints faced by the population, and thus may not a llow for a much needed rehabilitation. GCF grant resources are 
therefore essential making the Project affordable to Barki Tojik  and the Republic of Tajikistan, especially in light of the IMF 
recommendations with regards to debt sustainability observed by t he Government.  
The proposed financial structure for the project provides the least concessionality needed to make the proposal viable. The level of 
concessionality in this project needs to be very carefully balanced in order to allow the project to be affo rdable to the Government of 
Tajikistan and Barki Tojik  (and the Tajik population through their electricity bills) taking into consideration income/poverty levels, and 
to allow it to introduce innovative climate resilience features that incur additional costs, while providing appropriate ince ntives for 
Barki T ojik to continue gradually increasing tariffs (as explained in section D2) in order to ensure the long -term financial sustainability 
of the investment and indeed the entire energy sector.  
Financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention  
In the scope of EBRD’s involvement in the Tajik energy sector, the Bank is also involved in policy dialogue with the Tajik go vernment 
supporting energy tariff reform. Tariff reform is envisioned to contribute significantly to the financial sustainability o f the Tajik energy 
sector . Upgrades and improvements of existing hydropower capacities increase its ability to generate revenues by improving its 
reliability and increasing its generation capacities. In combination with tariff reform, this will help to mak e Barki Tojik  financially more 
sustainable and allow for better maintenance and further investments. The inclusion of long -term planning and climate change 
considerations shall ensure the resilience and efficiency in the long run. Furthermore, the capacity  building components will 
strengthen Barki Tojik’s operations and efficiency.   
Application of IMF guidance on sovereign debt sustainability  
The IMF is not involved in review or approval of individual projects. Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, th e IMF has a 
mandate to exercise surveillance over the economic, financial and exchange rate policies of its members in order to ens ure the 
effective operation of international monetary system. The IMF’s appraisal of such policies involves a comprehensive analysis of the 
general economic situation and policy strategy of each member country. The IMF holds bilateral discussions with memb ers, usually 
every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the co untry's 
economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, IMF staff prepares a report, which forms the ba sis for discussion by 
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the vie ws of 
Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities. According to the rec ent IMF briefing, IMF and 
Tajikistan are working to come to closure on an IMF -supported program in Tajikistan, as soon as the policy framework can be defined 
that would help to address the challenges that Tajikistan faces.  
 
The Government observes IMF rec ommendations including the ones on the debt sustainability. The indicative 40 per cent threshold 
has been introduced with regards to the external public debt to GDP ratio (35.9 per cent actual in July 2016). Financing has been  
targeted on highly concession al terms with a minimum 35 per cent “grant element” as per IMF recommendations (where the “grant 
element” accounts for pure grant funding as well as the level of lending concessionality).  
 
The proposed  financial structure of the project address es both the criteria of the concessionality of financing and of the impact on


---
*Page 43*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
the external public debt to GDP as described in the paragraph above. The proposed financial structure is in line with the deb t 
sustainability requirements adhered to by the Republi c of Tajikistan as (i) it provides for the “grant element” as per the IMF 
calculator above the minimum required 35 per cent and (ii) in view of the GCF finance, it offers the least possible impact on the level 
of the already high external public debt to GD P.   
Debt sustainability constraints faced by Barki Tojik  
Qairokkum HPP is not a separate legal entity, but one of the power plants owned and operated by Barki Tojik. Barki Tojik is a  
vertically integrated power utility, responsible for generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. Qairokkum HPP does not 
have a separate tariff; the final end -user tariff, on top of the generation related costs, needs to also account for transmission and 
distribution as well as dispatch cost.  
Under the current challenging macro -economic conditions  (and affordability con siderations that constrain tariff increases) , Barki 
Tojik is facing financial and commercial difficulties with domestic tariffs not sufficient to cover full operating cost s and set -aside 
financing cost s, and is highly leveraged. Barki Tojik  also faces significant investment needs related to required rehabilitation across 
the network of the aging infrastructure, and heavily relies on the Government support.  
This P roject will entail the implementation of a capacity increase from 126 MW to 174  MW which will result in an additional revenue 
stream and contribute positively to the operations of both Qairokkum HPP and Barki Tojik. However, this capacity increase alo ne 
would not allow Barki Tojik  to reach break - even , advocating the need for a highl y concessional financing.  Other policy actions 
implemented and under consideration shall result in better operational and financing standing of Barki Tojik  and the entire sector  in 
longer term as explained in section C5 . 
Barki Tojik ’s debt is mostly foreig n currency denominated (while revenue is mostly TJS denominated), exposing Barki Tojik  to the 
foreign exchange risk. The debt burden and the foreign exchange risk passed on to Barki Tojik call for a significant  share of the grant 
and concessional loan financing in hydro power rehabilitation projects to make such investments affordable to Barki Tojik  and the 
Government, as the current repayment capacity of Barki Tojik is heavily relied on the Government support.  The proposed finan cing 
structure addresses  significant debt sustainability constraints faced by Barki Tojik via the sovereign loan and the level of 
concessionality offered.   
Affordability constraints  
The latest electricity tariff for population in Tajikistan was set at c. TJS 0.1465 per kWh from November 2016.  Even the latest 
increased tariff (TJS 0.1465 per kWh vs TJS 0.1262 per kWh) would not allow full operating cost recovery , set aside financi ng of 
required rehabilitation . 
An average income household throughout the year is expected to allocate between 7.9% and 9% of its disposable income on 
electricity services throughout the period considered (2016 -2019 ). For the households belonging to the lowest income decile, on 
average their share of income spent on electricity is expected to be cl ose to the 10% affordability threshold through the period 
considered and slightly above in 2016 at 10.5 %. If there is no grant co -financing and the full rehabilitation costs for the hydro power 
plants are passed on to the consumers, there would be further increases in tariffs which could cause affordability concerns for 
poorest households.  Summing up, the analysis indicates that the affordability ratio for the lowest income households is close to the 
threshold.  If the capital costs of the project are fully  passed on to the consumers, the affordability concerns for the lowest income 
households are likely to increase. Therefore, though the importance of the project is highly recognised by all stakeholders involved, 
the project could have been rejected.   
The tariff for water supply pumps and pumping stations  is currently heavily subsidised with the current tariff for water companies at 
TJS 0.03 per kWh during the summer season. According to the World Bank analysis14, if Tajik electricity prices were increased to 
                                                             
14 Tajikistan’s Winter Energy Crisis:Electricity Supply and Demand Alternatives November, 2012


---
*Page 44*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
cover the cost of new supply, however gradually, they would impose huge strains on the budgets of Tajik households and other 
electricity users, who would in turn react by decreasing their use of electricity a t considerable economic and social costs.  
The proposed financial structure for the project has been developed to  account for affordability constraints outlined  and offers an 
appropriate level of concessionality while providing appropriate incentives to co ntinue gradually increasing tariffs in order to ensure 
the long -term financial sustainability of the investment and indeed the entire energy sector . The work on the new tariff policy is on -
going, with the first priority being the need to address operating cost recovery.  The savings of the added concessionality will thus 
diminish the burden of the required tariff increase and will thus be effectively passed on to the users.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
The Project will bring best international practices as well as well -adjusted technologies to the Tajik energy sector. Building on the 
experience of a leading international hydropower operator, Barki Tojik will benefit from skills and knowledge transfer regard ing the 
management and operations of hy dropower plants in the light of predicted changing climatic conditions. This includes site -specific 
and gender -sensitive assessments of climate risks, corresponding dam safety measures, improved utilisation of climate and 
hydrological data and special staf f trainings. The physical upgrade of the hydropower plant was developed through an extensive 
programme of research, data gathering and in -depth analysis, building on climate projections and selecting the best suitable and 
economically feasible technologica l option.


---
*Page 45*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  E 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
 Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
The GCF’s contribution will leverage an additional US$ 81,000,000  (160%) for P hase II of the project . The GCF’s funding 
enables with this the completion of the two -phased project, leveraging in total US$ 15 8,000,000 (or 300% of its own 
resources). The project is funded entirely with public resources.


---
*Page 46*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F  
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Economic and Financial Analysis of the Project  
Considering the socioeconomic benefits of the Project, the economic analysis of the rehabilitation project gave positive resu lts 
for all scenarios and technical options, expressed in an Economic Net Present Values of USD 112.8 million for selected optio n 
and an Economic Internal Rate  of Return (EIRR) of 21.71%. The financial analysis resulted in a Financial Internal Rate of Return 
(FIRR) of 6.88% and a  Net Present Value of USD  11.6 million for the selected design.  
Despite the clear financial and economic benefits of the project, a ffordability constraints  hinder the realisation of the project, 
while the d ebt sustainability constraints reduce  the ability of the Government to support Barki Tojik in carrying out this 
important project. Furthermore, Barki Tojik  is at present faced with huge investment needs across the network of aging 
infrastructure. Electricity tariffs are very low in Tajikistan and tariff increases, while necessary, need to be implemented in a way 
that is sensitive to the severe affordability constraints faced by the population, and thus may not allow for a much needed 
rehabilitation.  The GCF’s concessional loan will ensure improved debt sustainability and the affordability of essential investment 
in revenue generating components. Grant resourc es are also essential for the implementation of non -revenue generating 
components with significant public good externalities, such as ensuring dam safety in the face long -term climate change 
impacts . 
The financial analysis is based on the following assumptions:  
Revenues:  The average volume of production output to be achieved after the implementation has been estimated based on the 
technological parameters selected for the project. Simulations have been developed considering hydrological scenarios for  the 
next decades (see benefits described in part 1). Out of the number of simulated production values for each individual year of  
the projection period an average value of production output was calculated for both the project case and the Baseline Scenari o. 
The average annual production volume to be achieved after full implementation of the investment measures is calculated at the  
average value of 856 GWh. The cash flows resulting from this average production level must be considered average values as 
well. Actual values will fluctuate according to hydrological levels, examples of which are provided in the hydrological scenarios . 
For the projections of the refurbishment project, the production volume is linearly increased from the estimated present leve l 
of output to be still achieved by the plant in its present form at 700 GWh, up until the 6th new turbine is installed. In the 
Baseline Scenario the estimated present day value of 700 GWh is assumed to gradually reduce to zero in the sequence of 
turbines take n out of service. The electricity production is sold at a multitude of tariffs to the various categories of consumers. 
The presently applicable power tariffs are officially decreed in a tariff structure (according to „Price List No. 09 -01-2012”). In 
order to arrive at a realistic projecti on of prices for the output of Q airokkum, the average of the total revenues billed by Barki 
Tojik in the Sughd Region for the electricity supplied in the area in 2012 were assessed. The result of this analysis is a va lue of  
9.65 Dirham/kWh. After application of inflation the starting value in 2015 for the analysis results as 11.76 Dirhams/kWh In t he 
projections this value is subsequently increased at the projected CPI.  
Cost:  Based on the data received for the various cost ca tegories and production figures in the respective years, variable cost 
have been determined after consideration of inflation for basic materials and spare parts 0.85 TJS/kWh (including metal parts , 
oils and other supplies), operating maintenance of fixed a ssets and equipment 2.48 TJS/kWh. These rates for variable cost have 
been increased at the projected inflation rates and multiplied with the annual electricity production. For outsourced service s an 
initial value of 1.87 Mio. TJS has been estimated, which is also subsequently increased at the projected CPI. The own energy 
consumption of the power plant is estimated at 1% and has been valued at the specific production cost of the plant. In recent  
years the total staff has been kept at almost 120 employees. F or the future  operation this number is estimated to be 112. The 
average salary per employee is  topped up by a number of additional items including : Bonus for success indicators (50 % 
monthly salary) , payment for work on holidays and weekends , vacation paym ents , payment for overtime hours , working in 
more than one position , increased working scope, increased servicing area , for harmful working conditions , work during night


---
*Page 47*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F 
shift , for none fixed working hours of drivers , for high professional skills , for skil l level  and p ersonal allowances . This amount is 
increased at the projected rates of domestic wage growth.  In addition to the salaries and allowances, social charges are paid at 
a rate of 25% of  direct payments.  Administrative costs are estimated at an init ial value of 4.4 Mio. TJS and includes royalties, 
drinking water, travel and transport expenses, communication costs, bank and insurance services, taxes (on transport, propert y 
and land),other public charges (State Committee for standardization and Metrolo gy, State Technical Supervision), fire 
protection and guard services, health and environmental measures. For the calculation of the long term Levelized Unit Costs 
(LUC) the direct costs (materials, staff and energy), sales, general and administration costs , interest expenses as well as 
investment costs have been considered arriving at LUC 1.34 EUR -cent/kWh.  
All given assumptions and estimates have been applied in the elaboration of projected financial statements for the HPP in 
Qairokkum considering the refurbishment project. The projections have been carried for a period of 20 years, i.e. a project 
horizon up to the year 2034 has been used for the calculation of investment indicators. However, for the purpose of a 
presentable format the following Tables only show the period up to 2030, thus including the period of the EBRD loan. The 
following assumptions have also been applied in the projections of the financial statements: Corporate tax rate 15.0%, curren t 
assets on sales 35.0%, current liabilities on sa les 45.0%.  
For the economic analysis, the following factors were additionally included:  
Starting from the cash flow analysis of the financial evaluation, the socio economic analysis is to appraise the project’s 
contribution to the economic welfare of the c ountry. It thus takes the perspective of the society as a whole rather than only for 
the owner of the project. The performance of the investment as measured through financial project IRR is extended through 
the definition of a number  of correction factors,  which are to cover the project’s impact on the national economy.  
The corrective measures undertaken to record adaptations to the quantitative framework of the analysis are organized in two 
phases. In a first phase financial cash flows are corrected for fi scal transfer payments, which are to be applied differently from a 
national perspective. A further adaptation towards a socio -economic perspective is implemented in a second phase dealing 
with externalities (external costs and benefits) resulting from the project. This approach follows standard practices for 
economic project evaluation in the format of Cost Benefit Analyses.  
Fiscal corrections: This measure aims at adapting inflows and outflows (prices and costs) for tax effects, as these represent 
transfer  payments and hence would represent a distortion of the effect to the national economy. The time series of FCFs used 
for the calculation of the incremental (Financial)IRR are thus corrected for corporate tax.  
Externalities: Benefits from personnel employe d for the implementation : This measure is to compensate for outflows which do 
not occur in a socio -economic sense, i.e. which are actually to the benefit of some part of the national society. Such an external 
benefit is found with the project in question i n employment during construction, which represents value flows which are 
earned by households in the country and thus remain with the society. These amounts are hence considered in the socio -
economic evaluation as external benefits.  
Willingness To Pay (WTP ): As electricity tariffs are kept low in Tajikistan, while load shedding is common feature suppressing 
demand especially during winter, an approach was chosen to compare the above regulated tariff to a market value, which 
people are willing to pay for ele ctricity. The Willingness to pay (WTP) in this context is defined as the maximum amount 
consumers are willing to pay for electricity. An indicative analysis in this regard has been carried out for a study of the W orld 
Bank. The study provides an estimate o f the value of unserved demand as well as various electricity supply expansion programs 
in Tajikistan. The development of electricity tariffs is one of the key economic variables having an impact on the evaluation  of 
project variants. The World Bank study arrives at a weighted average value of Tajik WTP of 7 cents/kWh, which is proposed to 
be gradually reached by 2025 from the present less than 3 cents/kWh. WTP levels surpassing the assumed tariffs have been 
added as additional benefits to be gained by the project scenarios. Benefits resulting from Willingness To Pay considerations


---
*Page 48*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F 
have been applied accordingly in the detailed analysis of the selected project option.  
Additionally b enefits in terms of CO2 emission reduction  have been assessed : Descriptions and an assessment of CO2 emission 
reductions are provided in the full study and have been applied in the economic analysis.  
Both fiscal corrections and externalities corrections are entered into a comprehensive analysis of the aspects descri bed, so as to 
arrive at indicators measuring the long term effect of the project in a socio -economic perspective, the Economic Internal Rate of 
Return (EIRR) and the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV).  
For the detailed economic and financial analysis see ch apters 15 in Annex II.   
Barki Tojik  
Qairokkum HPP is not a separate legal entity, but one of the power plants owned and operated by Barki Tojik. Barki Tojik is a  
vertically integrated power utility, responsible for generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. Qairokkum HPP does 
not have a separate tariff; the final end -user tariff, on top of the generation related costs, needs to also account for 
transmission and distribution as well as dispatch cost.  
Under the current challenging macro -economic conditions, Barki Tojik is facing financial and commercial difficulties. Despite the 
latest tariff increases, domestic tariffs do not suffice to cover full operating cost. Barki Tojik  also faces significant inve stment 
needs related to required rehabilitation across the network of the aging infrastructure, and heavily relies on the Government  
support.  
The Qairokkum HPP rehabilitation project envisions implementation of a capacity increase from 126 MW to 174 MW wh ich 
would result in an additional revenue stream and contribute positively to the operations of both Qairokkum HPP and Barki 
Tojik. However, this capacity increase alone would not allow Barki Tojik  to reach break -even without other policy actions, 
advocati ng the need for a highly concessional financing. Other policy actions implemented and under consideration shall result 
in better operational and financing standing of Barki Tojik in longer term as explained in section C5 . 
Barki Tojik ’s debt is mostly forei gn currency denominated (while revenue is mostly TJS denominated), exposing Barki Tojik  to 
the foreign exchange risk. Tajik Somoni depreciated by c. 60% in recent years (calculated as TJS/USD 7.86 current exchange ra te 
vs. 4.9 TJS/USD 2014 average). The de bt burden and the foreign exchange risk passed on to Barki Tojik call for a high share of 
the grant financing in the hydro power rehabilitation projects to make these projects the most affordable to the Government.  
The proposed financing structure address es significant debt sustainability constraints via the sovereign loan and the level of 
concessionality offered.   
Affordability analysis of residential electricity tariffs  
The below analysis  presents projections on the affordability of electricity services in Tajikistan according to an affordability 
model developed by the Bank.   
The key variables and assumptions are summarised below:  
• The household income figures are based on “Tajikistan Fo od Security and Poverty Survey”, No 3, 2015 and “Social and 
Economic Conditions of Tajikistan during January -December 2015”.  The source of the data is the Agency on Statistics under 
President of the Republic of Tajikistan.  The household income projection s are derived from the consumer prices and real 
GDP growth rates as provided in the EBRD’s forecast of macroeconomic indicators.  
• The latest electricity tariff for population in Tajikistan was set at c. TJS 0.1465 per kWh from November 2016.  Even the 
latest increased tariff (TJS 0.1465 per kWh vs TJS 0.1262 per kWh) does not allow full operating cost recovery (set aside 
financing of required rehabilitation).  The tariffs are assumed to grow further, at least by inflation, in 2017 -2018, which,


---
*Page 49*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F 
accompanied by higher margin existing export sales, should allow Barki Tojik  to reach operating cost recovery level in 2018.  
• Household average electricity consumption is estimated at 625kWh per household per month and 500kWh per household 
for the lower income house holds.  
• An affordability limit of 10% of household expenditure on electricity services is considered.  
Results:  affordability of electricity annual average (in TJS), in per cent of household income  
 2016  2017  2018  2019  
average household  9.0%  8.4%  8.1%  7.9%  
1st decile (lowest)  10.5%  9.8%  9.5%  9.2%  
 
According to the model, an average income household on average throughout the year is expected to allocate between 7.9% 
and 9% of its disposable income on electricity services throughout the period considered.  
For the households belonging to the lowest in come decile, on average their share of income spent on electricity is expected to 
be close to the 10% affordability threshold through the period considered and slightly above in 2016 at 10.5 per cent.  
If there is no grant co -financing and the full rehabil itation costs for the hydro power plants are passed on to the consumers, 
there would be further increases in tariffs which could cause affordability concerns for poorest households.  
Summing up, the analysis indicates that electricity services remain affordable for an average household in Tajikistan based o n 
the tariff structure projected.  However, the affordability ratio for the lowest income households is close to the threshold.   If 
the capital costs of the project are fully passed on to the consumers, the affordability concerns for the lowest income 
households are likely to increase.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
The structure and output s of this proposed Project have been carefully developed based on detailed technical studies and 
extensive consultations with stakeholders in Tajikistan. The technical assistance and policy dialogue activities set out in Output  
1 and Output  2 were designed  based on the findings of a major stakeholder workshop on climate resilience in the energy sector 
that was organised by EBRD and Barki Tojik in March 2012.  
Output  3 was developed based on comprehensive analysis of nine detailed climate scenarios that were used to identify the 
most suitable and appropriate solution regarding the type and number of turbines for the rehabilitation of the hydropower 
plant. Three differ ent technical scenarios have been developed and studied during the pre -feasibility stage. One is the 
replacement of all six turbines with new ones of the same type but an increased total rated capacity of 170 MW. The second 
scenario additionally considers the construction of a second power house with a seventh horizontal Kaplan turbine. The third 
scenario would only replace four or five out of six turbines and run the remaining ones as long as they last without replacin g 
them once they are finished. The num erical simulations of all hydrologic scenarios in combination with all three technical 
scenarios where run over a period of 60 years, starting in 2015. The reservoir operation has remained unchanged which means 
that the reservoir is kept at its full level until the end of May followed by an irrigation regime until the middle of September 
before refilling the reservoir until the end of the year. The mean annual energy generation over the entire simulation period  is 
between 450 and 1100 GWh per year, dependin g on the combination of climatic -hydrological and technical scenario. Based on 
those results, including a comparative financial analysis and following the discussions with the client it was decided to fur ther 
pursue the option of 6 new vertical Kaplan turb ines to be custom fit into the existing power house. This requires only minor


---
*Page 50*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F 
adaptations of the structure.  
The technical evaluation included an in -depth assessment of hydrology and climate change impacts:  
The hydrological and climate change part of this study focused on four key aspects: The simulation of future inflows, the 
estimation of a Probable Maximum Flood (PMF), an assessment of reservoir sedimentation, and finally a review of the 
assumptions regarding climate change factors by a climate change sp ecialist. For the projection of future water availability for 
power generation the Consultant could build on the work done under PPCR project A4 “Improving the Climate Resilience of 
Tajikistan’s Hydropower Sector” (Wilby et al., 2012). The simulations were  based on 9 combinations of 3 climate scenarios and 
3 different hydrological models. One of the models (WBM) produces outlier results for the “hot -dry” and “warm -wet” climate 
scenarios, which are rather extreme in their assumptions regarding temperature an d precipitation changes. These outlier series 
were included in the power generation simulations but are considered to be very unlikely, and should be given little weight i n 
decision making regarding technical choices and economic viability. All other scena rio simulations produce results within a 
narrow range of ±3%. The predicted average flows for 2015 -2074 would be close to the average inflow of the period 1992 and 
2010, with aslight increasing trend (simulated flows for 2045 -2074 are 6.5% higher, on avera ge, than for the period 2015 -2044). 
The flood simulations indicate that the currently existing discharge capacity and spillway structures are not adequate to saf ely 
cope with a Probable Maximum Flood (PMF). Several PMF scenarios were studied with different  assumptions regarding the  
relative contribution of catchment areas upstream and downstream of Toktogul reservoir. Estimated peak flows were 
combined with the hydrograph shape of a historical flood (1966) and a hydraulic model was developed to transfer th e upstream 
flood hydrographs to Q airokkum, including the simulation of the effect of Qairokkum reservoir itself. The resulting flood waves 
had a duration of more than 6 weeks and a peak inflow into Q airokkum reservoir between 6400 and 8800 m³/s, resulting in 
maximum water levels between 349.5 and 351.3 m (with all spillway gates opened), clearly beyond the maximum flood level of 
348.35 m. The attenuating effect of the upstream reservoirs, Toktogul ad Andizhan, is smaller than expected, mainly because 
the cr itical PMF is caused by an extreme snowmelt event with a duration  of several weeks. Assum ing that Q airokkum and the 
upstream reservoirs are at full supply level at the beginning of the  flood, the available retention volume is quite limited and 
quickly fills up if the considered flood has a large volume. Flood volume is therefore a very critical assumption, and furthe r 
studies (requiring additional data from Kyrgyzstan) would be desirable  to enhance the reliability of the assumptions made. 
However, in any case it is strongly recommended to further investigate the need for additional spillway capacities based on a n 
analysis including not only Toktogul but also the Naryn Cascade and its spil ling capacities. This is justified not only by the above 
simulation results, but also by the vulnerability of the current system of gated spillways to operational problems as well as  by 
the additional uncertainty introduced by climate change. The impact of  climate change on extreme floods is difficult to quantify 
but according to the results of a recent ADB Project extreme floods are expected to increase. Sedimentation is not a signific ant 
problem for the future operation of Qairokkum reservoir. From constr uction to the most recent bathymetric survey (in 2009) 
Qairokkum reservoir has lost about 25% of its original volume due to sedimentation, but most of this loss occurred prior to t he 
construction of Toktogul reservoir. Today, due to the trapping effect of the upstream reservoirs, the annual sedimentation rate 
is about 10 million m³/year, i.e. about 0.3% per year of the remaining storage volume. The climate change part of the study 
confirmed that the scenarios used for the hydrological simulations are genera lly in agreement with other climate modelling 
scenarios, even though the “hot -dry” and “warm -wet” scenarios are rather extreme as they capture the outer “envelope” of 
predicted temperature and precipitation changes. A review of 50 precipitation and 20 temp erature time series indicates that 
during the past 50 years precipitation shows no clear trend whereas a significant warming by about 2°C has already been 
observed. Finally the relative role of glacier melting was studied. Runoff from glaciated areas is ra ther limited in the Syr Darya 
catchment and accounts for only about 6% of the total runoff. Drastic changes in annual water availability as a result of gla cier 
melting are therefore unlikely.  
The technical evaluation of the project entailed the following components:  
Qairokkum Embankment Dam : The embankment dam at Q airokkum is a sand fill dam without an impervious core or surface


---
*Page 51*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F 
layer. Such types of dams are highly sensitive against over topping, internal erosion through piping and surface erosion. 
Additio nally there is a risk for liquefaction under seismic loading. Any of these events could lead to a fast destruction of the dam  
through breaching in case of overtopping and internal erosion in the dam body or the foundation.  
Qairokkum Weir:  It can be summarized that the safety factor against sliding of one powerhouse block under normal loads and 
flood conditions is above the internationally required minimum safety factor for angles of internal frictions in the foundati on of 
at least 35 °. Acc ording to Melentev (1988) the angle of friction in the foundation should be at least 36 °. For the PGA 
earthquake load (calculation done with pseudo -static method) an angle of internal friction in the foundation of at least 42 ° is 
necessary for a safety f actor higher than 1. Further investigation for the final assessment of the foundation condition and 
possible internal angles of friction under earthquake load should be done in the next phase of the assessment.  
Concrete structure and foundation: In the in ception report the state of the power house was documented with extensive repair 
needs at the concrete surfaces and some specific components such as crane rail girders or gate niches, but no visible problem s 
regarding the structural integrity of the buildi ng. Basically the entire portion above the reservoir water level needs a detailed 
inspection and repair plan. The repairs of the damaged surfaces where the armour steel is lying openly will have to be done i n 
conjunction with the adaptation and partial aut omation of the spillway gates, turbine intake stop logs, trash racks, the new 
cleaning machine etc. There will also be changes to the transformers now installed at the top of the power house which will b e 
replaced and equipped with better safety equipment such as oil containments and fire protection systems. In addition to the 
surface renewal and repair needs there is a need for additional monitoring and safety instrumentation, such as pressure gauge s 
and flow meters, to be integrated into the new monitorin g and surveillance system of the scheme. Many of the piezometers 
which had been installed as open pipes in the original structure are dysfunctional by now. It will either be necessary to res tore 
the functionality of these systems and install automatic mete ring devices connected to the plant’s monitoring system, or to 
replace them with new technologies, such as automatic pressure meters and flow meters. The overall stability of the structure  
will be evaluated in more detail in the feasibility report when mor e data from the existing and still functioning monitoring 
devices (piezometers and manual flow measurements) have been analysed. There should also be an earthquake monitoring and 
warning system in the building that takes the necessary steps should a seriou s seismic event occur. Apart from that the civil 
structures appear to be in a reasonably good condition. No damages due to seismic events in the past or any other signs of 
structural damages could be detected.  It was found from the data collected during th e second visit following the presentation 
of the Pre FS that some of the piezometer readings underneath the concrete section of the dam are strongly fluctuating and 
reach very high values. This is raising concerns about the overall stability of the structu re. It is therefore necessary to install 
additional monitoring equipment to evaluate the overall stability and possibly the need for stabilizing measures by reducing the 
uplift pressure. Reasons could be that the pressure relief drains have become dysfunct ional and/or the sheet pile underneath 
the concrete structure has lost its functionality as impervious layer. A second thorough inspection of the entire structure h as 
resulted in the conclusion that no earthquake damage of any structural significance could  be detected or identified. The 
inspection tunnels below the turbine intakes were also accessed and inspected for the first time. They were found in excellen t 
condition with no visible seepage flow into and through the concrete structure. It is intended to  keep these tunnels 
permanently drained and accessible in the future.  
Hydro -mechanical equipment:  Several scenarios for the rehabilitation of the power plant have been studied during the pre -
feasibility phase, including uncertainty regarding climate change  effects and including financial feasibility. As a result and 
following the discussions during the prefeasibility study workshop held on 21 May 2013 in Dushanbe it was decided to 
implement the scenario based on the replacement of all 6 generating units by new ones with the same runner diameter. No 
additional turbines will be installed. The goal of the project is to improve the hydro power plants reliability, durability a nd to 
increase the electricity generation by using the existing civil structure. The tur bine output shall be increased to the maximum , 
which is possible without cavitation and with minor adaptations only for the concrete weir and power house. All gates will be  
rehabilitated and the turbine intake gates will be equipped with automatic drives. To enhance safety under flood conditions it is 
additionally recommended to install automatic drives at two out of the six spillway gates. New t rash racks and a new trash rack


---
*Page 52*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F 
cleaning machine are recommended.  
 Description of the new turbines: The existing Kaplan turbines will be replaced by new ones. The runner design will be state of 
the art, vertical axis and tailored to the existing powerhouse and to the actual key parameters. The runner diameter and the 
getting of the turbines shall remain unchanged, in  order to avoid extensive civil work. The centreline of the runner remain s 
unchanged at elevation 324.20 m .a.s.l..  The six (6) new Kaplan turbines to be implemented will have an operating range as 
follows: Head [m] 14.60 19.00 21.50; Discharge [m³/s] 140 1 77 150; Operating speed [rpm] 125 125 125; Turbine output [MW] 
18 30 29; Runaway speed off -cam 375 rpm; A discharge larger than 177 m³/s per single unit is not recommended, as such could 
cause cavitation pitting and destroy the runner blades. With efficien cies around 97% for the generators, 99% at the 
transformers and considering 1% internal consumption, a plant capacity of at least 170 MW is to be expected.  
Electro -technical equipment:  The installation of new turbines with increased rated power makes it mandatory to install new 
generators as well. Apart from that most of the electro -technical equipment has reached the end of its lifetime and is outdated. 
Based on the findings of the consultant on site, the age of the equipment, the requirement for a safe and stable operation as 
well as the possibility to increase the generation, we considered the replacement of all components by new and modern 
equipment. Great importance should be given to a reliable operation of the HPP since the grid in Tajikistan is pra ctically isolated 
from the neighbouring countries. The new layout is based on a 110/10.5 kV three phase unit transformer for each generator 
which will be connected to two new step -up transformers with a capacity of 125 MVA each. A new automatic control sys tem 
will have to be installed and the monitoring and surveillance system, including an alarm system for the embankment dam, will 
be integrated.   
(For the full detailed technical evaluation see chapter 4 -9 in Annex II.)  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
The physical component of the Project focuses on the extension of the rehabilitation of existing hydropower facilities, and n ot 
the construction of new ones. This means that environmental and social risks are re adily identifiable and assessable, and for 
that reason it has been categorised by EBRD’s Environment & Sustainability Department as a Category B project under EBRD’s 
Environmental & Social Policy. The development of this Project therefore includes a full e nvironmental, social and gender 
analysis, in line with the EBRD’s Environmental and Social Policy, and the EBRD’s  Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equal ity 
(2016 -2020)The EBRD recognises equality of economic opportunity, as a fundamental aspect of a m odern, sustainable and well -
functioning market economy. The Project is also aligned with GCF’s Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan, which aim to ensure 
programmes funded by the Fund benefit men and women equally.  
In line with the EBRD’s Strategy for the P romotion of Gender Equality (2016 -2020), this project will aim to enhance women’s 
access to electricity through identifying gender gaps, as well as gender differentiated needs, preferences and priorities, in  
access to electricity especially in rural areas,  to ensure both men and women can equally benefit from the services provided by 
Barki Tojik, as well as to contribute to achieving long -term sustainability goals, including poverty reduction .  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
All procurement will be carried out in line with EBRD’s public procurement policies and rules and will use the EBRD's standard 
tender documents. All contracts are subject to the prior review by the EBRD. A draft procurement plan specifying the contract  
type and procurement method for each  contract  will  be prepared  by  the  EBRD procurement  specialist  and  amended  by 
Barki Tojik prior to commencement of procurement. Any amendments will be subject to the EBRD prior review and approval.  
The following project components/scope of work have been envisaged for the rehabilitation of Qairokkum hydro power plant, 
Phase II: (i) Environmental Mitigation; (ii) Preliminary Works; (iii) Power House and Concrete Dam; (iv) Embankment Dam 
Rehabilitation ; (v) Building Systems and Technologies; (vi) Hydraulic Steel Structures; (vii) Hydromechnical Equipment; (viii)


---
*Page 53*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  F 
Basic Engineering and Design Services; (ix) Procurement, and Implementation Supervision. The procurement plan foresees two 
Contracts to be proc ured under the Project: (i) Power House and Concrete Dam Rehabilitation and (ii) Supply and Installation of 
Hydraulic Steel Components, Turbines and Electromechanical Equipment. These Contracts will be procured as open tenders in 
accordance with EBRD’s Pro curement Policies and Rules under which all interested suppliers or contractors are given an equal 
opportunity to submit a tender. The Bank’s standard tender documents shall be used. The Consulting Services under the Project  
include (i) support to the PIU , (ii) Design Services Consultant to produce Basic Engineering Design for the Plant, and (iii) 
Consultant for Capacity building to manage Climate Change Risks.  
The project is being implemented by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). A PIU consultant has b een engaged for provision of  
organizational and technical assistance to Barki Tojik to ensure the successful completion of the project in accordance with the 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP) and with all Bank’s requirements stipulated in the Loan Agreeme nt. EBRD’s procurement 
procedures as per EBRD’s Procurement Policies and Rules (PP&R) 
(http://www.ebrd.com/documents/procurement/procurement -policies -and-rules-2014.pdf ) as referred to in the Loan 
Agreement between EBRD and BT will be followed and EBRD will closely monitor the procurement process. The requested 
drawdowns must be for eligible expenditures as detailed in the Loan Agreement. Progress reports revie w and monitoring visits 
will be carried out. Further details may be found in the Disbursement Handbook for Public Sector Loans 
(http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/research/guides/disburs e.pdf  ). 
EBRD will monitor the environmental and social performance of the Project throughout the investment cycle. This will involve a 
combination of client reporting, regular site visits by EBRD’s staff and independent audits. As part of the monitoring, EBRD 
requires clients to provide a report, at least annually, on their environmental and social performance and the implementation  
of applicable Environmental and Social Action Plans (ESAPs).


---
*Page 54*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 52 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  G  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Climate variability risk – Risk that the occurrence of extreme 
weather events and worst -case precipitation scenarios 
threaten the success and limit the positive impact of the 
Project.   Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value ) Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The planning and design of the Project takes into account a wide range of climate scenarios mitigating the risk of 
underestimating the impact of climate change. It further improves the Tajik hydrological and meteorological monitoring 
capabilities, enabling  better management of extreme weather events. Enhancing the coordination among cascading 
hydropower plants along the Syr Darya (including across borders) boosts the system’s capacity to manage extreme events.    
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Implementation risk - Risks include cost overruns, delays in 
procurement and failure to achie ve expected technical 
outcomes.  Financial  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
EBRD  has  experience  in  other  early  transition countries  similar  to  Tajikistan  and  has  put  in place close   supervision  of 
implementation by international consulting firms. The PIU is responsible for managing  the physical investment under  
EBRD’s procurement rules. This PIU will be assisted by the international consultant, which is included in the overall budget.  
  
                                                             
15 http://www.ebrd.com/news/publications/policies/environmental -and-social -policy -esp.html  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
The Project is exposed to several risks that can have a considerable impact on its success. The identified two main risks are  
climate variability and project implementation. Both aspects are directly recognized and targeted by technical assistance 
support . Extensive climate modelling and the integration of best international practices will mitigate the climate risk. The 
EBRD’s experience in the country further mitigates risks related to the implementation. The occurrence of environmental 
and social risks is  covered and mitigated by the application of EBRD’s rigorous environmental and social standards as set out 
in its 2014 Environmental and Social Policy15.


---
*Page 55*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 53 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  G 
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Environmental and social risk - This  Project  has  been 
categorised  by  EBRD’s Environment   &   Sustainability 
Department as Category B as defined by EBRD’s 
Environmental &  Social  Policy, which means that the Project 
entails some environmental and social risks, but that these  
are  readily  assessed  and  managed.  As the Project is limited 
to the rehabilitation of existing hydropower facilities (not the 
construction of new ones) environmental and social impacts 
will be limited and location -specific . Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The  Project  includes a  full  environmental and social   analysis, in line with EBRD’s Environmental and Social Policy, whi ch  
will  be carried out  before loan signing and before the detailed  project  design  is  finalised.  This entails the development 
of a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, which will set out how communities and other stakeholders within the Projects’ zone of 
influence   will be consulted and involv ed in project development.  This  will  include a gender component to  ensure  that 
women are enabled to equally  benefit from  the  Project and that  their specific   needs   and   constraints are   taken   i nto 
consideration along with those of other com munity  views and are then fed in to the analysis. Specific attention will be 
taken to guarantee the finalisation of gender sensitive d isaster (floods) risk reduction, risk preparedness, risk response and 
contingency plans.  
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 56*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  H H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under the 
Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level16 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable development  The adaptation paradigm shift impact is derived from the transformative impact of this project in building the 
climate resilience of a critical but climate -vulnerable sector (hydropower) and in introducing best international 
practices on climate risk manag ement in hydropower operations.  
 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate  change  Number and value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to 
climate variability 
and change, 
considering human 
benefits  EBRD board 
documents  0 units 
rehabilitat
ed  hydro -
mechanical 
and electro -
mechanical 
equipment of 
two units (out 
of six) 
rehabilitated  
 all six units of 
hydro -
mechanical 
and electro -
mechanical 
equipment 
rehabilitated  The reliability and 
quality of the 
electricity supply is 
proportional to the 
value of the physical 
asset made climate 
resilient.  
  
                                                             
16 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available 
at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 57*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term (if 
applicable)   Final  
Project/programme  
Outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems for climate -
responsive planning and 
development  Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation  EBRD 
project 
monitoring 
reports  Energ y 
sector  
policymaking 
and 
investment 
planning  
do currently 
not take into 
account  
climate  
change or 
measures to 
improve  
climate  
resilience  One major 
hydropower 
facility 
modernised 
talking into 
account 
projected 
future 
climate 
conditions  Projected 
future climate 
conditions 
taken into 
account in the 
planning of 
upgrades to at 
least one other 
hydropower 
plant  Macroeconomic 
conditions 
remain 
sufficiently 
stable for 
scaled up 
investment in 
the hydropower 
sector  
A6.0 Increased generation 
and use of climate 
information in decision -
making  Use of climate 
information products/ 
services in decision -
making in climate 
sensitive sectors  Consultant 
reports  Dam 
management 
regimes do 
not take into 
account 
climate 
change 
projections  Up to three 
training 
workshops 
on c limate 
risk 
assessment 
conducted 
with with 
Barki Tojik 
and Tajik 
Hydromet  Protocol on 
using 
climatological 
and hydro -
meteorological  
information in 
hydropower 
operations 
agreed 
between Barki 
Tojik and Tajik 
Hydromet  Assumes good 
receptiveness 
and 
engagement  by 
staff of Barki 
Tojik and Tajik 
Hydromet  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and public -
sector services of 
Fund -supported tools, 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to 
respond to climate 
change and variability  Consultant 
reports  Rural 
communities 
often have 
problem 
accessing 
electric power 
due to bad 
conditions of 
the system, 
instability of 
voltage, and 
high losses 
(reduction of 
reliance on 
coal and 
wood 0 % at Reduction of 
households 
in the Sughd 
region 
relying on 
coal and 
wood by 
20 %  Reduction of 
households in 
the Sughd 
region relying 
on coal and 
wood by 50 %  Assumes that 
electricity 
tariffs remain 
affordable for 
the majority of 
the population


---
*Page 58*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  H start)  
Project outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1. Increased adoption of 
international best practices in 
climate risk management in 
the hydropower sector  Updated operating 
rules and risk planning  Consultant 
reports  None  Launch of 
collaboratio
n with OECD  
hydropower 
operator  Updated 
operational 
procedures in 
place  Assumes good 
receptiveness 
and 
engagement by 
staff of Barki 
Tojik and Tajik 
Hydromet  
2. Institutional capacities and 
structures for effective 
transboundary management 
of hydropower cascades 
developed  Existence of 
institutionalised 
transboundary 
collaboration between 
hydropower operators  Consultant 
reports  Non -existent  Negotiations 
launched  Establishment 
of protocol for 
sharing 
relevant 
climate and 
hydro -
meteorological 
data between 
riparian 
countries  Assumes that 
the political 
situation 
enables 
transboundary 
cooperation to 
take place  
3. Scaling -up of the 
integration of climate 
resilience measures into a 
strategic hydropower plant 
and big demonstration effect 
achieved  Replacement of six 
turbines and 
enforcement of dam 
safety  Site visits  All turbines 
dilapidated 
and in need of 
replacement - 
0 turbines 
replaced  Two 
turbines 
replaced  Six turbines 
replaced and 
safety 
measures in 
place  Macroeconomic 
conditions 
remain 
sufficiently 
stable for 
scaled up 
investment in 
the hydropower 
sector  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1. Technical capacity 
building support for Barki 
Tojik and other 
hydropower 
stakeholders  Twinning of Barki Tojik with leading 
OECD hydropower operator  
Training and skills transfer for 
integrating climate change projections 
into operations and planning  
The activities will contribute to 
(output 1.) the increased adoption of 
international best practices in climate 
risk management within Barki Tojik 
and the wider Tajik hydropower 
sector.  
Promotion of equal opportunities 
policies and practices within Barki 
Tojik’s workforce  Technical assistance and skills 
transfer package for Barki 
Tojik and other hydropower 
stakeholders  
 
 
 
 Targeted expert support  provided 
by consultants and international 
hydropower experts  
Technical training workshops  
Staff exchanges and study tour  
These inputs will facilitate the 
adoption of international best 
practices concerning climate 
change risk management in the 
hydropower sector (outpu t 1). 
2.1 Support for improved 
transboundary 
cooperation in Establishing official communication 
channels  and fostering data and 
information sharing  between national Technical assistance and skills 
transfer package for 
hydropower stakeholders in Targeted expert support  provided 
by consultants and international


---
*Page 59*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  H 
 
 hydropower 
management  hydropower operators and hydromet 
agencies in Tajikistan and 
neighbouring countries as appropriate  
These activities aim to help create and 
strengthen institutional capacities and 
structures for more effective 
transboundary management of 
hydropower cascades (output 2.)  Tajikistan and neighbouring 
countries as appropriate  hydropower experts  
Techni cal training workshops  
Staff exchanges and study tours  
The inputs facilitate the creation 
and strengthening of institutional 
capacities for better 
transboundary coordination in the 
hydropower sector (output 2)  
 
3.1 Physical investment in 
the modernisation of  
Qairokkum HPP to 
improve climate 
resilience, productivity 
and safety  Comprehensive programme of 
upgrades covering dam safety 
measures, turbines and power 
generation equipment.  
These activities are  instrumental in 
scaling -up and demonstrating the 
integration of climate resilience 
measures into strategic hydropower 
plant (output 3.)  Finance and technical 
engineering services to 
implement enhanced dam 
safety measures, turbine 
replacement and generation 
capacity upgrades  Provision of detailed engineering 
services, extensive technical 
support for Barki Tojik’s Project 
Implementation Unit, and a 
comprehensive financing package 
for physical works.  
These inputs contribute to 
demonstrating how clima te 
resilience measures are integrated 
and scaled up in a strategic 
hydropower plant (output 3.)  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
In  addition  to  active  monitoring  staff  in  its  headquarters  in  London,  EBRD  has   regional offices in Dushanbe and  Khujand 
with  local staff  who manage the implementation  and monitoring  of projects on a day -to-day  basis. There is  also a sem i-annual 
formal monitoring review of all projects  that  are  subject  to  internal  review by relevant  staff  at  EBRD  (Credit  Tea m, 
Environment & Sustainability Department, etc.). The monitoring review covers the financial standing of the Client, proj ect 
implementation, environmental, social, , civil society and gender issues, and improvements,  implementation  of  technical  
assistance,  as  well  as  progress  in  corporate development and  policy  dialogue. Moreover, all projects are subject to a fo rmal 
evaluation process upon completion. Furthermore, the logic framework in section H of this document will be used to evaluate t he 
outcome of this Project. In addition, the project monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements will be fully compliant  with 
the GCF monitoring and accountability policy requirement and AMA. This will include the  submission of an annual performance 
report to the GCF , as well as  a mid -term review/evaluation for any needed corrective actions. Both this and the final evaluat ion 
will be carried out by EBRD's independent Evaluation Department. Information on the post -implementation monitorin g system 
can be found in Annex VII .


---
*Page 60*
---

OFFICIAL USE  
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 56 
OFFICIAL USE  I 
* Please note that a funding proposal  will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
 I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No -objection Letter  
Attached  
☒ Feasibility Study  
Attached  
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if applicable )  
                Shared through secure dataroom  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (If applicable)  
Attached  
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation /Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.)   
Attached  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
 (If applicable)  
Attached and published on EBRD website  
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
Attached  
☐ Evaluation Report  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
NOT APPLICABLE – original project has not undergone evaluation yet.  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
Attached  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation  
See Section C.8 and attached  
☒           Monitoring and Evaluation Plan for learning and knowledge creation  
Attached


---
*Page 61*
---

 
GCF /B.16/07 /Add. 03 
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 62*
---

 
GCF /B.16/07 /Add. 03


---
*Page 63*
---

       
GCF/B.16/07 /Add.03  
    
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Tajikistan: Scaling Up Hydropower Sector Climate Resilience  
Accredited entity  EBRD  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) c ategory  Category B  
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)   
Date of disclosure 
on the accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -09-08 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  Russian and English  
Link to disclosure  http://www.ebrd.com/cs/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395252412582&d=&pagenam
e=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument   [Engli sh]  
http://www.ebrd.com/cs/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395252412618&d=&pagenam
e=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument  [Russian]  
The ESAAP  below contains a n impact assessment (ESIA) consistent with the 
requirements of PS1  for a category B project . 
Envi ronmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure 
on the accredited 
entity’s website  2016 -09-08 
Language(s) of 
disclosure  Russian and English  
Link to disclosure  http://www.ebrd.com/cs/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395252412582&d=& pagenam
e=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument   [English]   
http://www.ebrd.com/cs/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395252412618&d=&pagenam
e=EBRD% 2FContent%2FDownloadDocument  [Russian]  
The ESAAP  below contains a  management plan (ESMP ) consistent with the 
requirements of PS1  for a category B project . 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure  n/a 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  Environmental and Social Appraisal and Action Plan : As the project has been 
classed as Category B in line with EBRD’s Environmental and Social Policy (2104), 
the ESS document  was prepared for GCF and is aimed at providing GCF and the 
public with relevant information regarding (i) the environmental and social 
assessment carried out by EBRD and (ii) the resulting environmental and soc ial 
action plan agreed with Bark i Tojik in the fra me of the Scaling Up Hydropower 
Sector Climate Resilience  Project  in Tajikistan . 
Other link(s)  http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/get/knowledge -hub.html  [webpage showing 
all EBRD/GCF ESS disclosure documents]  
________