=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20170315174157+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20170315174231+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP 039 GCF/B.16/0 7/Add.0 2 
14 March 2017  Meeting of the Board  
4 – 6 April 2017  
Songdo, Republic of Korea  
Provisional a genda i tem 11(e)  
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a)A funding proposal summary titled “ GCF – EBRD Egypt Renewable Energy Financing
Framework ” submitted by European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority(ies)  or focal point (s);
and
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national  
designated authority(i es) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund , the funding proposal titled “GCF – EBRD 
Egypt Renewable Energy Financing Framework ” submitted by European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development  is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only 
to Board Memb ers and Alternate Board Members  to ensure confidentiality of certain 
proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.16/07/Add.02  
Page b 
Table of Contents  
 1 
   38 Funding proposal summary submitted by the accredited entity       
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal points  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure        39


---
*Page 3*
---

PUBLIC
Project/Programme Title:  GCF-EBRD Egypt Renewable Energy Financing Framework  
Country/Region:  Egypt  
Accredited Entity:  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)  
Date of Submission:  20th February, 2017


---
*Page 4*
---

Contents  
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
Section I  ANNEX ES 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
 Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all other
sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they wish to
present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this proposal, or provide
summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents such  as project appraisal
document.
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

List of abbreviations and acronyms  
BOOT  Build, Own, Operate and Transfer  
CCGT  Combined Cycle Gas Turbine  
CSA Cost Sharing Agreement  
E&S Environmental and Social  
EEHC  Egyptian Electricity Holding Company  
EETC  Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company  
EGP Egyptian Pound  
EgyptERA  Egyptian Energy Regulatory Agency  
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction  
ESAP  Environmental and Social Action Plan  
ESIA  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
GDP  Gross Domestic Product  
IFI International financial institution  
MENA  Middle East and North Africa  
MoERE  Egyptian Ministry of Electricity and Renewable Energy  
NCC  Network Connection Contract  
NREA  New and Renewable Energy Authority  
O&M  Operation and Maintenance  
PPA Power Purchase Agreement  
PV Photovoltaic  
SESA  Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment  
TC Technical Cooperation  
TCO 2e Tonnes of Carbon Dioxide Equivalent  
UA Usufruct Agreement  
USD  US Dollar


---
*Page 6*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 38 A   A 
Section A : PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information
A.1.1. Project / programme title Egypt Renewable Energy Financing Framework (the Framework) 
A.1.2. Project or programme programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region Egypt  
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)Ministry of Environment ; there will be a steering committee 
comprising of EBRD, the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry 
of Electricity and Renewable Electricity to monitor the 
implementation of the Framework.  
A.1.5. Accredited entity European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☐Direct ☒International
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiaryExecuting Entities: The European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD)  
Beneficiaries:  
a. Local and international p rivate sector renewable energy
investors or special purpose vehicles; in exceptional cases local
public investors.
b. Local i nstitutions and policy makers responsible to create the
enabling environment for RE investments
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million USD)☐Micro (≤10)
☐Medium (50<x≤250)☐ Small (10<x≤50)
☒Large (>250)
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☒Mitigation ☐Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting
A.1.9. Date of submission 20 February, 2017  
A.1.10.
Project
contact
detailsContact person, position  Andreas Biermann, Head of Policy and Climate Finance, Energy 
Efficiency and Climate Change team  
Marta Simonetti, Deputy Head of Multilaterals, Donor Co -Finance  
Organization  EBRD  
Email address  biermana@ebrd.com ; simonetm@ebrd.com  
Telephone number  +44 (0) 20 7338 7358; +44 (0) 20 7338 7259
Mailing address  One Exchange Square, London EC2A 2JN  
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)
Reduced emissions from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ Low emission transport 
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)  
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain 
management, etc.)


---
*Page 7*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 38 A   A 
☐ Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, 
etc.)  
Increased resilience of:  
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply 
chain management, relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g.  sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  ☐ 
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable benefit s 
(see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C . 
Egypt had the world's fourteenth  highest Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions growth rate in the 1990 -2012 period  (WRI, CAIT, 2014)  
and is among the top 6 greenhouse gas emitting countries in the EBRD region  (World Bank, Total GHG Emission database, 2014) . It 
faces significant challenges in diversifying its electricity sources away from its more than 90% reliance on hydrocarbons (ga s and 
oil). Renewable energy production to date has primarily been hydro power  (2,300 MW – c. 7%).  Scaling up renewable energy will 
help Egypt  meet its  climate change mitigation commitments as well as reducing the country’s fuel import bill and thus saving  foreign 
exchange reserves.  
Egypt has launched an ambitious programme to change its energy mix and to foster the development of renewable energy . The 
government has worked for many years to prepare the framework for renewables, which is currently based on the Renewable 
Energy Law dat ed 21 December 2014. The Sustainable Energy Strategy to 2035 approved in October 2016  builds on previous 
strategies emphasising the importance of renewable power and confirms the target (established in 2008) for renewable sources to 
provide 20% of electric ity generation  by 2022, with the private sector expected to deliver most of this capacity.  
Despite the progress made  by the government to develop the regulatory framework there has been limited development so far 
towards the renewable energy target, prima rily because  there are barriers to the implementation and financing of the projects, 
namely : 
(i) the uncertainty and high transaction costs associated with the first pri vate renewable energy debt projects,
(ii) the limited availability of debt from commercial sources, particularly given the required long  tenors,
(iii) the need to establish an adequate infrastructure to integrate renewables into the grid , and
(iv) the need to design and implement competitive tenders for renewable energy.
The GCF -EBRD Egypt Renewable Energy  Financing Framework (the Framework) will support Egypt to achieve its goals via two 
components: Component 1 – Enhancing renewable energy integration, policies and planning through a comprehensive technical 
assistance programme; Component 2 – Scaling up re newable energy investments, by blending EBRD and GCF financing and 
leveraging additional debt financing from international  and development  financial institutions and in the future from commercial 
banks, as well as private sector investments.  
Overall, the F ramework will catalyse the development of a competitive, efficient renewable energy market that will allow Egypt to 
achieve its renewable energy targets, while increasing the share of privately owned generation capacity. The projects to be 
implemented with  co-financing from the Framework are  expected to  generate around 1,400 GWh electricity annually and  result in 
avoided GHG  emissions of about  800,000  tCO2e annually once all projects are operational.   
GCF funds will only be used for subprojects with an Environmental and Social Categorisation of B.


---
*Page 8*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 38 A   A 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if 
applicable)  24/05/2017  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  30/09/2017  (first project)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: Q3 2017 (estimated signing date  of the first loans to the 
subprojects ) 
End: Q3 202 2 (estimated expiry date of the framework)  
Project/programme lifespan  The programme  lifespan  is expected to be up to 5  years  for Component 1 
and 23 years for Component 2 .


---
*Page 9*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 38 B   B 
Section B: FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme
The GCF -EBRD Egypt Renewable Energy Financing Framework (the Framework) will support Egypt to unlock its vast renewable 
energy potential by addressing key barriers hindering its development through two key components:  
1) Component 1 – Enhancing renewable energy integration, policies and planning
The Framework will include a broad  technical assistance program that will help creating the enabling environment for private
sector renewable investments in Egypt. The technical assistance program will include 3 key sub-components:
a) Enhancing planning and RE integration  – this sub-component aims at ensuring that the new renewable energy
capacity developed as part of this framework is successfully integrated into the electricity grid. Specifically,  the aim is
to ensure that the network absorption  capacity wi ll be sufficient to preserve the Very High (VH V), High Voltage (HV)
and Medium Voltage (MV) networks’ security and balance and that the electrical system performance will not be
technically degraded once new renewable energy generation plants are commissio ned. This component will further
enhance the grid planning work that the Egyptian government has conducted.
b) Enhancing capacity for administering RE tenders  – this sub-component will seek to provide the relevant institutions
(including but not limited to th e regulator and the off taker) with advice on the practical implementation measures
needed for the successful launch and completion of competitive tenders for renewable energy. This element could be
extended to provide support to investors and financiers i n the preparation of the subprojects.
c) Promoting gender equality  – this sub-component will include technical training to relevant projects to strengthen
equality of opportunity for women and men to access and benefit from employment and other economic benef its
connected to the development of renewable energy sources.
2) Component 2  – Scaling up renewable energy investments
The Framework will support the development and construction of renewable energy projects tota lling USD  1 billion. The scale
of this investment reflects the scale of the need, and opportunity, for renewable energy in Egypt. This investment in the fir st
wave of private renewable projects in Egypt will directly  deliver significant renewable capacity and catalyse the development
of a new industry in the country.
The project will leverage EBRD and GCF finance to attract additional investments from international  and development  financial
institutions  and commercial banks,  as well as equity investments from the project sponsors. The framework envisages debt
financing from GCF and EBRD of up to USD 500 million. The aggregate value of the GCF loans would be up to USD 150 million,
which would co -finance up to 15% of total project costs in any single project, with the amount allocated to each project decided
based on specific needs. EBRD will provide financing representing up to 35% of the cost of each project and the remain ing debt
is expected to be provided by another international  or development financial institution or, at a later stage of the programme,
by a commercial lender. The equity contribution is 25% of the project costs translating into investment from the privat e sector
of USD 250 million.
The total financing expected from the GCF and the EBRD  is provided in the table below:  
Component  Total amount  Currency  GCF EBRD  
1. Enhancing renewable energy
integration, policies and
planning7.0 million USD ($)  4.7 2.3 
2. Scaling up renewable energy
investments500 million USD ($)  150 350 
Total programme financing  507 million USD ($)  154. 7 352. 3


---
*Page 10*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 38 B   B 
B.2. Project Financing Information
Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total
project
financing(a) = (b)  + (c) 1,00 7 million USD 
($) 
(b) GCF
financing to
recipient(i) Senior Loans
(vi) Grants150 
4.7 million USD 
($)million 
USD ($)  
million USD 
($)million 
USD ($)  As defined in the term 
sheet.  
Not applicable . As defined in the 
term sheet.  
Not applicable . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  154. 7 million USD 
($)million 
USD ($)  
(c) Co -
financing to
recipientFinancial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior 
Loans  
Senior 
Loans  
Equity  
Grant  350 
250 
250 
2.3 million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  EBRD  
Other lenders  
Sponsors  
EBRD  TBD based 
on market 
and project 
conditions.  
TBD.  
N/A 
N/A TBD based on 
market and 
project 
conditions.  
TBD.  
N/A 
N/A senior  
senior  
junior  
Options  
Lead financing institution: EBRD  
Each GCF loan under the Framework will be provided alongside a loan from EBRD and other co -financiers loans 
on a pari passu basis .   
(d) Financial
terms
between GCF
and AE (if
applicable)GCF Special Fund  
In line with Article 10 of the Agreement Establishing the EBRD (AEB) , the GCF resources are ‘special resources’ of 
EBRD. The ‘special resources’ from GCF and EBRD’s ‘ordinary capital resources’ shall at all times and in all respects 
be held, used, committed, invested or otherwise disposed of entirely separate from each oth er. In this regard, 
EBRD will establish the GCF Special Fund (‘the Special Fund’) through which all payments from the GCF and 
repayments to the GCF will pass. GCF resources from the Special Fund will not be commingled with EBRD’s 
ordinary capital resources  or other donor resources as far as financial flows are concerned.


---
*Page 11*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 38 B   B 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)
Financial barriers represent a key barrier to the mobilization and scaling up of renewable energy in Egypt, mainly due to (i)  the 
uncertainty and high transaction costs associated with the first private renewable energy projects and (ii) the macroeconomic  
situation, which results in both an increased cost of capital and limited availability of debt from commercial sources for re newab le 
projects, particularly given the required long -tenors of the project s and current Central Bank of Egypt ( CBE) regulations (for local 
commercial banks). These barriers manifest themselves either in non-availability of finance or  in inflexible grace periods and loan 
tenors that are not adapted to the characteristics of such investments.   
The analysis below refers to the Feed in Tariff Scheme , which  started in October 2014 with Round 1. The tariff was then revised and 
some of the terms of the PPA revised by a decree in September  2016, which launched Round 2  (details are provided in section C.5).  
Local commercial banks are prohibited from providing hard currency financing for the renewable energy projects under the feed  in 
tariff program in Egypt. This restriction is  part of wider capital controls set by the CBE that prohibits local commercial bank s from 
providing hard currency funding to projects/companies that generate their revenue in EGP (local currency). 
The commercial banks also face limitations to finance in EGP. The lack of available and accessible commercial finance on offer by 
local finan cial institutions hinders the ability of sponsors to invest in renewable energy in Egypt. Finance facilities that address the se 
barriers can contribute simultaneously to increasing market confidence, reducing risk perception and attracting private investor s 
into this market segment.


---
*Page 12*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 38 C 
Section C: DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
C.1. Strategic Context
Egypt’s energy sector faces a number of major challenges. First, there is sustained growth in power demand, driven by economic 
growth, population growth and changing consumption habits . During the past several years, electricity demand grew on average 6 -
7% per year. In the period 2011 -2014, the nominal installed capacity in Egyp t was c.30 GW, some of the fleet at that time was past 
the end of its service life  and much of the rest has low efficiency and/or availability . Actual available capacity at that time was 
reported to be 22 -24 GW, against a summer peak of c.27 GW in 2014.  Second, more than 90% of generating capacity is designed 
to run on gas  but there is a shortage of domestically produced natural gas which forces the power sector to rely on expensive and 
polluting heavy fuel oil and diesel  or, since 2015, LNG imports . In the short term, the Egyptian government has addressed these 
challenges by securing gas supply through the lease of two floating storage regasification units to allow for liquefied natur al gas 
imports, and also by securing sufficient generating capacit y through (i) the completion of a fast -track investment programme which 
targets steam and open cycle turbines, and (ii) a large  contract with Siemens to construct 14.8 GW of CCGTs by 2018.  
Nonetheless, the Egyptian government is cognizant of the need for a  sustainable change in the country’s energy mix towards 
renewable energy  to both address these challenges and to move to a more environmentally sustainable and diverse electricity 
sector . The Sustainable Energy Strategy to 2035, which build s on previous st rategies  articulating the same theme , emphasizes the 
importance of renewable power and confirms the target ( originally established in 2008) to secure 20% of Egypt’s electricity  
generation from renewable sources by 2022, with the private sector expected to deliver most of this capacity.  
In recent years, the Egyptian government has moved both to increase the speed and scale of renewable energy development and 
to place much greater reliance on the private sector for financing and implementation of this increa se.  Accordingly, Egypt has 
established a robust regulatory framework, built around the Renewable Energy Law (Law 203/2014) dated 21 December 2014, and 
two Feed -in-Tariff Decisions (Prime Ministerial Decree 1947/2014 dated 27 October 2014  (round 1)  and Cabinet of Ministers Decree 
2532/2016 dated 22 September 2016  (round 2) . 
This framework sets out several mechanisms to reach Egypt's renewable targets:  
i. Publicly owned facilities procured by state agencies or companies and funded from sovereign loans.  This is the model used
to date.
ii. Feed -in tariff (FiT) Scheme - Privately owned projects of up to 50 MW relying on private finance, selling power to EETC,
relying on a 20/25 -year power purchase agreement.  These projects would rely on a fixed FiT establishe d by the
government from time to time.  The initial target for this programme, launched in October 2014, is 2,000 MW of wind
capacity and 2,300 MW of solar photovoltaic capacity. No projects under this scheme have entered operation  as at end -
February 2017 .
iii. Competitive tenders - Privately owned projects relying on private finance, selling power to EETC, relying on a 20/25 -year
FiT. These projects would be selected, and the tariff will be determined through a competitive tender process.  Some
tenders for  wind , solar photovoltaic and CSP have been issued.
iv. Privately owned projects selling through the grid to private off -takers.
The focus of the Framework is on the second of these mechanisms, the feed -in tariff scheme, although projects under the third 
mechanism  would also be eligible  up to a maximum of 25% of the total GCF financing  under Component 2 .  The fourth mechanism 
is currently being supported by a joint EBRD/CTF/GEF Programme called SPREF ( http://www.ebrd.com/work -with -
us/projects/psd/semed -private -renewable -energy -framework.html ). 
FiT Scheme  – This programme covers both solar and wind energy and the authorities have earmarked certain territorial areas for 
each technology.  The solar projects to be built under this scheme will primarily  be built on land owned by the New and Renewable 
Energy Ag ency  (NREA ) near the village of Benban  in the province of Aswan in Egypt, while the wind projects will primarily  be located 
on land dedicated for the FiT wind scheme owned also by NREA on the Gulf of Suez . The Strategic Environmental and Social


---
*Page 13*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 38 C 
Assessment (SESA ) for the Benban site has been completed and disclosed in 2016 , whereas the SESA for wind projects  is currently 
being conducted . Details on the environmental and social studies for these areas are provided in section  F.3.  
The initial period of the F iT scheme expired in October 2016  (i.e. round 1) .  The Egyptian government announced a second round 
of the FiT scheme in September 2016  (i.e. round 2) .  This round has revised and lower tariffs, and some changes to the contractual 
framework . The Framework' s focus is on supporting this second round.  
Competitive tenders  - In 2009,  and also during the past two years, EETC has launched various tenders for wind and solar projects 
above 50 MW, offering a long -term power purchase agreement (PPA) and selecting the cheapest technically compliant bid.  
However, those projects were repeated ly delayed. The wind projects launched to date under competitive tenders are all located in 
the Gulf El Zeyt, which has high wind resources. Separately EETC is running three similar competitive tenders for solar PV and solar 
CSP projects . 
All of these tend ers are currently on hold pending the progress on the FiT Scheme, which is important to generate  lessons learned 
and establish confidence in the Egyptian renewable sector . One of the key goals of this Framework is establish an environment 
where competitive  tenders are successful in Egypt.  The Framework aims to achieve this both through technical assistance to  assist 
the authorities to bring these tenders to a successful conclusion and design further  tenders, and to establish, through a successful 
implement ation of the FiT scheme, confidence in the Egyptian renewable market . 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline
Emissions baseline  
Between 1990 and 2012, Egypt has more than doubled  its GHG emissions, i.e. from 124 million tCO 2e to 288  million tCO 2e (WRI, 
CAIT, 2014). Egypt had the fourteenth  highest emissions growth rate during this period in the world, and such surge is significantly 
higher compared to the growth in global emissions , as well as in OECD and various European countries (Figure 1) .  
Besides increased industrial output, population growth and other developments,  this increase in GHG emissions is due to the fact 
that p ower generation in Egypt is dominated by fossil fuels, which account for over 90% of the electricity production; hydro and 
other renewables (solar and wind) represent around 8% and 1%, respectively.  
This mix translates into a relatively high grid emissio ns factor at 0.581 tCO 2/MWh, which is likely to increase due to the publicly 
announced plans to invest in more  fossil fuel -based generation capacity in the medium -term.  
Additionally, the structure of the power sector is such that private sector -driven exp ansion in renewable generation has not been 
possible at scale until recently. The electricity sector is state dominated, has been until recently vertically integrated, a nd 
consumption is subsidized. Given the pressures to expand generation, whilst limiting  reliance on imported fuels and easing the fiscal 
burden of subsidies, the Government has taken steps to setup a favourable  regulatory climate for a higher level of private sector 
involvement, including in expanding generation capacity. This includes the l aunch of the FiT scheme for private sector renewable 
developers since 2014.


---
*Page 14*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 38 C 
Figure 1: GHG emissions indexed to 1990 level  
Therefore, the current baseline context for the Framework consists of the following aspects: 
 very limited wind and solar -based generation capacity (accounting for approximately 1% of generation, or some 770 MW
reported installation as of 2015);
 a relatively high grid emissions factor, in contrast to the abundant clean generation potential; and
 limited private sector -led development of new renewable capacity.
Barriers  
Renewable energy production in Egypt to date has primarily been hydro power, principally from the Aswan High Dam (2,300 MW – 
c. 7%  of production ). In view of the limited potential for additional hydropowe r and increasing water scarcity driven by climate
change, Egypt must rely on  other renewable energy sources to develop its power generation capacity and reduce its greenhouse
gas emissions. Despite Egypt’s vast renewable energy potential (e.g. it receives some of the highest solar radiation in the world and
it has an abundant wind resource in the Suez Gulf area; for details see section C.5), there has been very limited development in
renewables.
This has been the case due to key barriers , such as : financial barriers , high perceived risk for first movers , infrastructure constraints  
and lack of institutional capacity  for administering  RE tenders . Without addressing these key barriers, the development of a market 
for renewables and the involvement of the private sector are likely to remain limited and non -sustainable.  
The Framework aims to address the barriers described above as follows:  
Type of barriers  Barriers  Measures to overcome barriers  
Financial  a)High investment needs
b)Perceived risk for first movers
c)High cost of capitalGCF and EBRD financing will address the lack of 
adequate long -term financing for renewables and 
reduce the costs for first movers.  This will  
demonstrate and scale up commercially viable 
renewable energy projects  
Technical/Institutional  Grid infrastructure constraints to integrate 
renewables  Technical assistance will support the relevant public 
institutions to assess an d enhance the infrastructure 
for the uptake of renewables


---
*Page 15*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 38 C 
Institutional  Gap to renewable energy targets/ 
Lack of institutional capacity  Technical assistance will increase Egypt’s institutional 
capacity for administering RE tender s 
Framework  impact on baseline 
The Framework will accelerate the development of renewables generation by facilitating the increased participation of the pri vate 
sector. The Framework will do so by improving the regulatory groundwork set up by the Egyptian Government,  namely the FiT 
scheme introduced since 2014.  
The investments which will be directly supported via the Framework will result in a doubling of the current renewable energy 
capacity over the course of the Framework. In the longer -term the Framework will catalyse  additional clean generation capacity, 
resulting in a lower emission factor for the grid.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description
The Framework aims at supporting Egypt to unlock its vast renewable energy potential by addressing key barriers hindering its  
development via EBRD’s proven business model of combining finance with technical assistance and policy dialogue.  
The framework wi ll contribute to support Egypt in fulfilling its Nationally Determined Contributions  to climate change mitigation as 
well as its ambitious target to supply 20% of its electricity  generation  from renewable energy sources by 2022. The current 
regulations pro vide feed -in tariff support  for 4,300MW of renewable energy capacity, of which 2.3 GW for solar PV and 2 GW for 
wind.  The total electricity generated once all the projects under the framework will be operational is equivalent to 805,280  
Egyptians’ annual consumption (based on the World Bank’s 2013 data).   
The programme will include two key components:  
Component 1 – Enhancing renewable energy integration, policies and planning  
The Framework will include a comprehensive technical assistan ce program that will help creating an enabling environment for 
private sector renewable investments in Egypt. The technical assistance program will include 3 key sub-components:  
a) Enhancing planning and RE integration  – this sub-component aims at ensuring th at the new renewable energy capacity
developed as part of this framework is successfully integrated into the electricity grid.
b) Enhancing capacity for administering RE tenders  – this sub-component will seek to provide the relevant institutions (including
but not limited to the regulator , NREA  and the off taker) with technic al assistance needed for the successful completion of
competitive tenders for renewable energy.
c) Promoting gender equality  – this sub-component will include technical training to relevant subprojects to strengthen equality
of opportunity for women and men to access and benefit from employment and other economic benefits connected to the
development of renewable energy sources.
Component  2 – Scaling up renewable energy investments  
The Framework will support the development and construction of renewable energy projects totalling  USD  1 billion with an EBRD -
GCF contribution of USD 500 million. The scale of this investment reflects the scale of the need and opportunity for renewable 
energy in Egypt. This investment in the first wave of private renewable projects in Egypt will both deliver significant renew able 
capacity in its own right and catalyse the development of a new industry in the country.  
The Framework will leverage on EBRD and GCF finance to attract additional debt financing . The aggregate value of the GCF loans 
would be up to USD 150 million, which would co -finance up to 15%  of total project costs in any single project, with the amount 
allocated to each project decided based on specific needs. EBRD will provide financing representing up to 35%  per project  and the 
remaining debt is expected to be provided by other internationa l and development institutions  or, at a later stage of the Framework, 
by commercial lenders. The equity contribution is 25% of the projects costs translating into investment from private sector o f USD 
250 million.


---
*Page 16*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 38 C 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)
Since its inception, the EBRD has in total invested EUR 22.2 billion over 1,267 climate mitigation and adaptation projects to  promote 
efficiency and innovation investments in energy for its countries of operation which resulted in 83.6 mtCO2 emissions redu ctions. 
The EBRD has been financing renewable energy projects since 2006 and has as of 31 December 2016 financed more than 4.54GW 
of renewable energy capacity for total investments of EUR 2.4 billion. These investments in renewable energy alone led to 12. 4 
mtCO2 emissions reductions. The projects financed by EBRD include all technologies and in particular wind, hydro and solar.  
The EBRD is committed to increase the share of renewable energy projects financed on an annual basis as part of its Green Eco nomy 
Transition (GET) Approach to deliver the mandate of transition impact.   GET aims to reduce GHG emissions, increasing the role of 
cleaner fuels and renewable energy, supporting reform and commercialisation of the power sector including through the 
mobilisat ion of private sector infrastructure investment. See link to EBRD’s GET Approach http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-
do/strategies -and-policies.html .  
All projects are subject to appraisal  under the EBRD’s Environmental & Social Policy (ESP) to ensure sustainable development of all 
operations receiving EBRD financing.   
The EBRD also have a solid experience in working closely as a trusted partner to governments in promoting renewable and 
sustainable energy through policy dialogue. The EBRD has helped the catalysis of many frameworks for renewables in its countries  
of operation such as in Kazakhstan, Romania, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Poland , Mongolia, Serbia  and more recently Jordan, and intends to 
do the same in Egypt with the support of GCF.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)
1. Electricity Sector Structure in Egypt
The Egyptian electricity sector is administered by the Ministry of Electricity and Renewable Energy (MoERE).  The sector is o verseen 
by the Supreme Energy Council, which is chaired by the Prime Minister and brings together all relevant Ministers, including  those 
of Electricity and Renewable Energy, Petroleum, Finance, Environment and Investment.  Supreme Council 
for Energy  Ministry of Electricity and 
Renewable Energy  Egyptian Electric Utility and 
Consumer Protection Agency  
Egyptian Electricity 
Holding Company  New and 
Renewable Energy 
Agency  
6 Production 
Companies  3 Independent 
Power 
Producers  9 Distribution 
Companies  Egyptian Electricity 
Transmission 
Company  
Generation


---
*Page 17*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 38 C 
The sector is regulated by the Egyptian Electric Utility and Consumer Protection Regulatory Agenc y (EgyptERA). EgyptERA is 
responsible for implementing policy decis ions, administering licenses and, since July 2015, setting tariffs.  
The sector is primarily operated by the Egyptian Electricity Holding Company (EEHC), which is 100% owned by MoERE.  EEHC in t urn 
owns:  
 the Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC)1, which both owns and operates the high voltage network and acts as
single buyer for all wholesale electricity;
 six generation companies (five thermal and one hydroelectric) which own and operate most of Egypt's electricity generation
plants; and
 nine distribution companies, which supply electricity to all consumers and own and operate the medium and low voltage
networks.
In addition there are three privately owned Build -Operate -Own -Transfer (BOOT) gas -fired plants totalling  2.25 GW that were 
implemented in the late 1990s and are currently owned by the Malaysian company Powertek; these companies sell all their 
generation to EETC under long -term power purchase agreements.  
2. Responsible institutions for the development of Renewa ble Energy in Egypt
The responsibility for developing renewable energy in Egypt is shared between three entities, under the overall supervision o f the 
MoERE  and the Supreme Energy Council:   
a) The Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC).  EETC is the owner and operator of the Egyptian high voltage network
and also the sole wholesale purchaser of electricity in Egypt's single buyer market model.
b) The New and Renewable Energy Authority (NREA).  NREA was established in 1986 as a state agency responsible for developing
renewable energy.  It is independent from EEHC and the other state -owned electricity companies but reports to the Ministry
of Electric ity and Renewable Energy.
c) The Egyptian Electric Utility and Consumer Protection Regulatory Agency (EgyptERA).  EgyptERA is the sector regulator.
Specifically in relation to renewable energy its powers include: granting generation licenses, approving the  terms of power
purchase agreements, general oversight and regulation of the sector.
3. Egyptian Renewable Energy Market
Renewable energy in modern Egypt began in 1970 with the commissioning of the Aswan High Dam.  In addition to its effects on 
irrigation an d waterflows the Aswan dam also has the capacity to generate 2,300 MW of electricity – at the time of construction 
sufficient to meet more than half of Egypt's needs.  Over time demand growth has meant that the dam, together with a few smal ler 
dams on the Nile which add a further 500 MW, meets only c. 7% of Egyptian electricity consumption.  There is limited further 
potential to develop hydroelectric power in Egypt given the absence of other major rivers.  In the early 2000s, faced with growing 
demand for electricity and the growth of renewable energy worldwide the Egyptian authorities began to promote the development  
of wind energy.  This was driven also by the realization that Egypt possesses, on the Gulf of Suez, some of the best wind resources 
in the world as well as  irradiation levels.  In addition there is no shortage of land on which to site wind or solar farms.   
The strategy for renewable energy was first set by the Supreme Energy Council's February  2008 decision to set a target of 20% of 
electricity production  to be met from renewable sources by 2020 (updated to 2022 in the 2035 Energy Strategy).  Reflecting market 
dynamics at the time the bulk of this was expected to come from wind . Accordingly, th e Egyptian authorities developed wind 
projects on two separate tracks:  (i) a series of state -owned windfarms; and  (ii) the launch of build –own –operate ( BOO ) project s 
through tenders . Currently, Egypt has three  state -owned  utility -scale non-hydro renewable energy plants: a 547 MW windfarm at 
Zafarana, towards the north of the Gulf of Suez , a 200 MW windfarm near the Gabl El Zeit on the Gulf of Suez  and a hybrid gas and 
solar thermal plant at Kureimat, with a total capacity of 140 MW, of which 20 MW  is solar. Together these projects generate less 
than 2% of annual electricity consumption.  
1 In accordance with the 2015 Electricity Law EETC will move to independent public ownership.


---
*Page 18*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 38 C 
4. Current Framework for Renewables in Egypt
The Renewable Energy Law sets out the four separate paths on which the Egyptian authorities are now proceeding to develop  
renewable energy:  
i. State -owned projects: NREA will continue to develop a number of windfarms initiated before 2011.
ii. Feed -in tariff Scheme: the Egyptian government issued a decree in October 2014 (Round 1) allowing qualified private
operators of wind and solar PV projects of up to 50 MW to secure a long -term power purchase agreement (PPA) with EETC
at a fixed tariff.  This programme aimed at securing 2,000 MW of wind and 2,300 MW of solar PV capacity by 2017. The
tariff was revised and some of the terms of  the PPA revised by a decree in September  2016 (Round 2). This Framework is
expected to finance mainly projects under Round 2.
iii. Competitive tenders: a thir d path to promote renewables is the launch by EETC of competitive tenders for wind and solar
projects above 50 MW, offering a long -term power purchase agreement and selecting the cheapest technically compliant
bid.  The first of these projects is the 250 MW  Gulf El Zeyt BOO windfarm originally launched in 2009. Subsequently there
were a few tenders launched but projects are still to be awarded. The TC element of this framework will aim to assist the
authorities to successfully develop and implement these com petitive tenders.
iv. Merchant projects: Consistent with the general trend towards greater liberalization and private participation in the
Egyptian power sector, the government is also keen to promote renewable energy projects that will deliver their power to
the high voltage network but sell it bilaterally to commercial and industrial consumers.
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)
Not applicable.


---
*Page 19*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 38 C 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements
Component 1  
The EBRD will be directly involved in all aspects of the implementation of the grant component of the program. All procuremen t 
will be done in accordance with EBRD’s Procu rement Policies and Rules , which stipulate a strong involvement in working with clients 
on all related documents and processes.  
Component 2  
The focus of the Framework is the financing of solar and wind projects under the FiT scheme.  Each SPV planning to develop a 
subproject under the FiT Scheme will conclude a power purchase agreement (PPA) with EETC with the following key elements:  
 Each SPV (the Seller ) will assume the obligation to design, procure, construct, erect, install, test, c ommission, finance, own,
operate and maintain the relevant power plant (the Facility ) in accordance with and in the manner contemplated by the PPA.
The Seller will be obliged to sell all electricity to EETC. At the end of the term of the PPA the Seller wil l have the obligation to
decommission and remove the Facility.
 EETC's obligations include designing, procuring, constructing, erecting, installing, testing, commissioning, owning, operatin g
and maintaining the network assets required to allow the Facility to connect to the transmission network in accordance with
the Network Connection Contract.
 EETC is also obliged to purchase all electricity generated by each Facility.
 The term of the PPA is 25 years from the commercial operation date  for solar projects and 20 years for wind projects .
The Network Connection Contract (NCC) will be concluded between EETC and each SPV planning to develop a project under the FiT  
Scheme (the Power Producer ), and sets out the terms of interaction between the parties relevant to the connection of and the 
delivery of electricity by each Facility to the transmission network of Egypt.  
The Usufruct Agreement (UA) sets out the terms under which the New and Renewable Energy Authority ( NREA ), the landlord of 
the Benban site and other public land made available for the FiT Scheme, will make the site available to each SPV planning to 
develop a project under the FiT Scheme on such land (the User ).  The term of the UA will be concurrent with the PPA.  
The Cost Sharing  Agreement (CSA) is concluded among three parties: EETC, NREA and each SPV planning to develop a project in 
Benban and other public land made available for the FiT Scheme under the FiT Scheme (the Developer ) and sets out the rights and 
obligations of EETC and NREA in constructing certain infrastructure for the site and the Developer's obligation to pay for costs 
incurred for such infrastructure.


---
*Page 20*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 38 D 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation
TASK Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20 Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24 
Component 1  
Enhancing planning 
and RE integration  X X X X X X X C
Tendering scheme 
design choices   X X X X X X X C
Assessment of 
areas to develop to 
administer tenders  X X X X X X X C
Drafting  of tendering 
documents and 
rules/launch tenders  X X X X X X X X X C
Practical support in 
administering 
tenders  X X X X X X X X X X C
Component 2/ 
FiT Scheme  
EBRD and GCF 
Board Approvals X X X C
Financial Close X X X C
Construction Period  X X X X X C
Commercial 
Operation Date  X X X C


---
*Page 21*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 38 D 
Section D: RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement
The GCF’s involvement in the proposed Project is critical to support Egypt in tackling climate change and exploit its vast an d 
currently untapped renewable energy potential.   With support from GCF and other partners, it will be possible to break current 
barriers and take renewable energy electricity generation in Egypt to a ‘tipping point’, from where private and public invest ments 
materialise and renewable energy targets can be achieved. The GCF -EBRD Renewable Energy Financing Framework will rely on the 
EBRD’s proven business model of combining finance with technical assistance and policy dialogue to remove barriers hindering 
investments and promote a sustainable, replicable model for financing.  
GCF involvement in financing the GCF -EBRD Renewable Energy Financing Framework is critical for the following reasons:  
Enhance the environment for private sector renewable energy investments :  GCF contribution to support technical assistance 
would provide government, regulator, and project developers with capacity to and undertake actions to further improve the 
regulatory and investment environment for renewables.  
Improve access to financing : The proposed programme will help to redu ce the cost of capital in an untested and challenging 
market.  
Fill the financing gap:  The availability of additional capital from the GCF in addition to the EBRD will address the lack of long -term 
financing from loca l and international banks in Egypt and bridge capital gaps in the financing structure of individual projects.  
Support private sector engagement:  While existing renewable energy capacity has been driven by public programmes, this would 
be the first renewabl e energy programme in Egypt working directly with the private sector which would enable to transform the 
market and scale up renewable energy investments in Egypt beyond the Framework.  
GCF finance under the Framework would both address the capital shortfal l and enable affordable access to finance by covering 
first movers ’ additional costs. In turn this would facilitate the widespread deployment of renewable energy and significant progress 
towards the government's target for the feed -in tariff programme.  A successful implementation of this programme would validate 
Egypt as  a major renewable energy market, catalysing scale, investor appetite and efficiencies that would lead to much greater 
renewables penetration, extending the impact of the Framework beyond the projects financed by it.  
D.2. Exit Strategy
Project financed under the Framework will benefit from long -term power purchase agreements, guaranteeing to purchase all of 
their outputs for substantially all of the asset life, and longer than the tenor of GCF and EBRD loans.  This will assure the  
sustainability  of the projects throughout their lives.  
At the sector level, the creation of a vibrant group of private sector renewable project developers and the supporting instit utional 
networks, such as legal, engineering advisors, will ensure that the programme wil l have a paradigm -shifting impact on the 
renewable energy sector in Egypt.


---
*Page 22*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 38 E 
Section E: EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the proposed 
project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and indicative assessment 
factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where relevant and applicable.  This 
section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
E.1. Impact P otential
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential
Egypt's current electricity generation is over 90% produced by gas and oil -fired plants.  The balance is almost entirely provided 
by hydropower, which has limited potential for further development.  Egypt is the 2nd largest economy in Africa (IMF WEO , 
2016), with a growing population and economy.  Consequently electricity demand is inc reasing rapidly, having grown at a 
compound annual growth rate of 4% between 2004 and 2014.   
Implementation of the Framework will deliver 600 MW of new generating capacity, generating approx. 1.4  GWh of clean 
electricity annually and thereby directly avoi ding emissions of more than 0.8 mtCO 2e per year.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 
eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  793,971  tCO 2e (once all projects will be in 
operation)  
Lifetime  18,933,163 tCO 2e 
 Expected total number of direct and
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by
gender  (reduced vulnerability or increased
resilience);
 Number of  beneficiaries relative to total
population , disaggregated by gender
(adaptation only)Total  4,000 short -term job s (during 
construction) and 200 long -term jobs 
(during operation)  
Percentage 
(%) N/A 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Examples include:  
 Expected increase in the number of households with access to low -emission energy
 Expected increase in the number of small, medium and large low -emission power suppliers, and installed
effective capacity
 Expected increase in generation and use of climate in formation in decision -making
 Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks
 Others


---
*Page 23*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 38 E 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above.  
EBRD developed a methodology to conservatively assess CO 2 reductions driven by Framework. The methodology calculates the 
CO 2 savings based on the total estimated  installed capacity of wind and PV power plants expected to be deployed by the 
programme in Egypt.  The grid emission factor (EF) takes into account the current energy mix supplied in Egypt and  was assumed 
to be 0.58 1 tCO 2/MWh . 
Technology  Unit installed 
capacity 
(MW)  Capacity  
factor  Annual 
electricity 
Generation 
(MWh)  Grid EF 
(tCO2/MWh)  Annual 
emissions 
avoided 
(tCO2)  Lifetime 
(yr) Lifetime 
emissions 
avoided 
(tCO2)  
Solar PV  480 0.25  1,051,200 0.581  610,747 25 15,268,680 
Wind  120 0.30  315,360  0.581  183,224 20 3,664,483 
Total  600 1,366,560 793,971 18,933,163 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)
The Framework will accelerate the early -stage development of Egypt’s renewable generation market, by directly supporting a 
critical mass of private sector -driven generation projects and the necessary strengthening of the regulatory context. This in turn 
will provide durable market development, contributing to the further development of power projects under the current FiT 
scheme on one level, towards the Government’s renewable generation targets, on a higher level, and ultimately towards further  
harnessing of the country’s vast renewable energy potential beyond this target.  
Firstly, the projects directly supported by the Framework are envisaged to account for 600 MW of new solar and wind -based 
generation capacity. This represents approximately 1 4% of the a dditional clean capacity ensilaged to be fostered by the FiT 
scheme, which has an overall target of 4,300 MW of additional clean capacity.  
Therefore, within the horizon of the current renewable capacity targets (2022) and given the stated aims of the FiT  scheme 
(4,300 MW in new capacity), the replication potential multiple of the efforts which will be enabled by the Framework ( 600 MW), 
can be approximately 7 times the capacity targets of the Framework.  
The FiT scheme is the private sector -driven window of the wider energy sector target of 20% of electricity generation in 2022 
being based on renewable sources. The progress towards the 20% wider target will be sought via all four project development 
windows described under the Renewable Energy Law of 2014.  However, further materializing Egypt’s vast renewable potential 
beyond this target will require sustained growth of private sector investments to as to continue scaling in the long -term.   
The Framework contributes to this durable scaling up of the renew able energy market by:  
 Increasing the ability of authorities responsible for the management of the grid to better assess , anticipate and enhance
the capacity to accommodate in a sustainable manner new renewable energy capacity;
 Addressing some of the most immediate non -financial barriers around project development through training and
knowledge transfer, such as the improved management of the tendering processes and systems;
 Providing adequately termed and blended financing for a critical number of first projects, demonstrating the viability
of investing in this market; this building up of a track -record would result over time in enhanced capacities and linkages
between projec ts sponsors, developers, suppliers, financiers and consultants.


---
*Page 24*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 38 E 
Figure 2 – Theory of change diagram of Framework 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning
In order to accelerate the development of a private sector investment market for renewable generation, the Framework aims 
to enhance capacity at the level of multiple stakeholders: private sponsors and developers, state authorities in charge of 
managing th e grid, the FiT system and tendering, and indirectly local suppliers, consultants and financiers. This capacity 
enhancement will instil  learning at all these levels via the transfer of best practices and skills in the sector, drawing on 
experiences from ot her markets where EBRD has contributed to the development or fine -tuning of private -sector driven 
renewable energy markets.  
Examples of concrete knowledge transfer and strengthening elements are the policy advisory activities to entities involved in  
grid management and tendering, namely:  
 Assisting with grid modelling, thus providing clarity for grid management and flexibility with regards to accommodating
new capacity;
 Training to improve tender processes will lead to testing and fine -tuning the adequacy  of tendering and PPA models,
of processes, and of IT and management systems;
 Cooperating on bringing individual projects to financial close will introduce best practices, for instance of environmental
and social impact assessment, and will provide a high ly valuable demonstration effect for future private project
sponsors and local commercial financiers in understanding how private sector renewable projects can be adequately
structured so as to manage real and perceived risks.
These activities will resu lt in the build -up of valuable lessons learnt and the enhancement of linkages between authorities, 
sponsors, financiers, suppliers and construction and consulting companies, and consequently the adequate strengthening of 
governance and institutional knowle dge at the level of the public authorities involved.


---
*Page 25*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 38 E 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
The fundamental purpose of the Framework is to enhance the long -term viability of private sector participation in harnessing 
Egypt’s renewable energy potential, thus enabling the scale necessary to bring the generation sector, and so the economy as a  
whole , onto a lower -carbon development path. The Framework builds on the ambitious efforts of the Egyptian Government to 
encourage the renewable generation market via the Renewable Energy Law, and via the FiT scheme. 
Concretely, the following activities will create conditions conducive to sustained private investments in the sector:  
 Strengthening the capacity of authorities to take necessary measures to connect and balance new clean generation
capacity to the grid, aims to reassure investors and consumers that  the energy system can accommodate low carbon
sources at scale;
 Enhancing the ability of authorities to run competitive tenders will lead to competition among sponsors so that high -
performing and effective projects are structured and implemented;
 Working  with sponsors, developers and various experts so as to bring projects to financial close  will help build up track -
record in applying best practices in project development (impact due diligence assessments, conclusion of adequate
PPAs, agreeing tailored fi nancing packages, gender inclusion measures) thus leading to a lowering of perceived risks
and increased private sector interest to invest, including  after the current Framework resources and the current FiT -
window are used up.
The purpose of the Framewor k is to enhance emission reductions and low -carbon development, by supporting the market for 
private sector investments in solar and wind -based generation in Egypt. As such, the current proposal  contributes to 
demonstrating the viability of a new market , supports the uptake of low -carbon technologies with low market penetration rates  
and m akes use of funding support mechanisms which are relatively new for the Egyptian power sector. Namely, these are the 
recently introduced FiT scheme, an d the blending of mu ltilateral  climate finance into project finance packages as proposed by 
the current Framework. Some of the capacity strengthening activities will target the enhanced management of the FiT scheme 
so as to make it sustainable, flexible and attractive for continuous in vestments. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies
The Framework directly supports the achievement of the renewables target adopted by the Government of Egypt, i.e. 20% of 
electricity  generation from renewables by 2022 (up from a current level of approx. 8% of which hydro represents the bulk), a 
target which has been the basis for the current FiT setup and wider renewables regulatory context. This context is part of a 
major reform prog ramme to address the decarbonisation of Egypt’s power sector and its dependency on subsidies. 
The Framework aims to make the robust renewables regulatory environment a success for private sector participation, by 
complementing it with practical knowledge  sharing and capacity enhancement and by making available adequately termed and 
priced financing for accelerated project structuring and implementation. 
The Framework fosters the success and improvement of the current legal and regulatory architecture supporting renewable 
generation via the following: 
 The capacity enhancement work at the level of entities managing the grid and the FiT scheme will strength en
preparedness (modelling of the grid capacity will underpin adequate PPAs and balancing actions) and responsiveness
(recommending actions to gradually accommodate more capacity and adjust FiT rewards over time), providing clarity
for regulatory decisions  which will affect the viability and sustainability of the FiT scheme and the grid in the longer -
term.
 The project -level activities (tendering, structuring, financing) will test the regulatory context and lead to learning via
practical actions on the groun d and fine -tuning of regulations according to a growing track -record.
These developments will ultimately underpin Egypt ’s willingness to increase its level of ambition in taking further climate action 
via its Nationally Determined Contributions. Give n its demographic and economic growth, Egypt’s policy environment needs to 
actively and continually target low -carbon development, however this can only be achieved once the current regulatory 
infrastructure achieves its full potential. The Framework direc tly supports this.


---
*Page 26*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 38 E 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential
Wider benefits and priorities
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact
Egypt's initial efforts to promote renewable energy are focused on the south of the country so that the Framework will also 
support economic development in a poor and undeveloped region.  
The Framework will bring:  
i. Socio -economic benefits through employment from construction (c.4,000 short term jobs) and operatio n (c.200 long -
term jobs), typically in poor and underdeveloped areas of Egypt
ii. Socio -economic benefits from sustainable energy supply
iii. Cumulative effects on climate through reduction in GHGs
iv. Decrease of air emissions and other types of environmental pollutio n associated with traditional energy production
v. Increased market penetration of modern construction/production patterns and technologies, demand in high skilled
personnel
vi. Reduction in water abstraction and consumption
Additionally, g iven the scale of the proposed Framework, it would create an opportunity to work closely with eligible RES project 
developers to develop and implement a comprehensive plan to ensure women and men are able to equally access opportunities 
connected to operations in terms of direc t technical and operations skills and employment. EBRD will also seek to develop 
partnerships with vocational/technical training schools, to enhance young women’s access to developing relevant technical 
skills. Attention will also be paid to developing a s trong and effective public relations and information campaign o n the extent 
of the long term benefits of renewable energy  
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)
N/A 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs
Egypt is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, because of a combination of water stress and increasing pressure on 
infrastructure from a rapidly growing population.  It is expected that the private sector will play the leading role in the 
implementation of the renewable energy capacity required to limit the above -mentioned clima te change impact. In this context, 
the proposed Framework will address the financial constraints of private sector developers and overall reduce the vulnerabili ty 
of Egypt to climate change by reducing Egypt’s GHG emissions.   
As discussed in section B.3, a major barrier to promoting renewable energy in Egypt is the lack of local and international 
commercial lending . 
Further to the above, the involvement of the private sector in developing renewable energy projects in Egypt is essential in 
addressing the lack of capacity at NREA and EETC. Currently the wind farms operating in Egypt ( 747 MW) are all developed and 
owned by NREA and therefore, it will be challenging for NREA to develop and implement the rest of renewable projects that are  
expected to be devel oped until 2022 to reach the country’s target of 20% of renewable energy from total electricity generation.


---
*Page 27*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 38 E 
E.5.  Country O wnership
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs and
NAPs
Egypt has demonstrated a strong commitment to the development of renewable energy, both at the policy and strategic level 
through the adoption of ambitious and specific targets, and at the detailed implementation level through the development of a 
detailed contractual and regulatory framework.  This commitment is articulated in the 2014 Renewable Energy Law and the two 
feed -in tariff decrees describ ed above, and also the Sustainable Energy Strategy 2035 which confirmed the country’s target of 
reaching 20% of electricity generation from renewable sources which require the addition of c. 10GW of wind and solar capacit y 
to the system by 2022.The strengt h of this commitment is reflected in the renaming of the Ministry of Electricity as the Ministry 
of Electricity and Renewable Energy in 2015.  
The importance of renewable energy in reducing Egypt's greenhouse gas emissions is also emphasised in Egypt's Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC) as part of the 5 key strategic policies for tackling climate change mitigation.  
Egypt has established robust institutions to implement its renewable energy strategy, incl uding a dedicated state agency NREA  
and a ded icated feed -in tariff unit within EETC. These two entities cooperate closely with the sector regulator, EgyptERA and are 
supported by international technical and legal advisers. The close cooperation between these authorities and the IFI communit y 
over man y years gives confidence both in the Egyptian authorities' commitment to the sector and their capacity to implement 
their renewable strategy.  
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver
Since its inception, the EBRD has in total invested EUR 22.2 billion over 1,267 climate mitigation and adaptation projects to  
promote efficiency and innovation investments in energy for its countries of operation which resulted in 83.6 mtCO2 emissions 
redu ctions. The EBRD has been financing renewable energy projects since 2006 and has as of 31 December 2016 financed more 
than 4.54GW of renewable energy capacity for total investments of EUR 2.4 billion. These investments in renewable energy 
alone led to 12.4  mtCO2 emissions reductions. The projects financed by EBRD include all technologies and in particular wind, 
hydro and solar.  
The EBRD has a dedicated team for renewable energy investments. The expertise of the team ranges from  banking and finance  
to engi neering.  
The EBRD has also a dedicated team for mainstreaming gender considerations across the Bank’s portfolio, into investments and 
policy dialogue activities who provide s technical expertise on gender issues across sectors and whose activities specifically focus 
on promoting women’s (a) access to finance and entrepreneurship; (b) access to employment and skills; and (c) access to 
services.  
In line with its recently adopte d Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality (2016 -2020), the Bank aims to mainstream gender 
in its operations until 2020. See the following link to EBRD’s Gender Strategy: http://www.ebrd.com/gen der-strategy.html  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders
The EBRD has met and discussed in details the GCF -EBRD Renewable Energy Financing Framework with the GCF focal point at 
the Ministry of Environment as well as with all relevant line ministries (i.e. Ministry of Electricity).  
Additionally, the EBRD has engaged extensively with a number of key stakeholders on the E&S elements of the FiT programme 
including the regulatory authorities, project  developers, other IFIs, NGOs and local communities.  This has resulted in a number 
of initiatives to ensure that projects under the scheme are developed in accordance with IFI E&S requirements.   EBRD has seen 
this initiative extend to other projects in co untry by private sector developers and has raised the capacity and awareness of the 
regulatory authorities.   The programme is also setting standards in the country regarding information dissemination and


---
*Page 28*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 38 E 
stakeholder engagement.   These elements will be furt her developed and demonstrate replicable behaviours once the 
subprojects under the programme start to be developed.  
Specifically in relation to the solar projects to be built under the FiT scheme, EBRD completed a SESA for the Benban solar site 
in January 2016.  This process included extensive public disclosure and consultation. The consultation activities are summarised 
in the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS Annex). A similar process in line with EBRD policies will be applied 
for further s ubprojects.  
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency
Essential to the development of the renewable energy sector in Egypt is to increase the participation of the private sector, which 
has been hampered  by the lack of adequate commercial long -term debt financing, which this Framework proposes to address.  
The construction of 600MW of capacity under the FiT Scheme with a 20 years support for wind power plants and 25 years for 
solar facilities will require debt financing of USD 750 million. Local commercial banks are prohibited from providing hard currency 
financing for the renewable energy projects under this FiT Scheme and the high cost of the funding in local currency makes this  
option economically unviable and unattractive for renewable energy investors. (as described in section B.3).  The availability of 
financing from GCF will address the lack of long -term commercial debt in Egypt and bridge capital gaps in the financing structure 
of individual projects.  
The cost -efficiency of the proposed Framework in Egypt is high, as the analysis on the emission reducti on potentials of the 
financing under the Framework shows that 1 tonne of CO2 equivalent emissions reductions can be achieved with GCF 
contribution of USD 7.9.   
Analysis has been done based on the operations of a typical solar plant with 50MW built under t he FiT Scheme round 2 .  Based 
on a grid emissions factor of 0. 581 tCO2e/MWh, each typical project is estimated to contribute to  approximately  60,000  tCO2e 
of annual avoided emissions , which results in around  800,000 tCO2e /yr of total  avoided annually once the full programme is 
implemented .  
The high efficiency of this project is expected to be achieved via:  
- Leveraging of GCF financing: with each USD financing from GCF expected to leverage USD 4 additional debt financing,
including the  EBRD financing, and to mobilise a total of USD 5.7 of financial sources, including equity contributed by the
sponsors.
- High operational efficiency: the estimate of CO2 savings were calculated based on a n average 25% load factor  (over 25
years)  for a typical solar plant operating in the Benban complex. It is expected that the contribution of the financing of wind
project to be like the solar projects or even better (i.e. lower cost per avoided per tCO2e) given the higher load factors of
wind pla nts compared to solar plants.
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)
The programme will support the development and construction of renewable energy projects totalling  USD 1 billion  (i.e. 
estimated total investment cost under this framework) . The projects are expected to be financed with a maximum leverage of 
75%, corresponding to total debt financing needs of USD 750 million. The GCF aggregate contributions of USD 150 million for 
subprojects financing will account for up to 15% of the total financing required to deliver the projects and represent 20% of  the 
debt needs. The GCF’s leverage ratio to EBRD and other additional financial resources is projected to be USD 1 : USD 5. 7. The 
EBRD will provide co -financing of USD 350 million from its own resources, representing up to c.35% of the project costs.  Other 
co-financers are expected to contribute with loans representing up to 25% of the total project cost.


---
*Page 29*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 38 E 
Regarding the technical assistance component, the total estimated budget for the various assignments is USD 7m, of which G CF 
is expected to contribute USD 4.7m and USD 2.3 million will be contributed by EBRD’s bilateral and multilateral donors.  
E.6.3. Financial viability
Sector level - Through this Framework, GCF and EBRD financing will demonstrate and scale up commercially viable renewable 
energy projects. Therefore, once the financing of the first wave of private sector renewable energy projects in Egypt is concluded 
and the projects reach commercial operations, it is expected that other new private investors  will be able to attract adequate 
long -term financing from local and international commercial banks.   
Subprojects level - Project financed under the Framework will benefit from long -term power purchase agreements, guaranteeing 
to purchase all of their outputs for substantially all of the asset life, and longer than  the tenor of GCF and EBRD loans.  This will 
assure the sustainability of the projects throughout their lives.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices
EBRD is committed to applying good international practices to select best available technologies (BAT) as well as manage 
environmental and social risks and impacts. Based on EBRD’s vast experience in financing renewables projects, a systematic be st 
practice approach has been established. These best practices include assessments of financially and technically f easible 
technologies, which also bring desirable environmental and social benefits. Where benchmarking data are available, the 
assessment process will make a comparison between the proposed project and good international practices. Another incentive 
for pr oposed projects to use BAT is that this Framework will assist to design and implement a competitive tender process, which 
will result in the winning bids offering the most cost -efficient technologies.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators
GCF core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
(a) Total project financing US$ 1,000 m 
(b) Requested GCF amount US$ 150m 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime 18,933,163 tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c) US$ 52.8 / tCO 2eq
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b / c) US$ 7.9 / tCO 2eq 
A methodology for expected lifetime emissions reductions is detailed in section E.1.2.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
The breakdown of the funding resources of the Framework is detailed in section B.2.  The GCF’s leverage ratio 
to EBRD and other additional financial resources is projected to be USD1 : USD  5.7


---
*Page 30*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 38 F   
Section F: APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis
A detailed economic and financial analysis will be conducted at project level  for investments that meet the F ramework’s eligibility 
criteria. The financial analysis of a typical project to be financed under this Framework  has been provided to the GCF Secretariat. 
A sector, as well as a regulatory  and market analysis , has also been p rovided to the GCF Secretariat.  
As mentioned throughout this funding proposal, there are currently financial barriers hampering the mobilization and scaling up 
of renewable energy in Egypt. These barriers manifes t themselves either in non -availability of finance or in inflexible grace periods 
and loan tenors that are not adapted to the charac teristics of such investments.  
A comparison has been provided to the GCF Secretariat between several financing scenarios for the financing of a typical project 
under the FiT Scheme round 2, which is the focus of the Framework. Such analysis has showed that there is currently no 
commerci al lending available at terms which would ensure the bankability of the projects and attract private investors . The 
analysis also highlighted the importance of the GCF funding to unlock the financial feasibility of the first wave of private sector 
renewabl e energy projects  through the blending of concessional financing with financing from EBRD and other international and 
development financial institutions .  
The demonstration effect of the feasibility of the first wave of private renewable energy projects in  Egypt will show the viability 
of the sector which will then attract new private investors, local and international commercial banks which will be able to p ropose 
adequate long -term financing  with no concessionality needs.  
Further economic benefits can also be added as de scribed earlier in the document, such as benefits from the GHG emissions 
avoided  and the s uccessful implementation of the FiT Scheme , which would set the basis for further renewable energy support 
mechanism s, namely through the launch of  competitive tenders (that this Framework will also support  via Component 1) . 
Overall, t hrough this Framework, GCF and EBRD financing will demonstrate and scale up commercially viable renewable energy 
projects in Egypt while catalysing a paradigm shift not  only within the electricity sector in the country  but also within the local 
and international financial markets.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation
Technical evaluation will be conducted at a project level as it is site specific  and construction contracts specific and it is on -going 
for the subprojects in the pipeline .  A high level market study presenting the context for this programme in the Egypt is annexed 
to this funding proposal  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, inc luding Gender Considerations
Environmental and Social aspects  
Under the EBRD’s 2014 E&S Policy the Framework itself will not be categorised and each Subproject will be subject to full pro ject 
and sponsor -specific environmental and social due diligence with the support of an independent consultant.  A similar approach 
is supported by the IFC’s E&S Policy and associated Performance Standards and therefore GCF’s requirements.  EBRD anticipates  
that all Solar projects under the FiT scheme will be Category B  and the wind projects will be a combination of Category A and B.  
On the basis of this each Subproject will be individually reviewed and categorised and due diligence wi ll be undertaken


---
*Page 31*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 38 F   
accordingly.  Under GCF’s “Comprehensive Information Disclosure Polic y of the Fund” it is understood that the Framework would 
be categorised according to the anticipated risk profile of the individual Subprojects would require site specific assessment s 
consistent with the approach of EBRD.  With this in mind it has been agr eed with GCF that Category A projects will be excluded 
from receiving GCF financing so that this framework will overall be considered Category B.  
Solar Subprojects:  
The E&S risks and impacts associated with the development of an individual 50 MW solar photovoltaic project in an area of low  
environmental and social sensitivity are likely to be readily identified, assessed and mitigated through the adoption of good  E&S 
practice. In the absence of any site specific sensitivities or concerns associated with any one project it is anticipated tha t each 
solar Subproject will be categorised B (I -2), and this will be confirmed during project appraisal.  
Most of the Subprojects are expected to be implemented on one specific 37 km2 plot allocated to NREA for these purposes near 
Benban in Upper Egypt. This plot is divided into 41 subplots, each allowing for a plant of 20 MW or 50 MW, with a total capac ity 
for the entire site of 1,8 00 MW. When complete this site will be the largest solar complex in the world delivering significant 
environmental benefits to a country that is largely dependent on fossil fuels for energy production. However, the concurrent 
development of a large number of projects on such a site has the potential to give rise to a number of cumulative risks and impacts 
such as: workforce sourcing; resource needs; logistical arrangements; and the requirement for associated facilities including  grid 
connection(s), even tho ugh the impacts of each individual project are not anticipated to be significant.  
Recognising this concern NREA, with EBRD support, initiated a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (a SESA) to ensur e 
that these cumulative impacts were identified a nd managed. The EBRD has engaged with its clients and also worked with other 
IFIs and the Egyptian authorities to ensure that Developers under the Solar FiT site cooperate in the management of these 
impacts.  This has extended to working with the authoriti es and the developers in building an E&S governance structure and 
sufficient management capacity to deliver on the SESA commitments collectively.  The SESA and its related Non -Technical 
Summary have been disclosed in English and Arabic and include a compre hensive E&S Action Plan (or ESMP in line with GCF 
terminology).  The documents in English and Arabic can be found here: http://www.ebrd.com/work -with -us/projects/esia/egypt -
renewable -feedintariff -framework.html  
Each Subproject will be subject to the full E &S Due Diligence and the usual disclosure requirements, during the ESDD period it 
will be confirmed that no Category A projects will be included in the framework.  Each subproject will be disclosed by EBRD a nd 
project specific environmental and social acti on plans (ESMP) will be developed to ensure the objectives of the framework are 
met; that the outcomes of the SESA are duly considered and actioned; and that the delivery of each Subproject is undertaken i n 
accordance with the PRs/PSs and GCF’s requirement s. 
Wind Subprojects:  
The FiT Wind programme has identified three areas  for wind development in Egypt, namely: a) East of Nile; b) West of Nile; and 
c)Gulf of Suez/ Ras Ghareb
Adopting a similar approach to the Solar FiT programme, EBRD and other agencies have recognised that additional information 
regarding E&S sensitives is required in order for such developments to progress in line with international E&S standards.  As  a 
resu lt a series of Strategic Environmental and Social Assessments of these areas that have been designated for development have 
been initiated.  A particular focus of these SESAs is the potential ornithological impacts of projects individually and in accumulat ion 
with others.  
It is anticipated that windfarms could be up to 250MW and some will therefore to Categorised A.  In addition there will be a series 
of smaller windfarms planned in low E&S sensitive areas that are likely to be Category B (I -2) and these s ubprojects would be 
appraised by EBRD on a case by case basis to ensure that these subprojects can be structured to meet the various E&S


---
*Page 32*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 38 F   
requirements, are disclosed individually appropriately and that all relevant supporting documents (ESMS) have been prep ared 
accordingly.  This method will screen out any Category A projects from receiving GCF financing under this framework.   
Gender aspects  
The energy market is vital to Egypt’s economy and women can in particular benefit from opportunities connected to the  
development of renewable energy sources. Women in Egypt currently work primarily in services and agriculture, with only very 
small numbers in power and energy (World Bank 2011). With appropriate university and vocational skills training, however, 
women ca n also access employment opportunities in RES engineering, industrial management and core operations. The World 
Bank (2011) estimated that addressing women’s under -representation in higher -value occupations such as RES would reduce the 
productivity gap and  boost worker's output in Egypt by 3 -25 per cent. By strengthening equality of opportunity in this framework, 
women are expected to be encouraged to apply their talents and seek training opportunities in RES sectors.  
The Gender plan for the Framework  will ensure that all consultations with stakeholders will be designed in a gender responsive 
way and women will be equally consulted and participate in all discussions related to the subprojects . This approach will be 
incremental and would set a proper benchma rk for other projects to follow.  
The Framework is accompanied by a Gender Action Plan template for subprojects.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement
Financial resources from the GCF will be managed according to the general provisions of the AMA between the GCF and the 
EBRD. EBRD  will establish the GCF Special Fund (‘the Special Fund’) internally, through which all payments from the GCF and 
repayments t o the GCF will pass.  
In using the resources of the GCF (‘Special Fund resources’) for this Programme, the EBRD will apply the same internal financ ial 
management policies and procedures as are applied when administering technical assistance or making a loa n, from its ordinary 
capital resources. The EBRD will exercise the same amount of care and diligence to ‘Special Fund resources’ as for its own ca pital 
resources. Compliance to the EBRD policies and requirements will be monitored and reported by the EBRD O ffice of the Chief 
Compliance Officer (OCCO).  
PROCUREMENT  
1. EBRD’s Procurement Policies and Rules (PP&R)
The EBRD aims to help create reliable and stable markets for climate technologies in its regions and thus puts strong emphasi s 
on procurement of relevant goods and services.  
The EBRD's Procurement Policies and Rules (PP&R)  are designed to promote efficiency and effectiveness and to minimise credit 
risk in the implementation of the EBRD's lending and investment operations.  
Among the EBRD’s PP&R2, three are of  particular relevance to this Programme. 
Relevant PP&R with regards to the Programme are as follows:  
 3. Procurement Rules for Public Sector Operations
2 http://www.ebrd.com/news/publications/policies/procurement -policies -and-rules.html


---
*Page 33*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 38 F   
 4. Procurement in the Private Sector
 5. Procurement Rules for Consultant Services
2. Event of violation of procurement policies and EBRD Enforcement Policy and Procedures
The EBRD requires that clients, including beneficiaries of Bank -financed operations, as well as tenderers, suppliers, contractors, 
concessionaires and consultants under EBRD -financed contra cts, observe the highest standard of transparency and integrity 
during the procurement, execution and implementation of such contracts. In pursuance of this policy, The EBRD defines 
prohibited practices, namely coercive practice, collusive practice, corrup t practice, fraudulent practice and theft (PP&R Section 
2.9).  
Any occurrence, or suspected occurrence, of a Prohibited Practice in the procurement, award, or implementation of a Bank -
financed contract in the context of a Project shall be dealt with in acc ordance with the provisions of The EBRD’s Enforcement 
Policy as defined in the EBRD’s Enforcement Policy and Procedures.


---
*Page 34*
---

RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 29 OF 38 G   G 
Section G: RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary
The level of key risks that will affect the Framework performance are generally moderate and expected to be mitigated to a 
substantial degree by EBRD’s established operational tools and control mechanisms. Key risks to this  Framework are listed in 
section G.2 below.  
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Regulatory risk/reliance on feed -in tariff  Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk is mitigated by the strong institutional commitment to renewable energy.  This risk is further mitigated by a robus t 
contractual framework supported by a sovereign guarantee for EETC's payment obligations under the power purchase 
agreement.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Forex risk  because of a mismatch between EBRD and GCF 
financing provided in USD while the project tariff is paid in 
EGP.  Financial  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk is substantially mitigated by indexation of a portion of the feed -in tariff to the then applicable USD:EGP exchange rate.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Creditworthiness of the off -taker . Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk is mitigated by  the provision of a sovereign guarantee for EETC's payment obligations.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Completion and cost overruns  risk Financial  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low


---
*Page 35*
---

RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 30 OF 38 G   G 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk is expected to be mitigated for each project through an EPC contract or similarly robust construction arrangements,  
appropriate contingency and/or cost overrun arrangements and detailed technical due diligence.  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Operation/technology risk .. Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
These risks will be mitigated by detailed due diligence and robust operation and maintenance arrangements.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Connection and curtailment  Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -20% 
of project  value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Contractually this risk is mitigated by the take -or-pay nature of the offtake arra ngements.  Each project will also be subject to 
technical due diligence to confirm that offtake of all of its generation is technically feasible.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Environmental and social risk . Each subproject under the 
framework will have an associated with an environmental 
and social action plan (an ESAP) an Environmental and Social 
Management System (an ESMS) to ensure compliance with 
EBRD's 2014 Environmental and Social Policy, the IFCs 
Perfo rmance Standards and therefore GCF’s requirements.    Social and 
environmental  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
ESAPs and ESMPs will be developed both for the framework and at subproject level to ensure uptake and implementation of 
appropriate mitigation measures.    
Where collective issues need to be developed at a strategic and collective level the ESAP / ESMP will  require that an appropriate 
E&S governance structure is developed so that common standards are developed and adhered to.   At a subproject level the 
responsibilities of a single developer will be clearly identified to ensure that subproject level mitigatio n measures are clearly 
identified and implemented.  
The resulting risk of E&S impact following ESMP/ESAP and mitigation implementation is considered to be low for category B 
projects and low – moderate for Category A projects.


---
*Page 36*
---

RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  | PAGE 31 OF 38 G   G 
Other Potential Risks in the  Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., iss ues that 
have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring) .  This could include issues re lated to external 
stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors . 
* Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 37*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 38 H  
Section H: RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
H.1. Logic Framework .
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under the
Results Management F ramework .
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level3
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  The fundamental purpose of the Framework is to enhance the long -term viability of private sector  
investments in harnessing Egypt’s renewable energy potential, thus enabling the scale necessary to 
bring the generation sector, and so the economy as a whole, onto a lower -carbon development path.  
The paradigm shift objectives are therefore two -fold: 
 Enhancing capacities at all levels to accommodate a sustainable growth in renewable energy
investments – this will include: strengthening the ability of the authorities responsible for
managing the grid and the FiT schemes to visualize and manage the capac ity of the system to
take in renewable c apacity; sharing knowledge  to improve the tendering processes and systems;
bringing in best practice at in structuring projects, for instance via adoption of high
environmental and social impact assessments, etc.
 Helping bring to financial close a critical number of first projects, by providing adequately project
finance, using the GCF resources – this will test and lead to fine -tuning of the regulatory context
and will demonstrate valuable project implementation trac k-record for more private sector
investors to follow.
This multi -angled approach to encouraging the development of a private sector -led investment 
market in Egypt’s renewable potential will provide durable context for the country to continue 
decarbonizi ng its power sector ove r the long -term. Directly, the  impact indicator for the Framework 
contribution to this development is represented by the estimated emission reductions to be 
achieved via the generation of clean energy throughout  the lifetime of the a ssets. This will be around 
19million tonnes of CO 2. 
3 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the following 
link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 38*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 38 H  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if 
applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
M1.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy  access 
and power generation  M1.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided  Programme 
level mid -
term report 
(15 years 
after 
operation) 
and final 
report (23 
years after 
operation)  N/A N/A Around 
19,000,000 
M1.0 Reduced emissions 
through increased low -
emission energy access 
and power generation  M1.2 Cost per tCO2eq 
decreased for all Fund -
funded mitigation 
projects/programmes  Programme 
level mid -
term report 
(15 years 
after 
operation) 
and final 
report (23 
years after 
operation)  N/A N/A N/A 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if 
applicable
) Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased number of 
small, medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers  6.1 Proportion of low -
emission power 
supply in a jurisdiction 
or market.  EBRD board 
document, 
reports from 
the recipients  N/A N/A tbc


---
*Page 39*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 38 H  
M6.0 Increased number of 
small, medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers  6.3 MWs of low -
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a 
result of GCF support  EBRD board 
document, 
reports from 
the recipients  N/A N/A 600 
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1.Commercially viable
renewables projects are
identified, financed and
implementedNumber of p rojects 
(depending on project 
size)  EBRD project 
monitoring 
reports  N/A N/A 8-12
Volume of financing  
N/A N/A Up to 
USD 1 
billion  
2.Technical advice to
enhance the enabling
infrastructure for the
uptake of renewablesCompletion of the 
model on the 
renewable energy 
injection capacity into 
the grid  EBRD 
monitoring 
report, 
consultant 
report N/A N/A tbc 
3.Capacity building for
public institutions to
prepare competitive
tendersNumber of capacity 
building workshop 
held ; number of 
attendants  
RE capacity 
awarded/built 
through 
existing/future 
tenders  EBRD 
monitoring 
report, 
consultant 
report  N/A N/A tbc 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
Regarding output 1   Conduct technical, financial,
environmental and social due
diligence
 Assist throughout the
procurement and implementation
of technologies
 Ensure the procurement processes
are in line with EBRD and the GCF
policies and rulesFinancial resources 
and technical 
expertise deployed 
to develop, assess, 
finance and report 
on projects Specific plans to be prepared


---
*Page 40*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 38 H 
 Monitor the performance of
technologies post implementation
Regarding output 2   Conduct a grid study to ensure the
increased renewables capacity can
be connected to the grid without
imposing unacceptable effects on
the gridExpertise on grid 
code  Specific plans to be prepared  
Regarding output 3   Training of relevant authorities on
designing and implementing a
competitive tender processExpertise and skills 
transfer for 
competitive tender 
process  Specific plans to be prepared


---
*Page 41*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 38 H  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation
I. MONITORING
Implementation of each project under this Framework will be managed and monitored at project and Framework level by both 
EBRD’s in -house staff, Project Implementation Unit, and procured consultants. The EBRD has dedicated staff in its sectors team s, 
risk departments and regional offices that will conduct due diligence and monitor project risks and prepare mitigation measures 
throughout the Framework lifecycle.  
II. REPORTING
1. Reporting of project companies to the EBRD
As specified in Loan Agreemen ts between project companies and EBRD, project companies are obliged to report on the use of 
proceeds of the Programme and the environmental and social performance of the project to the EBRD on annual basis.   
The implementation consultants of Component 1 will officially report progress on a periodic basis to EBRD staff throughout the 
Framework lifetime . The subprojects of Component 2  will be required to provide financial  and the environmental and social 
reporting, among other .   
The EBRD will provide to th e GCF a) semi -annual activity performance reports on the status of GCF funded activities throughout the 
relevant reporting period, and b) final evaluation reports at the end of the implementation period of the Framework :   
a. Semi-annual Performance Reports , including the disbursements made during the relevant period, the implementation status
of the Funded Activity and the monitoring of results and impacts of such Funded Activity.
b. Upon completion, projects will be subject to the EBRD formal evaluation process . A final report prepared by the independent
Evaluation Department (EvD) sets out the results and impacts achieved, as well as their sustainability, scalability and lesso ns
learned, during the relevant period.
III. EVALUATION
1. Project evaluation by the  EBRD in -house staff  and its independent advisors
Throughout the Framework lifecycle, both the EBRD in -house staff and its independent advisors  (such as technical and 
environmental and social advisors) will evaluate the success and risks of projects. A final report of each project will include review 
and evaluation of the financial and technical performance of projects, capacity building results, climate mitigation and adap tation 
impact, as well as donor  visibility and marketing outreach.  
2. Project or Framework level evaluation by the independent EBRD Evaluation department
The independent Evaluation Department evaluates the performance of the EBRD’s completed projects and Framework . The 
Evaluation Department  is a department independent of the EBRD’s various banking divisions (and hence of the developers and 
managers of the projects they evaluate); therefore, EvD reports solely to the Board of Directors (i.e. to the representations  of the 
shareholding governme nts). The EvD evaluates the effectiveness, relevance and input efficiency of projects and provides the Board 
with important insights into the implementation of projects, impacts, success stories and lessons learnt. Under the EBRD’s Pu blic 
Information Polic y, EvD publishes summaries of its independent project evaluations.


---
*Page 42*
---

ANNEX ES 
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 38 I I I I 
Section I: ANNEXES  
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal
☒ NDA No -objection Letter
☐ Feasibility Study
☒ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (If applicable)
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule,
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan
(If applicable)
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable)
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable)
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation
☒ Gender Annex
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents.


---
*Page 43*
---

Page 38


---
*Page 44*
---

Page 39 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Egypt Renewable Energy Financing Framework  
Accredited entity  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2017 -03-03 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Arabic  
Link to disclosure  Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)  
http://www.ebrd.com/work -with -us/projects/esia/egypt -
renewable -feedintariff -framework.html   
Other link(s)  
Environmental and Social Management Plan  (ESMP)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclos ure on 
accredited entity’s website  2017 -03-03 
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Arabic  
Link to disclosure  Environmental and Social Management Framework and System 
(ESMFS)  
http://www.ebrd.com/what -we-do/get/knowledge -hub.html   
Other link(s)  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Not Applicable  
Language(s) of disclosure  
Link to disclosure  
Other link(s)  
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  
Language(s) of disclosure  
Link to disclosure  
Other link(s)  
________  Not Applicable