=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/CreationDate: D:20160922162329+09'00'
/Creator: PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2
/ModDate: D:20160927141357+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration	of	funding	
proposals	–	Addendum	VII	
Funding	proposal	package	for	FP024GCF/B.14/07/Add.07 
27	September	2016 	Meeting	of	the	Board	
12	–	14	October	2016	
Songdo,	Incheon,	Republic	of	Korea	
Provisional	agenda	item	11(f) 	
Summary		
This	addendum	contains	the	following	three	parts:	
a)A	funding	proposal	titled	“Empower	to	Adapt:	Creating	Climate‐C hange	Resilien t
Livelihoods	through
	Community‐Based	Natural	Resource	Management 	in	Namibi a”
submitte
d	by	Environment	Investment	Fund	of	Namibia	(EIF );
b)A	no‐objecti
on	letter	issued	by	the	national	designated	authori ty	or	focal	point; 	and
c)Envi
ronmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure.
The	documents	are	presented	as	submitted	by	the	accredited	enti ty,	and	national	designated	
authority	or	focal	point,	respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.14/07/Add.07 	
Page	b	
Table	of	Contents 	
Funding	proposal	submitted	 by	the	ac credited	entity	
No‐objection	letter	issued	by	th e	national	designated	authorit y	or	focal	point	
Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Project/Programme Title: Empower to Adapt:
Creating Climate-Change Resilient Livelihoods through Community-Based Natural Resource Management in Namibia
 
Country/Region: Namibia, Southern Africa 
Accredited Entity: Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia 
Date of Submission: August 26, 2016


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Contents 
  
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 Section D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAIN ST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AN D MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template   
 Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accre dited entity. For all 
other sections, including the A ppraisal Summary in section F, a ccredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information.  Accredited entities can either  directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with c ross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name c onvention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[ Date]-[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 59 
 B
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / p rogramme title Empower to Adapt: Creating Climate-Change Resilient 
Livelihoods through Community-Based Natural Resource 
Management in Namibia 
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     Namibia 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) Ministry of Environmen t and Tourism (MET)  
A.1.5. Accredited entity Environment Investment Fund of Namibia (EIF)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality   Enhanced Direct Access ☐  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary Fund Management: Environment Investment Fund of 
Namibia 
Executing Entities: Communal Conservancies, Community 
Forests, MET and support organizations such as the 
Namibian Association of C ommunity-Based Natural 
Resource Management (CBNRM) Support Organizations 
(NACSO)1. 
Beneficiaries: Rural communities from registered Communal 
Conservancies and Community Forests in Namibia. 
A.1.7. Project size category  (Total investment, million 
USD)   Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☐ Mitigation  Adaptation ☐ Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission August 26, 2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, position Mr. Benedict Moore Libanda, Chi ef Executive Officer (CEO) 
Organization Environment Investment F und of Namibia (EIF) 
Email address blibanda@eifnamibia.com 
Telephone number + 264 61 431 7700 (+ 264 811 491 944) 
Mailing address PO Box 28157, Auas Valley 
  
                                                      
1 An association comprising 8 N on-Government Organizations (NGOs ) and the University of Namibia. The purpose of NACSO is to 
provide quality services to rur al communities seeking to manage  and utilize their natural resour ces in a sustainable manner.


---
*Page 6*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 59 
 B
 
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
 Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapi d bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-ef ficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, et c.)   
 Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and ma nagement, agroforestry, agricul tural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of: 
 Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate ch ange – diversification of supply sources and supply chain manag ement, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
 Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, e fficient irrigation systems, et c.) 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
  
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
The Community-Based Natural Res ource Management (CBNRM) program  makes an enormous contribution to both 
ecosystem conservation and rural development in the communal ar eas of Namibia. Almost one fifth of Namibia´s land 
surface, accommodating more than 200,000 people, is under conse rvation and improved management through this 
program. Local institutions have developed and have gained skil ls and capacity, resulting in the diversification of 
livelihoods and the generation of e conomic benefits for their m embers. These CBNRM successes are threatened by CC 
impacts. 
 
2. The proposed project is built on the strong institutional fo undation of the Namibian CBNRM network, which consists 
of communal conservancies and community forests in the rural co mmunal areas of Namibia. These existing institutions 
are ideally placed to be the conduits for the implementation of  local-level climate action as they have been in operation 
for the past 26 years. It is ex pected the project will increase  the resilience towards climate change of at least 15,000 
direct and an estimated 61,000 i ndirect beneficiaries and impro ve management on an area of 7,200,000 hectares. The 
project will run over five years and consists of two complement ary components that will empower rural CBNRM 
communities to respond to climate change in terms of awareness,  adaptive capacity and low- carbon rural development. 
The two components are: 
 Component 1.  Capacity Building and Community Support:  This component is essential for the success and 
sustainability of community-bas ed climate action. It comprises awareness raising, capacity building and support 
to development and implementation of climate investment plans a t the local level. 
 Component 2.  Resilient Grant Facility for CBNRM Livelihoods in Namibia:  This component will empower 
rural CBNRM communities to increase their resilience to climate  change through direct access to climate 
finance. It comprises a ring-fenced grant facility that will fo cus on the development and strengthening resilient 
CBNRM livelihoods through grants in three defined investment ar eas.


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 59 
 B
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 31/10/2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 31/12/2022  
Estimated implementation start and end date Start: 01/03/2017 
End: 31/03/2022 
Project/programme lifespan Five years 
 
B.1. Description of Financial E lements of the Project / Program me 
A grant-financing instrument is used for this project seeking m aximum concessionality to undertake the proposed 
adaptation investments. 
Table 1: Breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub-component in local and foreign 
currency  
Component Sub-component ( if applicable) Amount 
(USD) Amount in 
Local 
Currency 
(NAD) GCF funding 
amount 
(USD) Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient 
Component 
I: Capacity 
Building and 
Community 
Support CC awareness creation 192,000 2,803,830 192,000 USD 
Support to local climate monitoring 34,500 503,813 34,500 USD 
Strengthen CBNRM governance 438,500 6,403,540 438,500 USD 
Capacity building for community-led 
initiatives 228,500 3,336,850 228,500 USD 
COMPONENT I SUBTOTAL 893,50 0 13,048,034 893,500 USD
Component 
II: Grant 
Facility for 
Resilient 
CBNRM 
Livelihoods 
in Namibia Grant Option 2.1: Climate Resilient 
Agriculture 2,040,000 29,790,6 99 2,040,000 USD 
Grant Option 2.2: Climate Resilient 
Infrastructure 1,200,000 17,523,9 41 1,200,000 USD 
Grant Option 2.3: Ecosystems Based 
Adaptation and Mitigation 4,740,000 69,219,5 65 4,740,000 USD 
COMPONENT II SUBTOTAL 7,980,000 116,534,205 7,980,000 USD 
EDA Project 
Management   813,747 11,883,374 813,747 USD 
EDA Project 
M&E   312,753 4,567,227 312,753 USD 
Total program financing 10,000,000 146,032,841 10,000,000 USD 
A detailed breakdown of cost/budget by 
expenditure type is provided in the Excel spreadsheet attached to this funding 
proposal. 
A n  i n d i c a t i v e  d i s b u r s e m e n t  s c h e d u l e  i s  
provided in the term sheet attached to this 
funding proposal. USD 893,500 , 
9%
USD 7,980,000  , 
80%USD 312,753 , 
3%USD 813,747 , 
8%Program Budget Distribution
Component  I: Capacity
Building
Component  II: Grant
Facility
Project M&E
EDA Project
Management


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 59 
 B
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  10 million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient (vi) Grants * 10 million USD 
($) (  )  years 
(  )  years (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  10 million USD 
($)  
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of 
Institution Tenor Pricing Seniority 
No co-financing envis aged for the proposed project. However, co -funding is envisaged in line with the 
GCF exit strategy (refer to section D.2.). 
Lead financing institution: N/A 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GC F financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financin g
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE)  or if the AE is the reci pient itself, in the propose d
financial instrument and terms as described in  part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
For the present funding proposal,  the AE is the recipient itsel f and will administer the grant facility to be 
established with GCF funding. 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
N/A


---
*Page 9*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 59 
 C
 
C.1. Strategic Context 
4. About Namibia:  Namibia is situated in South -Western Africa and covers a land area of 825,418 km². With a 
population of 2.3 million (2013 fi gure) and an average populati on density of less than 3 persons/km² (global average: 49 
persons/km²), Namibia is the se cond least densely populated sov ereign country in the world (after Mongolia). Namibia 
gained independence from South Africa only in 1990. The country  is a stable parliamentary democracy, classified by 
the World Bank as an upper-middle income country. Yet, Namibia faces certain unique challenges due to, among other 
things, its arid climate, recent  apartheid history and a severe  income gap illustrated by a Gini Coefficient of 63.9 – one 
of the highest worldwide (UNDP, 2014).  
 5. Namibia’s climate:  Namibia is the driest country i n Sub-Saharan Africa. The media n annual rainfall ranges from less 
than 50 mm to 250 mm in Namibia’s hyper-arid southwest and coas tline, and peak at 350 to 550 mm in the sub-humid 
northeast. Overall, about 22% of the country is classified as h yper-arid, 70% as arid, and less than 8% as dry sub-
humid (Mendelsohn, Jarvis, Rober ts, & Robertson, 2002). Over mo st of the country, potential evaporation is at least five 
times greater than average rain fall (GRN, 2014). The climate is  characterized by high variab ility in the form of persistent 
droughts, unpredictable and variable rainfall patterns, variabi lity in temperatures and scar city of water (GRN, 2011). 
Lack of water is regarded as a ke y limitation to Namibia’s deve lopment. Perennial rivers on ly occur on the country´s 
borders. Of the total rainfall, 83% evaporates shortly after pr ecipitation and 17% is available as surface runoff of which 
1% recharges groundwater sources and 14% is lost through evapo- transpiration (2,600 mm to 3,700 mm per year). 
Hence, only 2% (i.e. 5 mm) remains to be harnessed in surface s torage facilities (FAO). Namibia is one of the world’s 
most vulnerable countries with regard to climate change due to its extreme aridity and dependence on primary industry, 
combined with a limited adaptive capacity (Brown, 2009). Approx imately 70% of Namibia’s population live in rural 
areas. Farming is the dominant land use in Namibia, but it is c haracterized by low production and high risk due to arid 
conditions, infertile soils and generally poor land use practic es. 
 
6. Conservation in Namibia:  In total, almost 44% of Namibia´s  land area is under some form  of conservation (NACSO, 
2016)
2. While state-protected areas cover 16.8% of the land surface, an additional 20%, i.e. one fifth, of Namibia’s land 
area is under conservation through the Community-Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) Program (see 
Figure 1). This corresponds to an area of 163, 396 km², which i s about 53.4% of all communal land and accommodates 
about 200,000 residents. Of this area, conservancies manage 160 ,244km², which is about 19.4% of Namibia. Although 
community forests covers an area of 30,827km², 90% of this area  is overlapping with conservancies. The program 
currently comprises 82 Communal Conservancies and 32 Community Forests on communal land. CBNRM is a 
conservation and development strategy premised on an incentive- driven philosophy that recognizes how conservation 
of natural resources links with rural development and sustainab le livelihoods. It is based on the assumption that 
communities with responsibility and authority over natural reso urces tend to manage them sustainably in ways that also 
result in reduction in rural pov erty when they are in control o f those resources and derive direct benefits arising from 
their use. 
 
                                                      
2 Private forms of conservation areas are Freehold Conservancies  and Concessions.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 59 
 C
 
Figure 1: Conservation areas in Namibia. In total, almost 44% o f Namibia’s land surface are under some form of 
conservation. The proposed project targets registered Communal Conservancies and Community Forests, which cover 
roughly 20% of Namib ia’s land surface.  
 
7. CBNRM in Namibia:  CBNRM is founded on three pillars  - institutional development,  natural resources management, 
and business, enterprises and livelihoods. Institutional develo pment emphasizes that good governance creates the 
basis for resource management, benefit capture and distribution . Natural resource management is focused on 
innovative management approaches, which enables biodiversity co nservation and sustainable use. Business, 
enterprise and livelihoods are based on market-based approaches  that enable a wide range of community returns 
(NACSO, 2014; NACSO, 2013). Some o f the characteristics of CBNR M are that:


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 59 
 C
 It is a rural development program that seeks to devolve rights  and responsibilities over w ildlife, tourism, forests 
and other natural resources  to rural communities  
 It promotes wise and sustainabl e management of natural resourc es 
 It encourages biodiversity cons ervation by creating the necess ary conditions for sustainable use  
 It provides incentiv es to communities to manage and use natura l resources in sustainab le and productive ways  
 It creates opportunities for ent erprise development and income  generation 
 It is an empowerment and capacity-building project that encour ages and assists communities and their local 
institutions to develop skills and experience to manage their n atural resources in order to improve their 
livelihoods  
 More recently, CBNRM is being used as an entry point for commu nity based climate change adaptation 
initiatives at a local level 
 
8. Climate change and CBNRM:  The majority of CBNRM income is directly linked to natural res ource utilization. 
Already, the impact of climate ch ange is undermining the growin g nature-based tourism industry in Namibia directly by 
impacting on the tourism resource base, through changes in habi tats, landscape characteristics and vegetation cover, 
biodiversity loss, decreasing wa ter availability, increased fre quency and severity of climate hazards, coastal erosion, 
and increased incidence of vector borne diseases (like malaria) . Beneficiaries of the CBNRM program in conservancies 
and forest reserves, who are developing sustainable livelihoods  based on resource management and tourism, stand to 
be severely affected by any such changes. The impact of climate  change undermines the investments and potential 
ecosystem services and goods that CBNRM provides to support liv elihoods of more than 200,000 Namibians who 
depend on natural resource use for their survival. The Vulnerab ility and Adaptation Assessment of Namibia (MET, 
2008) identifies CBNRM as an important Program that offers an o pportunity for communities to diversify their livelihood 
options. At the same time, these local level institutions provi de an opportunity to integrate adaptation to climate while 
responding to other environment al or socio-economic changes. 
 9. CBNRM Policies:  Namibia, to date, has implemented several conservation interve ntions that combine sustainable 
natural resource management and rural development through CBNRM  since 1992. The idea of a national CBNRM 
support structure emerged in the early 1990s through the work o f the CBNRM support organizations, the Ministry of 
Environment and Tourism and the national NGOs, and was supporte d by the USAID funded Living in a Finite 
Environment (LIFE) project. International support was received through USAID, DfID, SIDA, WWF, GEF and World 
Bank, together with domestic support from the Ministry of Envir onment and Tourism, the Namibia Nature Foundation 
and others. The objective was "to p romote activities that demon strate that sustainably managed natural resources can 
result in social development and economic growth, and in suitab le partnership between local communities and 
government." This has certainly been demonstrated and the progr am has been successfully mainstreamed into national 
development priorities - representing one of CBNRM's major, ove r-riding achievements. CBN RM activities are now an 
integral part of Rural Poverty Reduction, Rural Development, Na tional Development Plans, Harambee Prosperity Plan 
and Vision 2030. In short, the CBNRM Program provides a win-win  livelihoods and conservation/ sustainability solution. 
The legal provision enabling the implementation of CBNRM is fra gmented and embedded in the legislative frameworks 
of various government ministries. The legislation most relevant  to this study is Nature Conservation Amendment Act of 
1996 and the Forestry Act  of 2002. The CBNRM legal entities as established by the Ministr
y of Environment and 
Tourism (MET), and Ministry of Ag riculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) are commonly known as communal 
conservancies and community forests (CFs). The legal declaratio n of an area as Communal Conservancy or 
Community Forest goes hand in hand with the registration of a c orresponding legal institution in form of a Community-
Based Organization (CBO). CBO is the term used throughout this funding proposal when referring to these CBNRM 
legal entities. 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
10. The CBNRM network comprises about 200,000 residents in 82 C ommunal Conservancies and 32 Community 
Forests on communal land. This corresponds to an area of 163,39 6 km² (16,339,600 hectares). Communal 
conservancies and community forests operate exclusively in rura l settings in Namibia. This renders them particularly 
vulnerable to the effects of a changing climate as they remain highly dependent on variable rainfall patterns and 
associated fluctuating natural resource yields. In addition, CB NRM entities in rural Namib ia often have very limited 
access to the financial, technical and human resources required  to enhance their resilienc e to climate change. In


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 59 
 C
general, CBNRM communities liv e under high exposure to climate risks such as: 
 Drought and low rainfall:  More than 80% of people living within the CBNRM boundaries dep end on natural 
resource use for their livelihoods as subsistence farmers, smal l-scale emerging farmers and horticultural 
farmers. These communities have been identified as having the h ighest levels of ex posure because drought 
increases the likelihood that crops will fail or animals will d ie. Drought has affected f ood production directly 
over the last 15 years in Namib ia (Ziervogel and Angula, 2016).  This has led farmers to finish their stock of 
millet in granaries before  the next rainy season.  
 Loss of forest cover and species:  Deforestation and desertification; frequent forest fires; chan ges in forest 
types, species composition and di stribution; and the disappeara nce of medicinal plants. Vulnerable species are 
those that have limited geogra phical ranges, drought/heat intol erance, low germination rates, low survival rate 
of seedlings, and limited seed dispersal/migration capabilities . Unsustainable supply of forest, products and 
services. Decrease in employment and foreign exchange earnings through forest-based industries and trade  
 Inadequate access to climate information:  This is a serious concern for CBNRM communities who depend on 
land and natural resources and for who knowledge on climatic tr ends and corresponding adaptation is crucial. 
This is especially true as resid ents incur the direct costs of damage from increased extreme weather events.  
 High temperatures:  Extreme high temperatures over the past 15 years have been ass ociated with the outbreak 
of pests and diseases that impac t both crops and animals. Over the years, there has been outbreak of foot and 
mouth disease, anthrax, and rabies . These diseases have profoun d impact on both livestock production and 
wildlife management resulting in l oss of revenues to support li velihoods. Sensitivity for those on social grants, 
such as the elderly and those living with HIV/AIDS was seen to be high, because they will not be able to work 
long hours in their fields if it is too hot. Small-scale trader s are less sensitive because they do not directly 
depend on natural resources. However, their products are likely  to expire faster d ue to heat stress.  
 Biodiversity loss and species movement:  There is indication that recent and ongoing climate change is leading 
to rapid changes in the distributions of species in Namibia’s p rotected area network. Species movements into 
areas where they were not prev iously found are observed, the di sappearance of species from a region where 
they once were, or a shift in the abundance and distribution of  individuals within a species range (Midgeley et 
al. 2010). Changes in fire and precipitation regimes continue t o drive or accelerate shifts from one ecosystem 
state to another. Declines in charismatic wildlife populations lead nature-watchers, phot ographers, and hunters 
to seek other habitats that offer more substantial populations and that have an impact on local livelihoods. The 
impacts of these changes includ es, loss of income opportunities  and jobs, loss of primary production to provide 
ecosystem goods and services, and increased levels of poverty a s CBNRM residents depends on natural 
resource for their livelihoods. 
11. While CBNRM communities through the CBNRM program have rece ived substantial support in terms of institutional 
development, biodiversity and ecosystem conservation and busine ss development based on sustainable natural 
resource management and utilization, there has been no dedicate d support to date to prepare them for the above risks 
associated with climate change. If the achievements of the Nami bian CBNRM program are to be sustained and built 
upon in future, substantial enhance ment of the adaptive capacit y of the CBNRM communities is crucial. At the same 
time, CBNRM CBOs have been identi fied as critical institutions for local-level awareness and practical climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities and are thus crucial to Na mibia’s overall climate change strategy. The existing 
Namibian CBNRM program therefore forms a solid basis for widesp read community-based climate change responses 
at the local level and bears enor mous potential for creating an d safeguarding resilient rural  livelihoods while contributing 
to Namibia´s mitigation and adaptation targets. 
 
12. The proposed project aims at increasing the climate change resilience of CBNRM communities while taking 
advantage of the strong community -based structures that the CBN RM network provides.


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 59 
 C
13. The overall objective of the proposed project is therefore to 
Overall Project Objective: 
‘Empower Rural Communities of the  Namibian CBNRM Network to Res pond to Climate Change in Terms of 
Awareness, Adaptive Capacity and Low-Carbon Development’ . 
The project is expected to directly benefit more than 15,000 wo men and men3 in the CBNRM areas through the support 
to diversified climate-resilient livelihood options. An area of  more than 7 million hectares will be under improved and 
effective management, which cont ributes to both increased clima te change resilience and to greenhouse gas emission 
reduction, indirectly benefitting more than 60,000 inhabitants of the CBNRM areas. This will be achieved through two 
complementary project components: 
14. Component I: Capacity Building and Community Support 
 
Component I Objective: 
‘Build and Strengthen the Institutional Foundation for Effe ctive and Sustainable Community-Led Local Climate Action in 
the CBNRM Network’ 
 Component I of the pr oject will build and s trengthen the instit utional foundation for effectiv e and sustainable community-
led local climate action in the CBNRM network. Activities under  this component do not necessarily relate directly to 
climate change actions but that applies to the entire CBNRM net work and need to be addressed to ensure the effective 
implementation of the proposed interventions and to enhance the  achievement of the envisaged impacts under project 
component II. Component I activit ies fall under the following s ub-components: 
1. Climate change awareness creation  
A minimum of 80 CBNRM CBOs will be targeted through awareness m aterials and dedicated training in order 
to raise their awareness towards climate change and share infor mation on possible ada ptation measures 
2. Local-level climate monitoring  
A climate monitoring system tailor-made for CBNRM CBOs will be developed and implemented across the 
CBNRM network. A mini mum of 30 CBNRM CBOs  is expected to adopt the climate monitori ng system. This will 
allow both CBNRM communities as well as external support organi zations to strengthen planning and adapt 
their activities and interventions accordingly.  
3. Strengthening CBNRM governance  
Good governance creates the basis for effective resource manage ment, benefit capture and distribution and is 
essential for successful impleme ntation of community-based proj ects as provided under component II. 
Governance in 30 CBNRM CBOs will be strengthened through this s ub-component.  
4. Capacity building for community-led initiatives  
Community-led initiatives to address climate issues are going t o require capacity-building of a new set of skills 
that these CBOs have not yet had the opportunity to develop. No t only will the CBOs be engaging in new 
aspects of environmental management – climate change adaptation  measures – but they will also be required 
to identify appropriate interventions and develop and submit co rresponding proposals und er component II. This 
sub-component will provide training and technical support to CB Os based on a prior assessment of specific 
needs.  
 
15. Component II: Grant Facility fo r Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods in  Namibia  
 
Component II Objective: 
Empower Rural CBNRM Communities through Direct Acce ss to Climate Finance for Increased CBNRM Livelihoods 
                                                      
3 Note that this is lower than the sum of the figures provided in  paragraph 15, since some overlap between the beneficiaries of the 
different grant investment areas  is expected. See the attached Excel spreadsheet for more detail.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 59 
 C
Resilience and Low-Carbo n Rural Development. 
Component II comprises a grant facility for resilient CBNRM liv elihoods through self-determined local climate change 
adaptation initiatives. It will se rve exclusively for direct ac cess by legally recognized CBOs operating within the ambit of 
the national CBNRM program and seeking to implement community-l evel activities which hav e a strong climate change 
adaptation impact potential. The grant facility will be fully a ligned with GCF investment criteria while allowing for 
maximum responsiveness to nati onal and, particularly, local pri orities in the following thr ee grant investment areas:  
1. Climate Resilient Agriculture   
A minimum of 6 grants under thi s investment area will benefit m ore than 11,000 direct and 26,000 indirect 
beneficiaries by addressing the direct and indirect impacts of climate change on agricultural production. 
Possible grant projects will focu s on responses that feature sh ifts towards innovative resilient farming 
techniques such as conservation/climate-smart agriculture, as w ell as technological improvements. 
2. Climate Resilient Infrastructure   
A minimum of 15 grants under this investment area will benefit more than 2,000 direct and 3,600 indirect 
beneficiaries by addressing the climate change vulnerability of  settlements, the people living in those 
settlements and the infrastructure on which they depend. Possib le grant projects will focus on infrastructure 
adaptation, renewable energy tec hnology and water saving measur es. 
3. Ecosystem Based Adaptation   
A minimum of 12 grants under this investment area will benefit more than 7,000 direct and 60,000 indirect 
beneficiaries by enhancing resilience and maintain ecological f unctions and services of ecosystems at the 
landscape scale. Examples include improvement of connectivity o f CBNRM areas, re-integrated natural 
resource management for wildlife and forest resources, fire man agement interventions, forest inventories, 
introduction of wildlife in its former range, restoration of de graded wetlands or forests or unproductive 
ecosystems. 
Altogether, a minimum number of 33 grants with an average volum e of USD 240,000 will benefit directly more than 
15,000 and indirectly more than 60,000 women and men4. An area of more than 7 million hectares will be under 
improved and effective management. An estimated 2,400 household s will enjoy improved food security through the 
adoption of climate resilient agriculture techniques. The clima te change resilience of an estimated 90 rural settlements 
will be increased and an estimated 186 sustainabl e climate-resi lient jobs will be created. For  more detailed information 
on expected project outcomes and outputs, please refer to the l ogical framework in section H.1. 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
16. Target Population:  The project targets rural comm unities on land which is managed  by a registered CBNRM CBOs 
in Namibia. This corresponds to a population of roughly 200,000 . These communities can submit proposals and apply 
for grant funding from the Grant  Facility for Resilient CBNRM L ivelihoods through their registered CBO. Project 
component I aims at preparing them for this task by specificall y addressing CBO committee members. All CBNRM 
CBOs will be made aware of the grant opportunity for community- based local climate adaptation action. A diagnostic 
screening tool will be applied to all CBNRM CBOs in Namibia in order to establish their spec ific vulnerability status, 
baseline information and needs for targeted training and suppor t by the project under component I. Selection of grant 
beneficiaries will be made according to alignment of proposals with GCF criteria and climate change vulnerability of 
respective communities/areas. 
17. Target areas: The project targets areas managed by registered CBOs of the CBN RM program. Since these 
operate exclusively on communal land in Namibia, the communal a reas constitute the wider p otential intervention area. 
Most of the CBNRM CBOs operate in the north-western (Kunene Reg ion) and north-eastern (Kavango East and West, 
Zambezi and Otjozondjupa Region) parts of the country. It is th erefore expected that mos t grant projects will be 
implemented in the communal areas of these regions (see Figure 2), simply due to the comparably high number of 
CBNRM CBOs operating there. Howev er, note that CBNRM CBOs from other regions are by no means excluded from 
the project and that CBNRM CBOs from all regions (except Khomas , since there are no registered CBNRM CBOs in 
                                                      
4 Note that this is lower than the sum of the figures provided se parately for the different grant  investment areas, since some o verlap 
between the beneficiaries of the different grant investment are as is expected. See the attached Excel spreadsheet for more det ail.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 59 
 C
that region) are targeted by c omponent I and eligible for grant  funding under component II. 
 
Figure 2: Wider target area of t he proposed project. CBNRM CBOs  exclusively operate on 
communal land (orange color), which constitutes the wider targe t area. The north-western 
and north-eastern regions (blue color) of Namibia accommodate t he majority of CBNRM 
CBOs. Most grant projects will therefore probably be implemente d in the communal areas of 
these high intensity regions. 
 
Project Activities under Component I: Capacity Building and Com munity Support  
Output 1: Climate Cha nge Awareness Raised 
This sub-component targets all CB NRM CBOs in Namibia. It is exp ected that awareness on climate change and related 
issues is enhanced among at least 80 CBOs. 
Activity 1.1: Develop and disseminate CC training and awareness materials 
18. This activity targets all CBNRM CBOs in Namibia. It entails  the development and dissemination of materials to raise 
climate change awareness amongst rural Namibians. These materia ls should aim at creating awareness about climate 
change as well as highlighting examples of how climate change c an be mitigated. Included should also be a description 
of the need for adaptation and exam ples of simple ways in which  rural Namibians can start adapting to climate change.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 59 
 C
19. Once these materials are developed and produced, they shoul d be disseminated through as many channels as 
possible – distribution of print ed copy, social media and radio  programs. These materials should be distributed at any 
CBO gathering in all of the regions. Support organizations and regional government offices will also be approached to 
assist. These materials should be available and distributed at any of the planned project event s during the first year of 
project implementation. 
Activity 1.2: Regional training workshops on c limate change awareness, adaptation and mitigation 
20. The second activity involves climate change training worksh ops that target the CBOs who potentially will engage to 
a greater extent with this project and aim at exposing training  participants to relevant aspects of climate change and 
means of reducing vulnerability to climate change. It entails 1 7 training workshops in 13 regions to train a minimum of 
40 CBOs with at least 10 reps from each. Selection of the targe t CBOs will be based on the outcome of the CBO 
assessment under activity 4.2. The delivery of these workshops will target any CBOs interested in applying for a grant 
and the training will be delivered on a regional basis during t he first half of year 1 of the program. Suitable candidates 
for this training will include CBO staff or committee as well a s representatives from their support organizations. These 
regional training events will provide possible applicants with the basic climate change knowledge needed to be able to 
identify needs and possible interv entions appropriate in their areas. 
21. Participation in these training events will be a pre-requis ite for each CBO planning on submitting a proposal for 
funding for climate change activities through  Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods in Namibia grants. If this is consi dered 
essential to all grant applic ants, then it will be necessary to  repeat the training in selected re gions at a later stage durin g 
program implementation to provide the opportunity to CBOs who m ight not have accessed the information about the 
opportunity of accessing support fo r climate change activities during year 1. 
Output 2: Local Climate Monitoring Established 
The expected number of CBOs who will have adopted the climate m onitoring system and submit corresponding annual 
monitoring reports as a result of the project is 30. 
Activity 2.1: Development and verification of a climat e monitoring system with supporting training materials 
22. CBNRM in Namibia has a major focus on improved land and res ource management practices with considerable 
emphasis on monitoring the status and use of resources through a structured approach called the Event Book System 
(EBS). The EBS is a grassroots natural resource monitoring prog ram. It differs from traditional monitoring in that the 
CBO decides what needs to be m onitored, collects the data and u ndertakes the analysis. The EBS was created to 
inform management decisions in communal conservancies throughou t Namibia and to support the processes of 
adaptive management. More than 60 conservancies in Namibia have  adopted the EBS. A sense of ownership, 
confidence, pride and commitment to this monitoring system has developed (Stuart-Hill, Di ggle, Munali, Tagg, & Ward, 
2005). 
23. This activity will require the current EBS to be reviewed a nd opportunities for integrat ing climate relevant data 
collection identified. This will include participatory processe s with clusters of CBOs to det ermine what their data needs 
are and to explore ways in which this information can be effect ively utilized. Once the clim ate monitoring components 
that need to be added to the EBS system have been identified an d developed, CBOs will be provided with training on 
how to implement and use this system in line with activity 3.2.  In addition to formal training events, ongoing support 
should be provided to the staff of CBOs responsible for collect ing the data. Support should also be provided to CBO 
management to facilitate the sy nthesis of the data and its appl ication in adaptive management processes. A minimum 
of 30 CBOs is expected to adopt t he climate monitoring system. 
24. It should be recognized that the needs of the CBOs are goin g to vary greatly as a result of geographic differences 
but also due to locally identified needs and the processes for developing and implementing the climate monitoring 
system will need to accommodate these variations.  
Output 3: CBNRM Governance Strengthened


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 59 
 C
25. The exact content of this s ub-component as well as the sele ction of the CBOs that will re ceive targeted support will 
be based on the outcome of the CB O assessment under activity 4. 2. The minimum number of additional CBNRM CBOs 
for which governance will be strengthened (measured by their co mpliance with the MET’s standard operating 
procedures (SOP)) as a result of the project is 30. 
Activity 3.1: Development or revision of governance and SOP training materials 
26. Existing training materials will be reviewed and adapted or  updated to address the identified needs. This is likely to 
represent several existing training modules being revised with the possible need for the development of new modules. 
Activity 3.2: Targeted training and technical s upport provided to CBOs by service providers 
27. Based on the outcomes of the diagnostic process under activ ity 4.2, CBOs and their support organizations will then 
need to develop a training and technical support work plan whic h demonstrates how the needs for improved 
governance and management capacity are going to be addressed. B ased on this, support organizations will be 
contracted by the EIF to provi de the required support and capac ity building. One of the issues that are likely to be 
identified through this process is the need for CBO management committees to encourage active engagement of the 
members in all of the CBO activities. Also, the need for new me chanisms to be developed that allow for increased 
accountability of CBO management and staff to members. Note tha t this activity also includes  support and training for 
the adoption and implementation o f the local climate monitoring  system under output 2. 
Output 4: Capacity of CBNRM CBO s for community-led initiatives increased 
28. Community-led initiatives to address climate issues are goi ng to require capacity-building of a new set of skills that 
these CBOs have not yet had the opportunity to develop. Not onl y will the CBOs be engaging in new aspects of 
environmental management – climate change adaptation measures –  but they will also be required to identify 
appropriate interventions, devel op and submit corresponding pro posals and, if accepted, manage the grant awarded by 
the EDA Project Management Unit within EIF. 
29. Those CBOs with demonstrated requisite capacity (to develop  fundable projects, to implement such projects, to 
report as required and account for funds disbursed) can apply d irectly and implement projects on their own. The 
number of proposal applications s ubmitted to EDA grant faciliti es from CBOs directly (i.e. without external support by 
implementing partner) that are approved for funding is expected  to amount to 10. While this will be the preferred 
modality from the perspective of the NDA and the EIF, the reali ty is that most CBOs lack this requisite capacity and this 
capacity-building component has been included to change this si tuation. Therefore, it is anticipated that most funding 
applications will be made in partnership with support organizat ions (for more detailed information on grant modalities 
and possible support organizations refer to section C.7.). The same is true for project implementation as well as 
monitoring and reporting. Including the support organization as  a partner in the grant application is intended to ensure 
that this component o f capacity building is provided for. 
Activity 4.1: Information shar ing meetings on grant facility 
30. There will be 15 information sharing meetings held in all r egions and major centers in order to inform CBOs and 
respective communities about the project and the opportunity to  apply for resilient livelihoods grants. All CBNRM CBOs 
will be targeted by this activity. 
Activity 4.2: CBO diagnostic designed and carried out in all 13 regions to identify CBO capacity and support needs 
31. During the first half of year 1, a diagnostic tool needs to  be developed that, when applied to CBOs, captures not 
only baseline information about the CBO and its governance stru ctures, but also identifies the specific training needs 
related to CBO governance. The diagnostic report that will be g enerated should provide the baseline information for the 
program level indicators as well as an assessment of the CBOs’ training and technical support needs. Other factors 
such as potential risks or issues relating to gender or margina lized groups need to be identified and evaluated. Support 
organizations will be contracted to undertake this diagnostic p rocess and will also be able to use this opportunity for 
further sharing the CC awareness materials with the CBOs and pr oviding them with information about the grant


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 59 
 C
opportunities offered by this program. 
32. The results of this activity will be key in informing the e xact scope, content and target CBOs of support activities 
under the project outputs 2 and 3 . It therefore constitutes the  point of departure for component I. 
Activity 4.3: Training workshops for CBOs accessing grants 
33. All CBNRM CBOs identified through activity 4.2 as having th e basic capacity and structures in place on which to be 
built on for development and impl ementation of grants under com ponent II will be invited to attend grant training 
workshops under this activity. 10 workshops at the regional lev el (some regions will be combined) are envisaged under 
this activity. Participating CB NRM CBO representatives will be provided with detailed inform ation on grant opportunities, 
the grant application process, t heir roles and re sponsibilities  in grant project development, implementation and 
monitoring as well as opportunities for technical support and c ooperation with support organizations. 
Activity 4.4: Targeted support to potential gr antees for proposal development and submission 
In addition to training provided under activity 4.3, there will  be ongoing support to grant proposal development and 
submission by the EIF EDA Project Management Unit (see section C.7. for further information). Furthermore, an 
independent service provider will be contracted under this acti vity to provide targeted information, training and proposal 
development support to sel ected CBOs as identified through acti vity 4.2. 
Project Activities under Compone nt II: Grant Facility for Resil ient CBNRM Livelihoods in Namibia  
Output 5: Grant facility for Res ilient CBNRM Livelihoods implem ented 
34. This component aims at empowering rural CBNRM communities t o increase their resilience to climate change a 
through access to direct climate finance. The EIF will establis h a ring-fenced EDA Livelih ood Resilient Grant Facility 
from GCF funding that will focus on grant financing for develop ing and strengthening resilient livelihoods within CBNRM 
areas. This component will provide grant funding and technical assistance on a demand-driven basis to CBNRM 
institutions for climate invest ments that will generate lessons  and experience for scaled-up climate action in priority 
areas in Namibia and possibly neighboring countries. GCF fundin g will allow for the provisi on of resources for climate 
investments on a grant basis, hel ping reach the poorest and mos t climate-vulnerable rural communities in priority areas, 
including the poorest populations residing on fringe/risk-prone  areas and marginalized groups such as women. 
Female–headed farming households with climate resilient (and ge nder friendly) agriculture technology, extension 
services, and soil co nservation techniqu es will be targeted and  be the main beneficiary of the project. 
 
35. A minimum of 33 grants for community-led climate change ada ptation action with an average volume of USD 
240,000 will be awarded, implemented and reported upon. In part icular, GCF-financed activities will strengthen the 
climate resilience of those most vulnerable to climate change, by supporting the adoption of climate-smart rural 
production and landscape management investments that aim to ach ieve multiple benefits (e.g ., climate resilience, food 
security, increased well-being of beneficiaries, including gend er and social inclusion). In the context of the present 
proposal, 80% of the GCF resources sought under the present pro posal will be directed toward s three grant investment 
areas for resilient CBNRM livelihoods. 
Activity 5.1: Awarding and implementation of grants under  investment window 1: Climate-resilient agriculture 
36. A minimum of 6 grants under this investment area with an av erage financial volume of USD 340,000 will be 
awarded, implemented and report ed upon. Projects that fall with in this investment window will address the direct or 
indirect impacts of CC on agricultural production in CBNRM area s, and could target livestock and/or crop production. 
They will focus on responses that  feature shifts towards innova tive resilient farming techniques such as 
conservation/climate-smart agriculture, as well as technologica l improvements. The latter could include the use of 
hydroponic garden systems for fo od security and supply to commu nity owned lodges, bush encroachment management 
measures, tree planting or the construction of shade structures  and more drinking troughs for livestock in the face of 
increasing temperatures.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 59 
 C
Table 2: Grant Investment Window 1  
Option 1: Climate resilient agriculture  
Purpose:  to address direct or indirect i mpacts of climate change on agr icultural production  
Scope  Priorities for biomes: Tree Savanna 
 Intervention areas: conservati on agriculture, grazing manageme nt, fire management 
 Impact spheres: adaptio n and economic 
 Grant sizes: USD 100 000 – USD 400 000 
 Duration: 3 years 
Cost categories  Large and small scale infrastructure and equipment  
 Services for planning, imp lementation and management  
 Training, research and monitoring 
 Consumables 
 Operational costs 
Eligibility criteria  Grant should include more than one CBO within a landscape 
 Grantee must have the capacity  to implement the full scope of the grant 
 Measures must ensure tangib le benefits for CBO members 
 Interventions must comply wit h local-level land-use plans 
Activity 5.2.: Awarding and implementation of grants under  investment window 2: Climate-proof infrastructure 
37. A minimum of 15 grants under this investment area with an a verage financial volume of USD 80,000 will be 
awarded, implemented and reported upon. This investment window incorporates projects that increase the climate 
change resilience of settlements, the people living in those se ttlements and the infrastructure on which they depend. 
Concrete examples of infrastructure upgrades would be water har vesting and storage infrastructure, solar water 
heaters, solar retrofitting of d iesel pumps, small-scale photov oltaics, dry sanitation, etc. 
38. Development of climate-proof  infrastructure also addresses the need for disaster risk reduction, as climate change 
in some areas might mean an increase in the frequency and inten sity of climate extremes. Community- led disaster risk 
reduction projects that can safe-guard lives, livelihoods and i nfrastructure, will thus be included (e.g. erosion 
management). Depending on the climate change projections for th e area, such projects could prepare for extremes 
ranging from droughts to floods. Ecological infrastructure can in some cases play a role in buffering extremes, and as 
such be incorporated as part of climate-proof settlement projec ts. Such interventions need to be linked to projected 
climate change related impacts on settlements being reduced or prevented as a result of healthy and functioning 
ecosystems. This could include the restoration or rehabilitatio n of a wetland that can be shown to provide flood 
attenuation for a community at risk from flooding due to an inc rease in the intensity of heavy rainfall events. 
Table 3: Grant Investment Window 2  
Option 2: Climate proof infrastructure  
Purpose:  to address the climate change vu lnerability of settlements, th e people living in those settlements and 
the infrastructure on which they depend.  
Scope  Priority for biomes: all 
 Intervention areas: infrastructu re adaptation, renewable energ y technology, improved 
sanitation, water demand management 
 Impact spheres: mitigation and social 
 Grant sizes: USD 50 000 – USD 400 000 
 Duration: 1 to 2 years 
Cost categories  Infrastructure and equipment 
 Services for procurement and installation 
 Monitoring of outcomes 
Eligibility criteria  Grant can be limited to one CBO 
 Infrastructure development mus t comply with the Environmental Management Act


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 59 
 C
 Interventions need to be link ed to projected climate change re lated impacts on 
communities being reduced or prevented 
Activity 5.3.: Awarding and implementation of grants u nder investment window 3: Ecosystem Based Adaptation 
39. A minimum of 12 grants under this investment area with an a verage financial volume of USD 395,000 will be 
awarded, implemented and repo rted upon. Ecosystem based adaptat ion is a framework that uses an integrated 
ecosystem management approach to enhance resilience and maintai n ecological functions and services at the 
landscape scale. It combines multi-functional land uses and con servation of natural capital to enhance multi-scale 
benefits from ecosystems that hel p socio-ecological systems ada pt to changing conditions and multiple pressures, 
including climate change. This framework suggests a new landsca pe paradigm to maximize the adaptation benefits of 
ecosystem-based pathways that combine strategies over a mosaic of inter-connected ecosystems.  
40. Examples include improvement of connectivity of CBNRM areas , re-integrated natural resource management for 
wildlife and forest resources, fir e management interventions, f orest inventories, integration of climate change into local 
level monitoring system, introduction of wildlife in its former  range, restoration of degraded wetlands or forests or 
unproductive ecosystems. 
Table 4: Grant Investment Window 3 
Option 3: Ecosyste m-based adaption  
Purpose:  to achieve multiple benefits in the context of sustainable dev elopment by linking biodiversity and 
ecosystem conservation to rural development, in order to enhanc e climate change resilience and maintain 
ecological functions and services   
Scope  Priorities for biomes: Namib D esert, Nama Karoo, Shrub Savanna  and Tree Savanna 
 Intervention areas: B iodiversity managem ent, biotrade, forest restoration 
 Impact spheres: environmental , adaptation and economic 
 Grant sizes: USD 100 000 – USD 400 000 
Duration: 3 years 
Cost categories  Small scale infrastru cture and equipment 
  Services for planning, imp lementation and management 
 Training, research and monitoring 
 Operational costs 
 Consumables  
Eligibility criteria  Grant should include more than one CBO within a landscape 
 Interventions must comply with lo cal-level and regional land-u se plans 
 Grantee must have the capacity  to implement the full scope of the grant 
 Measures must ensure tangib le benefits for CBO members 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Exe cuting Entity)  
41. The Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia (EIF) is a ful ly accredited entity of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
and thus has met the fiduciary responsibilities for managing fu nds. In addition to the domestically-funded programs, the 
EIF has managed micro-scale f unding on behalf of the UNDP, UNFC CC, and served as a crucial financial management 
institution for the eleventh Conf erence of Parties of the UNCCD  (that is, COP 11), a large- scale resource envelope that 
was deemed very successful, by international standards for same  l a r g e - s c a l e  u n d e r t a k i n g s .  F u r t h e r m o r e  t h e  E I F  i s  
currently managing three different environmental and climate ch ange related grant programs, namely the Game 
Product Trust Fund, UNDP Small Grants Program and the EIF Grant  Program. In total the EIF has handled more than 
US$35 million of combined administration of grants. Moreover, t he working relationship with other grant making 
programs provides opportunities for coordination, cost efficien cy, and sharing of lessons and experiences.  Therefore


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 59 
 C
the EIF is able to link emerging organizations with more establ ished ones, thereby facilitating more rapid capacity 
building. These linkages between initiatives also promote colla boration and synergies between projects and 
organizations, resulting in a better product and in a cost-savi ngs. The EIF has experienced personnel in running and 
implementing projects, in supporting and back-stopping grantees , in providing on-the-job training to less experienced 
grantees, etc.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
42. Not applicable. Most envisaged grant project activities foc us on subsistence activities and only marginally on 
products, which require certain market conditions. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
43. The Environmental Investment F und of Namibia is exempted fr om tax. This project will enjoy full tax exemption on 
all goods and services except for the salaries of the project i mplementation unit. For purposes of this project, all capital 
equipment will be tax exempt, as is the case for all externally  sourced grants. However, project personnel from Namibia 
will pay normal income taxes to meet social security requiremen ts. All capital goods such as cars, equipment will be 
insured against theft, fire damage and accidents. Project staff  will also receive medical insu rance benefits,  as required 
under the Labor Act. All these conditions have applied to large  projects that Namibia has run in the recent past through 
the MET. The scale of these ranged from small (for example INC/ SNC5 US$200,000) to medium (for example 
CPP/US$7 000 000).  
C.7.   Institutional / Implemen tation Arrangements  
44. National Implementing Entity: The EIF will be the National Imp lementing Entity (NIE) for the project. The EIF will 
support project implementation by administering the grant facil ity and recruiting and contracting project personnel and 
implementation, support and consultant services, including subc ontracting. The EIF will also monitor project 
implementation by Executing Entities and the achievement of the  project outcomes/outputs and ensure the efficient use 
of donor funds. Within the EIF, the proposed project will be ma naged and monitored by a dedicated EDA Project 
Management Unit (PMU). This EDA PMU will consist of four additi onal dedicated staff members who will be employed 
on contract for the duration of the EDA agreement. They will be  employed with GCF funding and will include the 
following positions: 
 Project Manager , responsible for overall project coordination and management, preparation of annual work 
plans, project risk monitoring and reporting towards the EIF bo ard and GCF 
 M&E Officer , responsible for monitoring, evaluation and reporting as well as ensuring compliance with 
environmental and soci al safeguards (ESS) 
 Grants Support Officer , responsible for supervision and management of the EDA grant f acilities 
 Accountant, responsible for reconciling financial accounts, produce monthly  financial report, assets 
management, and insurance  
The structure of the EDA PMU6 Initial within the EIF is  illustrated in Figure 3.  
                                                      
5 Initial National Communication/ Second National Communication.  
6 The Project Manager will provide required technical and adminis trative support to coordinate and implement project activities at 
national level as well as lin kages to CBOs and supporting agenc ies. He/she will ensure effective management of the supported b y 
the Project Steering Committee (PSC). The Monitoring and Evalua tion (M&E) Officer will be responsible for monitoring and 
evaluation of the EDA Project including overseeing gender mains treaming, environmental and social safeguard as well as to 
perform other M&E functions. The Grants Support Officer will be  responsible for project devel opment support activities with CB Os 
and NACSO partners including narrative, financial, logical, and  all grants content.  The Project Accountant is responsible for 
maintaining the budget, recording and reflecting fully, accurat ely, clearly and in a timely manner the funds that are allocate d and the 
disbursements made to support project implementation, in accord ance with the approved documents and the liquidation of 
expenditures on an annual and quarterly basis as well as upon p roject termination.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 59 
 C
 
Figure 3: Organogram of the EIF, including the EDA PMU to be es tablished for management of the 
proposed project (orange boxes).  
Component I Implementation Arrangements 
45. Executing Entities: For practical reasons, the EIF through the PSC will select Exec uting Entities (EEs) for the 
implementation of Component 1 a ctivities on the open market thr ough a rigorous competitive and transparent public 
process. Given the broad thematic  spectrum of component 1 activ ities and, particularly, the large geographic spread of 
the target groups, it is likely that corresponding tasks will b e distributed among several EEs. In addition to the MET, 
possible EEs with long-standing ex perience in CBNRM support are  organized under the umbrella of Namibian 
Association of CBNRM Support Organizations (NACSO7). Examples of these are Integrated Rural Development and 
Nature Conservation (IRDNC), which is the lead NGO in Kunene an d Zambezi regions and the Namibia Nature 
Foundation (NNF), which is the lead NGO in Kavango West and Kav ango East regions. NACSO c omprises eight NGOs 
and the University of Namibia (UNAM). The purpose of NACSO is t o provide quality services to rural communities 
seeking to manage and utilize their natural resources in a sust ainable manner. The philosophy of forming NACSO was 
to harness the wide range of sk ills available in GRN, NGOs and UNAM into a complementary nation-wide CBNRM 
support service. The rationale behind this is that it is unlike ly that any single institution houses all of the skills, resour ces 
and capacity to provide community organizations with the multi- disciplinary assistance that is required to develop the 
broad range of CBNRM initiatives  taking place in Namibia. The p articipation of NACSO members  in this project brings a 
wealth of experience in natural resources management and skills  to support climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
The NACSO members have long-standing experience in CBNRM suppor t and are the natural supporting partners for 
implementation of the proposed program. While these organizatio ns constitute obvious candidates for project 
                                                                                                                                                                           
     
   
 
 
7 http://www.nacso.org.na  Chief Operations Officer 
(Director of Operations)Portfolio ManagerBusiness Development 
Officer 
Loan Officer: Green Soft 
LoansClient support Offcier
Loan Officer Green 
Concessional LoansClient Support Officer
Credit & Risk Analyst Credit Officer   ESS & Gender Specialst
Grants & Environment  
Manager Grants OfficerGrants Officer: Projects 
Development
Grants Officer: M&E , 
Reporting 
Climate Change & RE 
Practitioner
CBNRM & Environment 
PractitionerM&E Specialist 
GCF EDA
Project ManagerGrants Support Officer 
M&E & ESS Officer 
Accountant Regionally-based 
Freelance  M&E 
Consultants  x 8


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 59 
 C
execution, the calls for applications will not be limited to th ese. A summary of the expected needs for EEs is presented 
in Table 5. 
 
Table 5: Summary of expected needs of EE for implementation of Component I activities  
Number of EE Responsibilities 
EE 1 Development and distribution of CC awareness materials; develop ment of training materials for 
CC workshops 
EE 2 Organizing and presenting r egional workshops on CC – 17 wo rkshops 
EE 3 Development of a community-based  climatic monitoring, system; d evelopment of training 
materials; organizing and presenting training workshops 
EE 4 Development of methodology for CBO diagnostic – include trainin g needs assessment (TNA), CC 
baseline information and M&E bas eline; guidelines for implement ation. 
EE 5 Multiple regionally based service providers to facilitate the diagnostic process with CBOs 
EE 6 Development and/or revision of CBO governance training mat erials including SOPs. 
EE 7 Provision of training and  technical support to CBOs – gove rnance and SOPs.  
46. Procurement of Component I Services:  The existing Fund Management Co mmittee (FMC) of the EIF will a ssume 
the responsibility of procuring services related to component 1 . The role of the FMC under the project is to provide 
administrative functions for t he PSC to approve all submissions  related to the EDA. The FMC is comprised of the Chief 
Executive Officer, Director of  Operations and Director of Finan ce and Administration. The EIF’s Operations Department 
serves as the Secretariat for the FMC. For the task of selectin g the various EEs for Component I, up to two 
representatives of the NDA and t he EIF’s Corporate Secretary wi ll be co-opted to the FMC, in order to add more rigor 
and depth to the selection process.  
47.The FMC will develop clear terms of reference, review and ev aluate the bids received, select the best bids upon 
PSC approval and negotiate terms of agreement with selected bid ders. Successful bidders w ill then be contracted as 
service providers through existi ng contracting procedures with legal inputs from the EIF’s corporate lawyers. 
Concomitant agreements will be per formance-based service contra cts – as opposed to grant agreements - in terms of 
which selected entities will be paid only for agreed services a ctually provided. This is in line with the results-based 
financing philosophy of the GCF. 
Component II Implemen tation Arrangements 
48. The grant facility will support the implementation of concr ete adaptation and/or mitigat ion measures in vulnerable 
communities within CBNRM areas t hrough a suite of interventions  that are supported through at least 28 small grants 
that will be limited to a maximum of USD 400,000 per grant. The  grants should be phased and must be disbursed in 
tranches to ensure a sound implementation process and effective  integration of project-level monitoring and evaluation 
processes. 
49. Executing Entities:  Executing entities (EE) will be re sponsible for implementation  of the grant projects. They can 
be either the respective CBNRM CBOs themselves (in case they ha ve sufficient capacity for development, 
implementation, monitoring and reporting of grant projects) or supporting organizations which develop, implement, 
monitor and report on grant projects in partnership with the re spective CBNRM CBO(s). Given the limited experience 
with and capacity for grant project development and implementat ion among CBNRM CBOs, the latter constellation is 
expected to be used in the ma jority of grant projects. 
50. Grant Modalities: CBNRM CBOs will be able to acce ss grant funding in two ways. Th ose CBOs with demonstrated 
requisite capacity (to develop fundable projects, to implement such projects, to report as required and account for funds 
disbursed) can apply directly and implement projects on their o wn. While this will be the pr eferred modality from the 
perspective of the NDA and the EI F, the reality is that most CB Os lack this requisite capacit y. Therefore, it is anticipated 
that most funding applications will be made in partnership with  support organizations. The same is true for project 
implementation as well as monitoring and reporting. In order to  ensure full ownership by the CBOs, such partnership


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 59 
 C
arrangements with support organi zations will need to fulfil the  following conditions: 
I. The project must target a CBNRM a rea on communal land in Namibi a  
Projects are not limited to one certain CBNRM entity (e.g. one single Communal Conservancy or Community 
Forest, but can also target clusters of these at the landscape level). In order to ensure a fair geographical 
distribution of grant funding, a CBNRM CBO cannot be beneficiar y of more than one grant under the same 
grant investment window. Multipl e grant funding for a given CBN RM CBO through grants under different 
investment windows is possible.  
II. The grant application must involve and be endorsed by a registe red CBO which forms part of Namibia´s 
CBNRM network. The proposed EDA Project is dedicated exclusivel y to assist CBNRM communities with direct 
finance for climate action. Ideally, the grant applicant must t herefore be a registered conservancy or CF (or a 
group thereof in case of cluster -level project proposals). Howe ver, since many CBOs do not yet have the 
internal capacity for project development, implementation and m onitoring, assistance from support 
organizations will be required in many cases. However, such sup port organizations can only propose projects 
in partnership with registered CB Os. Therefore, funding applica tions must always be accompanied by no-
objection/support letters signed by legally authorized CBO mana gement.  
III. If possible, expected project benefits must accrue (directly or  indirectly) to the entire population of the targeted 
CBNRM entity/ies. Grant applicat ions must clearly describe how the entire population of  the targeted CBOs will 
benefit from the proposed project and how potential economic co -benefits (monetary and in kind) will be 
distributed. If applicable, the p roposal must clearly describe a benefit sharing model as agreed upon in advance 
by the respective CBOs. The signed benefit-sharing agreement mu st be provided. If certain benefits are 
concentrated on a sub-population basis, this needs to be justif ied in the proposal.  
IV. The proposal development processes by the CBOs and their servic e provider will be facilitated by a member of 
the EDA Project Implementation Unit. 
V. Overhead costs of the supporting organization will be limited t o 25% of the total budget in order to ensure that 
the majority of funding (75%) is utilized for implementation of  agreed community-level activities. 
VI. If applicable, the support organi zation will have the responsib ility for ensuring that m onitoring and reporting 
according to defined EDA grant facility monitoring and reportin g regulations is adhered to (either by the CBO or 
by the support organization). 
VII. The support organization (if involved) must make provisions for  acceptable skills transfer and capacity 
measures with realistic targets and corresponding objectively v erifiable indicators in their respective grant 
applications. 
51. Grant Duration:  In line with the GCF results-based financing approach, project s funded under the grant facilities 
shall yield an objectively measurable impact by project end. El igible projects are thus considered standalone projects, 
as opposed to long-term programs/intervention series. The durat ion of grant agreements will therefore not exceed 
durations of 36 months. All projects must be proposed and contr acted within a time frame that allows full 
implementation within the EDA project lifetime, i.e. by the yea r 2021. Time extensions (also called no cost extensions) 
of up to 12 months can be requested for, provided: 
 the contract partner provides a convincing justif ication for t his request 
 the total duration of an individual grant does not exceed 42 m onths 
 time extensions are not request ed during the last 12 months of  the EDA project implementation 
 project implementation will be finished at least 6 months befo re the end of the EDA project lifetime (end of the 
year 2021) 
52. Financial Volume of Grants:  The total financial volume of proposed projects must be betwee n the minimum of 
USD 50,000 and the maximum of USD 400,000. However, in special cases, projects with a smaller volume (down to 
USD 10,000) could be considered at the discretion of the EDA Pr oject Steering Committee (see below). 
53. EDA Grant Funding Criteria:  In line with the GCF investment criteria, EDA grants will only  be awarded to projects 
for which a significant impact in the field of climate change a daptation is expected. This means that the very nature and


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 59 
 C
overall objective of a project must be aligned with this criter ion and further expected co-benefits will add value to a 
project only if this central c ondition is met. In terms of cont ent, any grant application will then be judged according to the  
following EDA Grant In vestment Criteria: 
 Climate change ada ptation impact  
o Adaptation impact, e.g. 
 Direct and indirect beneficiaries whose vulnerability is reduc ed or resilience is increased 
 Climate change resilient j obs/livelihoods created 
 Dependency on livelihoods vulnerable to climate change reduced  
 Increase in generation and use of climate information in local  decision-making 
 
 Transformational/paradigm shift character of the project  
o Degree to which the proposed project addresses prevailing unsu stainable practices/situations towards 
a sustainable (low -carbon/resilient) development pathway 
o Degree to which the project i s innovative/business unusual 
o Potential for cost-effective sc aling up and replication elsewh ere if the project proves successful 
o Potential for knowledge and learning 
o Sustainability of outcomes and results beyond completion of th e intervention 
 
 Sustainable CBNRM Community -Level Development Impact 
o Environmental Co-Benefits:  
Potential for positive environment al externalities (i.e. not di rectly climate-related), such as conservation, 
biodiversity, soil quality, air quality etc. 
o Social Co-Benefits:  
Potential for positive externalit ies in areas such as health an d safety, access to education, cultural 
preservation etc. 
o Economic Co-Benefits:  
Potential for positive economic e xternalities in areas such as expanded and enhanced job markets, job 
creation and poverty alleviation,  improved sector income-genera ting capacity, increase in agricultural 
productivity, increase in energ y and water supply security, etc . 
o Gender-Sensitive Development:  
Degree to which the project addresses prevailing gender inequal ities in general and with regards to 
climate change vulnerability  and risks in particular 
54. Performance of proposed projects against the specified crit eria must be credibly described in the project proposal 
and summarized in the accompanying EDA grant application form. Corresponding targets must be set realistically 
through the definition of tar get values for appropriate perform ance indicators.  
 
55. Grant Advertisement:  The AE will publicly advertise “calls for proposals” twice a y ear starting with mid-year of the 
first year of the five-year EDA agreement with GCF. This will b e done through print media, the EIF website, EIF social 
media appearances (e.g. Facebook) and the NACSO network and wil l run for up to 30 days at a time. The adverts will 
be placed six months apart from each other, preferably in Janua ry and June. For practical reasons, there will, however, 
be no public invitations for proposals during the four or fifth  year. All proposals will need to be reviewed and contracted 
by the start of year 4 to allow sufficient time for implementat ion and M&E. 
Grant Appraisal Procedure 
56. E D A  P r o j e c t  U n i t :  The EDA project manager and PO will assume the primary responsi bility for receiving and 
processing all grants applicati ons. These staff members will pr ocess all applications received as follows: 
 Issue acknowledgments of recei pt to applicants and record all applications onto the prescribed register


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 59 
 C
 Perform administrative and te chnical pre-screening of applicat ions (for completeness and eligibility) 
 Ensure relevant EIF staff members administer the Environmental  and Social Safeguards and Gender 
Assessments on screened applications 
 Communicate with applicants as necessary on queries or shortco mings 
 Prepare and present applications to EIF approval structures – i.e. FMC, Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) and 
the PSC for decision-making 
 Implement decisions of the said approval structures (approvals , declines and refer backs) as prescribed in the 
Operations Manual. This will also involve communicating and cor responding with applicant as necessary 
 Negotiating contracting terms and performance measures with su ccessful applicants 
 Prepare grant agreements for signature 
57. Fund Management Committee: The EIF Board established the FMC to serve as the first interna l evaluation and 
appraisal structure for project proposals submitted to the EIF.  The FMC’s detailed terms of reference are outlined in the 
Operations Manual. The FMC consists of the EIF CEO (FMC chairpe rson), the EIF Director of Operations and the EIF 
Director of Finance, Administration and HR. After reviewing EDA  grant applications submitted, the FMC is entitled to 
make one of the following decisions: a) decline, b) refer back for improvement, or c) accept for further processing. 
Applications accepted for furthe r processing will be presented to the TAP.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 59 
 C
 
Figure 4: Schematic illustration of the grant appraisal and con tracting procedures 
58. Technical Advisory Panel: The TAP is prescribed in Section 11 of the Environmental Invest ment Act (Act 13 of 
2001) as a subcommittee of the EIF Board. Its composition, area s of expertise to be represented, its mandate and 
functions are all spelled out in detail in the Act. The TAP ess entially serves as the external and independent technical 
screening panel. It undertakes thorough technical and financial  feasibility evaluation on grant and loan applications and 
provides expert advice to the EIF Board for final decision. TAP  is also legally mandated to play a pivotal role in 
monitoring and evaluation. After assessing grant applications p resented, TAP will make one of the following decisions: 
a) decline, b) refer back for improvement, or c) recommend for presentation to the Board. Applications recommended 
by TAP will be presented to the ED A Project Steering Committee for final decision.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 59 
 C
59. Environmental and social safeguard assessment: All proposals will be subjected environmental and social 
safeguard assessment as there ar e cornerstones of technical and  financial evaluation to achieve sustainable poverty 
reduction and enhanced resilience of CBNRM livelihoods. Therefo re, procedures for addressing environmental and 
social issues are included in the project cycle management proc ess. A driving principle of the  project is to prevent and 
mitigate any harm to people and thus to incorporate environment al and social concerns as an intrinsic part of project 
cycle management. The project will only approve proposals that are categorized as Category C of the environmental 
and social safeguard policy of the EIF and in line with the GCF  accreditation conditions. The objective of these 
safeguards and associated policies and procedures is to prevent  and mitigate undue harm to people and their 
environment and strive to devel op benefits in the development p rocess. More specifically, safeguard policies and 
procedures are designed to avoid, mitigate, or minimize adverse  environmental and social impacts of projects and 
strategies, and to implement projects and strategies that produ ce positive outcomes for people and the environment. 
The Project Cycle Management Approach describes a project cycle  of design, implementation and evaluation. The EIF 
addresses environmental and soci al issues within this cycle as follows: 
 
Design  
 Inquire on, and assess, environmental, and social guidelines 
 Discuss with project designer s and study any reports as reques ted 
 Prepare comments and request s for additional information  
 Advise on any specific requirements for compliance 
 Review and assess for approval and/or any special measures req uired 
Implementation   
 Continue to inquire and review environmental and social safegu ard issues  
 Prepare any comments and requests for new information 
 Review and advise on implementat ion of any special measures re quired 
Evaluation   
 Ensure inclusion and review environmental and social safeguard  issues in final project reporting as well as any 
lessons learned  
Sharing of lessons  
 Provide platform for grant recipients and partners to share le ssons  
 
Table 6: Checklist of environmental and social principles 
Access and Equity 
 Potential impacts and risks –further 
assessment and management required 
for compliance  Remarks 
Compliance with the Law    
Access and Equity   
Marginalised and Vulnerable Groups   
Human Rights   
Gender Equity and Women’s Empowerment   
Core Labour Rights   
Indigenous Peoples   
Involuntary Resettlement   
Protection of Natural Habitats   
Conservation of Biological Diversity   
Climate Change   
Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency   
Public Health   
Physical and Cultural Heritage   
Lands and Soil Conservation   
60. EDA Project Steering Committee: A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established as a sub -committee of 
the project with the NDA as the Chair. The Board will formally delegate powers, functions and authority - outlined below 
- to the PSC for the duration of the EDA project. The PSC shall  serve the purposes of approving proposals and 
monitoring and evaluation of t he EDA Resilient Livelihood Grant s Facility. The primary aim of the PSC is to make


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 59 
 C
selection and award decisions on grant applications received fr om eligible CBOs and supporting partners, in line with 
EDA and GCF funding criteria. The PSC may make one of the follo wing decisions on applications under its review as 
part of its review procedures: a) decline, b) refer back for im provement, or c) approve. The  PSC will be chaired by the 
NDA and will consist other members with background expertise co vering environmental finance, climate change, 
CBNRM, social science, biodivers ity conservation and sustainabl e development. Sectors rep resented in the PSC will be 
from the national/local governmental institutions, private sect or, beneficiary representatives , Civil Society Organization, 
and Academic Institution. Equal gender representation on all st ructures of the project will be promoted. See more 
detailed information on the PSC i n the attached feasibility stu dy. 
61. Risk Management:  A number of measures overseen by the EIF Risk and Investment C ommittee (RIC) are in place 
to manage the financial and project risks. The Risk and Investm ent Committee (RIC) is a specialized board committee 
also established under section 10 of the Environmental Investme nt Fund Act. The RIC shall review grant proposals 
cleared by the TAP financially as well as in terms of the Fund Risk Framework and will prov ide expert advice to the 
Board from these perspectives. M ore detailed information is ava ilable in Annexure IV of t he EIF Operations Manual. 
62. Contract Management:  Successful grant applicants will  be issued with comprehensive grant agreements. 
Contracting procedures are detailed in Chapter 5 of the Operati ons Manual. Following approval by the Board, 
applicants will be issued with an offer. After receiving legall y valid acceptance letters, the EDA Project Implementation 
Unit will prepare draft grant agr eements with input from the M& E (ESS Officer). The M&E and ESS Officer’s 
involvement in this process is of cardinal importance, as he/sh e will assist with developing, negotiating and agreeing on 
realistic, practical and measurable performance indicators. Aft er clearance by the Director of Operations, applicants will 
be provided with copies of the dr aft grant agreements for their  review and comments. Once agreement is reached on 
the content and terms, the EIF w ill prepare the contracts with all supporting documents for signature with the authorized 
beneficiary representative. In order to ensure full awareness o f the agreement from the side of the respective 
beneficiary CBO, the latter must be either the legally authoriz ed member of the CBO (e.g. conservancy chairperson) or 
a proxy person mandated i n writing by the CBO. 
 
63. The EIF Company Secretary offi ce will ensure that the GCF f iduciary standards are upheld, and will undertake the 
contractual and administrative functions that are required in r elation to overall procurement whilst tracking payments 
and expenditure for the duration of the project. The EIF will u ndertake due diligence on the applicant using the already 
existing systems by applying che ck points such as fiduciary ass essments, capacity assessment, know you customer 
tools, credit check, financial management assessment, etc. With  regards to paying grant recipients and service 
providers, the EIF will follow standard grant management operat ing procedures whereby: 
 Pre-authorize payments to grant  recipients and service provide rs based on a schedule of milestones and 
expected payments as ent renched in the agreement. 
 The EE’s project manager and the EDA Project Implementation Un it personnel work in close collaboration to 
monitor the performance of the grant recipients. 
 The EI will require written confirmation from the project mana ger that a grantee has met the standards for a 
milestone before payment is made. This is known as “sign off” a nd is required for all payments. 
 Every effort will be made to pay  contractors within 14 days of  receipt of sign off on a payment. 
 Bank charges charged by the grant recipients‟ banking institut ion will be for the grant recipients‟ account. 
64. Redress Mechanism: The EIF has a Grievance and Redress Mechanism in place to ensur e that ensures that 
complaints are being promptly reviewed and addressed by the res ponsible units. An independent committee that is 
comprised of the Company Lawyer, External Auditor (PWC), Repres entative from a Commercial Bank (Credit Expert), 
Communication Officer (Appeals Administration), UNDP/SGP Nation al Grants Manager, and Board member (Chair) is 
established to address public grievances and complaints. All me mbers of the committee will not be involved in the 
decision making process of the ac tivities implemented by the ED A Resilient Livelihood Project and as such their opinion 
on handling issues is balanced. Please refer to Annex V and Cha pter 7 of the EIF Grants Manual.  
 
65. Backup Support:  The EIF will provide backstopping support to the EDA Project I mplementation Unit by 
establishing a Project Support Team that consists of the Chief Executive Officer, Director of Finance, Director of 
Operations, Monitoring and Evaluation Officer and the Communica tion Officer. The support t eam will play an advisory 
role with regards to ensure alignment of activities to the GCF result framework and as per the accreditation conditions


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 59 
 C
of the EIF.  This will ensure that there is overall good projec t management throughout the life cycle of the project. 
Specific risks and low delivery will be averted by ensuring str icter adherence to the existing requirements, such as, a) 
legal agreements, which are enforceable as government by Namibi an contract law, which the EDA will use with all 
contractors; (b) counterparty risks, which are a core element o f all legal agreements in Namibia; and (c) should the 
need really arise, the Namibian justice system, to which the EI F is obligated, is robust with adequate recourse 
mechanisms all the way to the Supreme Courts. For practical rea sons, the Programme Steering Committee will select 
Executing Entities (EEs) for the implementation of these crossc utting issues on the open market through a rigorous 
competitive and transparent public process. Given the broad the matic spectrum of the cross-cutting issues and, 
particularly, the large geographic spread of the target groups,  it is likely that correspo nding tasks will be distributed 
among several EEs.


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 59 
 C 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Pr ogramme Implementation 
Project Component  I: Capacity Building and
Community  Support  Quarter   Mid‐Term 
ACTIVITY   1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
1.1. Awareness  and training materials
development,  production  and distribution  to all
stakeholders       
                                                     
4.1. Regional information  sharing meetings  on
grant opportunities  ‐ focus on target CBOs                                                            
4.2. Undertake  CBO diagnostic  consultations  and
report identifying  needs                                                           
1.2. Regional CC training events ‐  at least one 
event in each region with potential beneficiary  
CBOs                                                             
2.1. Climate monitoring  system developed  and
tested, training materials  developed                                                                 
3.1. Governance/SOP  training materials
development/revision  and production                                                           
3.2. Provision of training and technical support to
CBOs by regional service providers                                                
4.3. Training Workshops  for CBOs accessing  grants                                                         
4.4. CBO and service providers  supported  with
proposal development                                                      
 
Project Component  2: Resilient CBNRM
Livelihoods  Grant Facility  Quarter   Mid‐Term 
ACTIVITY   1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
5.1. Implementation  of climate resilient
agriculture  grants: Option 1                                                   
5.2. Implementation  of climate proo f
infrastructure  grants: Option 2                                                 
5.3. Implementation  of Ecosystem  based
adaptation  and mitigation  grants: Option 3


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 59 
 C 
EDA Project Management  and M&E  Quarter     Mid‐Term 
ACTIVITY   1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Inception                                                              
Establish procurement  staff and processes                                                             
Establish grant assessment  and approval 
processes                                                            
Develop TORs for awareness  and training 
materials,  advertise  and contract consultants                                                            
Develop TORs and contracts  for regional service 
providers  for CBO diagnostic,  training & technical 
support   
                                                       
Develop TORs for regional CC training events                                                            
Develop TORs for development  of approach  and 
system for climate monitoring                                                           
Develop TORs for development/revision  of 
governance/SOP  materials                                                           
Develop TORs for proposal development  support 
and contract consultants                                                            
Contract consultants  and service providers                                                           
Launch call for proposals                                                               
Receive and evaluate proposals  from CBOs, 
develop contracts                                                  
Mid‐term evaluation                                                              
End of project evaluation                                                              
Project monitoring


---
*Page 33*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 59 
 
 
 D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement   
66. CBNRM CBOs have been identified as critical institutions fo r local-level awareness and practical climate change 
adaptation activities and are thus crucial to Namibia’s overall  climate change strategy. The existing Namibian CBNRM 
program forms a solid basis for widespread community-based clim ate change responses at the local level and bears 
enormous potential for creating and safeguarding resilient rura l livelihoods. 
67. Communal conservancies and community forests operate exclus ively in rural settings in Namibia. This renders 
them particularly vulnerable to the effects of a changing clima te as they remain highly dependent on variable rainfall 
patterns and associated fluctuating natural resource yields. In  addition, CBNRM entities in rural Namibia often have 
very limited access to the financial, technical and human resou rces required to enhance their resilience to climate 
change. Rural activities relat ed to land use, land-use changes,  and the use of fossil energy sources, have a significant 
impact on the livelihoods of rural communities. Often, because of variable incomes resulting from fluctuating year-to-
year natural resource yields, rural communities’ access to suit able sources of funding is less reliable and more 
constrained than that of their ur ban counterparts living on reg ular incomes. 
68. Yet, CBNRM communities live 
in and from unique ecosystems, 
which are important reservoirs of biodiversity and crucial habitats of numerous endemic species. CBNRM entities in the north-west and south of Namibia harbor a 
large number of endemic species, 
while CBNRM entities in the north-east generally harbor a higher number of different plant and mammal species. As such, 
CBNRM communities are 
guardians of areas with an enormous value not only for the national, but also the global public. As climate change is threatening these ecosystems, building 
resilient livelihoods based on their 
conservation through CBNRM provides an adaptation venue which benefits both these ecosystems and the rural communities they accommodate. 
The proposed project through 
enhanced direct access puts the CBNRM communities in the driver’s seat in order for them to take full ownership of securing their 
future livelihoods through natural 
resource management and 
conservation. 
69. The need for investment in 
Figure 5: Endemism and diversity of plants and mammals in Namib ia (Mendelsohn, 
et al., 2002).


---
*Page 34*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 59 
 
 
 D
Communal Conservancies and Community Forests is underpinned by the impact on rural development, job creation 
and the empowerment of communities and increasingly by both the  project’s need and potential to encounter and 
adapt to the impact of climate change. However, there is a stri king imbalance between investments in communal and 
commercial areas in Namibia. 
70. CBRNM investments are primed in communal areas. Market fail ure manifests itself as a result of the lack of secure 
tenure rights, from private banks and investors’ perspective. E ven the current leasehold regime is not adequate 
enough to reduce the risk perspective involved. As a result, lo cal communities lack the r equisite equity/development 
capital to engage into joint ventures to derive benefits from e xisting opportunities. Moreover, the risk premium of such 
investments is increased further by the long cash flow gestatio n character of investments in CBNRM. The major 
deterrent towards capital flows  to the green industries are mai nly very low investment returns as well as the long 
holding period required. This cr eates major uncertainty for com mercial and at development banks, thereby creating a 
financing gap for such opportunities.  
71. Despite the positive CBNRM program outcomes and its huge po tential as a platform for local-level climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, NACSO (2012), through the CBRNM Sust ainability Task Force, indi cated the sustainability 
crisis that is engulfing the program in the presence of declini ng donor support. The rapid (mainly donor-driven) growth 
in the number of communal conservancies since the first four co nservancies were registered in 1998, combined with 
the addition of community forests to the CBNRM network, has out stripped the capacity of government and NGOs to 
respond to increasing demands for assistance. The CBNRM program  faces funding gaps that needs to be addressed 
with estimates of around NAD 40 million per annum. There are a number of risks to conservancies and community 
forests if support cannot be sustainably funded in the future. The major risks are that CBNRM entities do not meet 
their full potential for revenue generation, are driven by inte rnal disputes because of mismanagement of revenue, and 
as a result lose the support of their members. Declining suppor t from members could lead to collapse of CBNRM 
CBOs and the collapse of their co nservation efforts, their cont ributions to rural development and their potential for local 
level climate action. The study by Humavindu & Stage (2015) und erpins the need to ensure the financial sustainability 
of CBNRM in the face of its high social and economic impacts an d argues for a quicker resolve of the overall program 
resourcing requirements. 
72. The proposed project “Empowe r to Adapt: Creating Resilient Livelihoods through CBNRM in Namibia” constitutes 
a unique opportunity not only to empower rural communities of t he Namibian CBNRM network to respond to climate 
change in terms of awareness, adaptive capacity and mitigation action through direct access to climate finance. At the 
same time, GCF support would crucially contribute to the consol idation of the achievements by CBNRM communities 
in terms of their contribution to  conservation of wildlife, for est lands and biodiversity as well as rural development. 
73. In addition to maximizing t he potential of the CBNRM networ k as a platform for local-level climate change 
adaptation action, the GCF could therefore make a significant c ontribution to the long-term sustainability of the entire 
Namibian CBNRM program, whilst efforts are being undertaken to create a sustainable path for the national program 
support mechanisms. 
D.2. Exit Strategy  
73. Local Ownership through Enhanced Direct Access: In line with the objectives of the GCF EDA modality, rural 
communities will be enabled through this project to directly ac cess climate finance. The grant facilities will be fully 
aligned with the GCF in terms o f their objectives and investmen t criteria while all owing for maximum responsiveness to 
national and, particularly, local priorities. In contrast to a pre-determined top-down funding approach, the proposed 
approach of self-determined loca l adaptation through a grant fa cility is expected to 
 Respond directly to local need s, vulnerabilities and opportuni ties, 
 Create more local awareness towards climate change and ownersh ip of the climate change response, and 
thus 
 Be sustainable beyond the perio d of direct financial support.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 59 
 
 
 D
74. Possibility for Self-Sustainab ility of Project Elements: Project elements such as the climate monitoring system 
to be developed and introduced by the project are expected to b e self-sustained and bear benefits beyond the project 
lifetime. Furthermore, some of the grants awarded could entail self-sustaining elements such as ‘revolving CBNRM 
funds’. While this is not prescri bed at the current stage, corr esponding activities may emerge from grant proposals. If 
corresponding proposed self-sustained activities appear realist ic and feasible and are aligned with the grant criteria, 
these will certainly draw parti cular interest by the EIF. 
75. Pilot nature of the Proposed Project: The proposed EDA proj ect constitutes a first-of -its-kind, not only in 
Namibia, but also internationally. Enhanced direct access to cl imate finance is a new strategy unique to the 
GCF and as such still in developm ent. The proposed project ther efore constitutes a pilot which has a huge 
potential for learning. Even if not all elements of the propose d EDA project may be sel f-sustainable after 
project end, corresponding lessons will be learned for the desi gn of a full-scale  EDA program with stronger 
elements of self-sustainability.  Thorough evaluation of the project impact and sustainability w ill be key in order 
to maximize the value of the pr oposed project b eyond its lifeti me. 
76. Possibility for Domestic Allocation for Continuation of Res ilient CBNRM Livelihoods Grant Facility:  The 
project establishes a model for  enhanced direct access by rural  communities to climate finan ce. In doing so, it provides 
an opportunity for future allocation of domestic resources, bot h from the public and private sector for continued grant 
funding for CBNRM. This will how ever depend on the impact and r esults of the project to i nfluence policy and decision-
making on treasury. The EIF is a dedicated national funding and  investment instrument that p resents an opportunity to 
absorb much of the activities o f the project and scale up fundi ng for CBNRM in Namibia. 
77. From January 2017, the EIF intends to introduce environment al levies on electronic and electrical appliances, 
lubricant oils and batteries. These are expected to generate US D 9 million per annum. The EIF Board of Directors 
approved 20% of this amount (USD 1.8 million per annum) to be d edicated to CBNRM grant funding as part of the exit 
strategy for the prop osed project. A corresponding confirmation  letter is attached to this proposal.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 59 
 
 E
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/progra mme to contribute to the achieve ment of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
78. The proposed approach of self-determined local adaptation a nd mitigation action through two complementary 
grant facilities is expected to r espond directly to local needs , vulnerabilities and opportunities. Empowering rural 
communities by enabling them to di rectly access climate finance  will allow for the provisio n of tailored local-level 
solutions to local-level challenges related to climate change. 
79. By program end, the propos ed grant facility will have impac ted an estimated 15,500 direct beneficiaries in terms 
of increasing their resilience towards climate change. The esti mated number of indirect beneficiaries is 61,000 by 
project end 8. This is critical in a country where large numbers of inhabita nts are rural dwellers who will carry a 
significant cost in relation to  climate change impacts if they do not have access to adaptive approaches, technologies 
and funding. 
80. The area that will be under improved and effective manageme nt that increases ecosystem and livelihoods 
resilience and potentially contri butes to CO2 emission reductio ns is expected at 7,200,000 hectares. The number of 
rural households implementing climate-resilient agriculture tec hniques is estimated at 2,400. The number of rural 
settlements with reduced climate change vulnerability is estima ted at 90. An estimated 450 households will benefit 
from improved water security, improved health and sanitation an d at the same time increased resilience to slow 
onset/sudden climate induced disa sters. An estimated 186 sustai nable climate-resilient jobs will be generated 
through the project. Furthermore, an estimated 30 CBNRM CBOs wi ll include climate monitoring in their existing 
event book system. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) Annual  
Lifetime  
 Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) Total Direct: 15,500 (50% female, 50% male) 
Indirect: 61,000 (50% female, 50% 
male) 
Percentage 
(%) Direct: 1% of population of CBNRM 
areas (200,000 people) 
Indirect: 30% of population of CBNRM 
areas (200,000 people) 
                                                      
8 In line with the Adaptation Fund Core Indicator Methodology, an  indirect beneficiary is defined as a person benefitting from t he 
project at medium intensity in a way that is not targeted. In t he present case, these are inhabitants of discrete CBNRM areas and 
members of corresponding CBNRM communities which benefit from t he project investments. The figures presented were 
established based on beneficiary fi gures of comparable communit y-based projects concluded in t he past in the Namibian CBNRM 
context.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 59 
 
 E
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate- responsive planning and 
development: 
o 30 additional CBNRM entities will demonstrate compliance with MET's SOPs as a result 
of the project. 
 Increased generation and use of c limate information in decisio n-making: 
o 30 CBOs will have adopted the local climate monitoring system developed and 
introduced by the project. 
 Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate  risks: 
o 2,400 rural households expected to climate resilient agricultu re actions 
o 90 settlements expected to hav e increased climate change resil ience 
o 450 households with improved water security, improved health a nd sanitation and at the 
same time increased resilience to slow onset/sudden climate ind uced disasters 
o 186 sustainable climate-resilient  jobs (50% female, 50% male) expected to be 
generated 
 Strengthened awareness of climat e threats and risk-reduction p rocesses 
o 510 people directly trained in a wareness of climate threats an d related appropriate 
responses 
o Awareness of climate change issues of 80 CBNRM CBOs will be en hanced 
81. Most of the figures presented were established based on ben eficiary figures of comparable community-based 
projects concluded in the past in the Namibian CBNRM context. T he Excel spreadsheet containing corresponding 
source data and calculations is attached to this funding propos al. 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed acti vity can catalyze impact beyon d a one-off project/pro gramme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale)  
82. At its start in the 1980s, the CBNRM concept of promoting n ature conservation and rural economic development 
by giving local communities the management and utilization righ ts over the natural resources constituted an 
innovative and radical shift fr om the prevailing conservation p aradigm. Nowadays, 20% of Na mibia’s land surface are 
under conservation through CBNRM, which is now termed a ‘moveme nt’. The CBNRM concept has been replicated 
worldwide. CBNRM is increasingly being adopted as a means of po verty reduction in the national development 
strategies of most southern African countries. 
83. GCF Enhanced Direct Access, meaning granting rural communit ies direct access to climate finance for locally 
determined climate change adaptatio n (and potentially mitigatio n) action, seems like a similarly radical concept and 
has the potential to trigger a s imilar paradigm shift from top- down to bottom up combating of climate change. 
84. The proposed project propagates this EDA spirit by putting rural CBNRM communities in the driver’s seat for 
climate change adaptation. If succ essful, the potential for sig nificant up-scaling of this approach in Namibia is given. 
As the proposed project will directly target about one third of  CBNRM areas and indirectly target about 30% of 
inhabitants of CBNRM areas, a threefold scaling up in Namibia w ould be possible, given that corresponding funds 
are available. Furthermore, the concept could be replicated in any other country where CBNRM structures and 
institutions are in place. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 59 
 
 E
85. As one of the first of its kind, the project will certainly  yield extremely valuable lessons on the potential of the 
approach of providing rural communities with direct access to f inance for local climate change adaptation action. In 
the sphere of the fund recipients, the project has a huge poten tial for increasing their awareness and knowledge 
about climate change and increasing their capacity to develop a nd implement their own adaptive responses to it. In 
the sphere of the global initiative to combat climate change, t he approach piloted through the project may yield 
lessons on the effectiveness of d irect provision of climate fin ance to rural communities and the adaptation impact 
resulting from it. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creat ion of an enabling environment  
86. If successful, the project could not only trigger the susta ined support and expansion of the concept by the 
Namibian government (see section D.2.), but also spread this in novative direct funding approach for community-
based adaptation internationally. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
87. CBNRM in Namibia has proven to influence policy development  and led to measures being included in Rural 
Development Programs, National Development Plans and Vision 203 0. A great strength of CBNRM is that projects 
actively engage with local farmers and resource users and thus the demonstration effects is visible in the use of the 
same techniques elsewhere on participating communities, even af ter the projects have ended. For example, CBNRM 
has been instrumental in the introduction of adaptation strateg ies such as no tillage and cover crops and since 
August 2015, Namibia has adopted a national policy on Comprehen sive Conservation Agriculture. CBNRM is yet to 
focus strongly on climate change mainstreaming as such this pro ject unlocks mechanisms for sharing information 
among local decision makers in different sectors, between gener al purpose local governments and local between 
local and higher level governance arrangements, and across deci sion making in the process influencing national 
policies that can create incentives for communities to undertak e adaptation, or provide re sources for community use 
in adaptation initiatives. Nati onal government programs will ga ther ideas from this project as a community-led and 
replicate them through larger initiatives. It is acknowledged t hat mainstreaming adaptation at all levels require a 
considerable amount of awareness raising and interaction with s takeholders. Component I of the project addresses 
this concern with a view to include public involvement to impro ve transparency and accountability in adaptation 
planning and share lessons. This is a key benefit to improve un derstanding of the perspectives of vulnerable 
populations, and increased buy-in from policy makers.  
88. The proposed project therefore has a huge potential to cont ribute to shaping future CBNRM support policies, 
particularly with regards to clim ate change interventions that are local determined and thus r espond to locally specific 
needs and priorities. By preparing the ground for sustainable i nvestment through the environmental levy system 
currently under preparation (s ee section D.2.), the proposed pr ogram offers great potential to catalyze significant 
long-term financial support by the Namibian government to a cli mate change responsive CBNRM carried by local 
CBNRM communities.  
 
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and ec onomic co-benefits, includin g gender-sensitive development impact


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 59 
 
 E
89. The project will address ecosystem degradation, water secur ity, food insecurity and hunger resulting from crop 
failures and erratic rainfall patterns (SDG 2). Furthermore, Th e project aims at poverty eradication amongst the most 
vulnerable society groups and communities in Namibia (SDG1). An other benefit will be suppor ting actions that have 
a direct bearing on improving rural communities adaptive capaci ties to adapt (that is, live and adjust their community 
settings and cropping practices) to the negative impacts and ri sks of climate change, as well as those related to 
agriculture, forestry and land use (AFOLU) that can build up la ndscape carbon stock on soil and standing biomass, 
through, for instance, reforesta tion activities or improved fir e management (SDG 13). 
90. Environmental Co-Benefits: The proposed project has the significant environmental co-benef it of consolidating 
and safeguarding the tremendous wildlife, habitat and biodivers ity conservation benefits of the CBNRM network. 
Conservancies and community forests contribute to the survival of important wildlife species, thereby providing 
tourism benefits for the rest o f the country and enormous conse rvation benefits for the glo bal community as a whole. 
Strengthening the CBNRM network as such therefore yields high e nvironmental co-benefits. The proposed activities 
under the  ecosystem-based adaption investment window  will support the further develop ment and integration of local 
level institutions to enhance their environmental benefits. The  grant facility will achieve the following environmental 
benefits:  
 Provide on-going incentive to  manage indigenous biodiversity a s a long-term land use; 
 Finance interventions against  and enhance alternatives to ille gal hunting and trade in wildlife products in 
Namibia’s communal areas; 
 Safeguard essential ecosystems services and functions that sus tain the livelihoods of rural people  
 It is estimated that about 7,200,000 hectares are expected to be under improved management in terms of 
land use and conservation by t he end of the proposed project. 
91. Social Co-Benefits: Active participation in CBNRM act ivities is associated with lar ge social co-benefits. Although 
many of the benefits associated with wildlife and forest manage ment activities are colle ctive, CBO members who 
actively participate in CBO activities are more likely to reali ze these benefits (Bandyopadhyay, Lendelvo, & Guzman, 
2010). From the Namibian government’s perspective, the conserva ncies are an important source of employment 
generation in areas where unemployment is high. The social bene fits linked to employment generation are important, 
and as a result, the social net benefits are higher than the fi nancial net benefits, to the conservancy itself.  Net social 
benefits were generally found to be lower for more recently est ablished conservancies than for those that have been 
established for many years. The project is expected to yield th e following social co-benefits: 
 Unlocking human capital throu gh the creation of new resilient livelihoods. 
 Natural resource managers will be drawn from local communities  and will have appropriat e skills, knowledge 
of mainstreaming climate acti ons into the CBNRM Program. 
 At least 90 settlements will benefit from the project interven tions in terms of climate change resilience. It is 
anticipated that 450 households w ill have improved water securi ty, improved health and sanitation and at the 
same time increased resilience to slow onset/sudden climate ind uced disasters. Direct beneficiaries are 
estimated at a minimum of 2,200 people with around 3,700 indire ct beneficiaries.  
 The grant making interventions aims to diversify and improve p eople’s livelihoods and will also yield social 
co-benefits. For example, monitoring of the use of income gener ated from bio-trade activities in Kunene 
region indicates that the cash that will be earned is primarily  used to access (travel) and pay for healthcare, 
buy school uniforms and pay school fees and to buy food. 
92. Economic Co-Benefits: The expected economic co-benefit s from the project are hard to quantify. Since this 
project is essentially a grant mechanism, it is almost not poss ible to pre-determine the exact nature of the proposals 
that will be developed. However, several studies have confirmed  that returns from wildlife, tourism and biotrade 
generated through CBNRM have proven to be substantial. The vari ety of opportunities and direct benefits being 
created add a new dimension to c ommunity empower ment that tradi tional forms of land use are not able to deliver on 
their own. This is particularly valuable in rural areas where h uman development needs are high and the chances of 
making a reliable living from traditional land uses are limited  by low and erratic rainfall, infertile soils and limited


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 59 
 
 E
access to markets and services. By diversifying land use and li velihood options and choosing a balanced mix of 
activities, communities can optimize the returns from their lan d and its resources. This reduces susceptibility to the 
impacts of climate change and other threats (NACSO, 2015). The estimated number of direct beneficiaries from the 
grants who will gain economic co- benefits from the project gran t investments is 15,500 (7,750 men and 7,750 
women). Furthermore, it is expected that the project will gener ate 186 sustainable climate-resilient jobs (50% female, 
50% male). 
93. Gender-Sensitive Development: All EDA project activities will aim at ensuring equal participa tion by gender 
groups. The proposed project will attempt to enhance the trend of increasing participation by women in CBO-level 
decision-making. The project will foster gender equality and ar e expected to result in an approximate 50/50 split 
between genders in terms of empl oyment and other income-generat ing opportunities. Improving infrastructure in 
conservancies and community fores t areas will provide market op portunities for local craft weavers to sale their 
locally made craft, an enterprise that has a very strong female  bias (of 765 people supplying crafts to a range of 
outlets in 2014, 155 were males and 610 females) . The development impacts for women will thus be significant. 
The expected number of beneficiaries from the project is expect ed to consist of an equal share of women and men. 
Since traditionally women are t he managers of plant resources, many of the interventions will be targeting women. 
Examples of these are bio-trade and conservation agriculture. M onitoring reports from other similarly targeted 
interventions indicate that while the number of male and female  participants might be equal at the start of a new 
development, the female participants are more likely to remain engaged with the related activities throughout the 
program period than the men. Adaptation options include interve ntions aiming at bio-trade and natural indigenous 
products (INPs). Bio-trade activities in both conservancies and  community forests are becoming increasingly 
important as a means of liveli hood diversification. The develop ment of bio-trade activities in CBNRM centers round 
women and their traditional know ledge (Nott, 2007). While men a re involved in the harvest ing and selling of INPs, the 
involvement of women is more co nsistent and strengthening corre sponding livelihoods therefore a means to 
specifically target fe male beneficiaries. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country an d population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of countr y and beneficiary groups (Adaptat ion only)  
94. Namibia’s Climate Vulnerability: In Namibia, climate change will create vulnerability in the wat er balance, 
which is expected to be affected adversely by an increase in ev aporation rates due to temperature increases. An 
increase in evaporation of about 5% is expected per degree of w arming. With rainfall variability predicted to increase, 
Namibia is likely to face severe water shortages and total lack  is projected for the central part as early as later this 
year (2016), unless rain falls soon and in large quantities to enable the major aquifers and underground sources to 
be recharged. The country’s poor rural population, particularly  subsistence pastoralists and dryland farmers, will be 
affected most as they are alrea dy facing existing vulnerabiliti es in terms of social, economic and gender imbalances. 
Namibia’s northern and southern par ts of the country experience  the highest temperatures, with the average 
maximum for the hottest month being over 34°C. High evaporation  rates in the country vary between 3 800 mm per 
annum in the south to 2 600 mm per annum in the north. This is attributed to high solar radiation, low humidity and 
high temperatures. It is also estimated that potential evaporat ion is at least five times greater than average rain 
received over most of the country . Climate change is likely to pose new challenges for vari ous farming systems.  
 95. The vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) assessment (MET, 201 3) reveals that more than half of the Namibian 
population live in rural areas and depends heavily on subsisten ce farming. Poverty is an important driver in the 
sensitivity of people to climat e change and their adaptive capa cities. This high vulnerability is further attributed to the 
country’s natural resource-based economy, its arid nature, and variability in climatic patterns, as well as socio-
economic factors, such a high divergence of income levels, whic h limit the adaptive capacity of its population (GRN, 
2002; Dirkx et al, 2008; MET, 2011). Additionally, natural resources such as for est products and rain-fed agriculture 
on which people depend are vulnerable and sensitive to anthropo genic climate change (Reid et al, 2007; GRN,


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 59 
 
 E
2002). According to the vulnerability assessment report to the impacts of climate (2011), the first vulnerability aspect 
concerns the likelihood that an individual or group will be exp osed to and will be adversely affected by new climatic 
circumstances. The second aspec t of vulnerability relates to th e characteristics of individuals or groups in terms of 
their capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist and recover fro m the impacts of environmental change. This capacity to 
adapt to climate variability and climate change understandably varies among specific regions and socio-economic 
groups in Namibia, in the sense that those with the least capac ity to adapt are generally the most vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate variability and change. In turn, this depend s to a great extent on resour ces available to a given 
group, individual or region. The report points out that livelih ood vulnerability to climate change is acute in the 
Zambezi, Kavango East and West, Omusati, Ohangwena, Oshana, Kun ene, Otjozondjupa and Omaheke regions. 
The listed regions make up more than 85% of the CBNRM area. In these regions, the regional and household 
livelihood system is based on subsistence production on communa l land, that is, on small crop plots that surround 
people’s homesteads, natural products, whilst livestock largely  grazed on communal pastures and woodlands 
(Mendelsohn, 2006). 
 
96. Risk exposure of CBNRM comm unities as a result of climate c hange:  
 Drought and low rainfall: More than 80% of peoples living with in the CBNRM boundaries depend on natural 
resource use for their livelihoods as subsistence farmers, smal l-scale emerging farmers and horticultural 
farmers. These communities have been identified as having the h ighest levels of exposure because drought 
increases the likelih ood that crops will fail or animals will d ie. Drought has affected food production directly 
over the last 15 years in Namibia (Ziervogel and Angula, 2016).  This has led farmers to finish their stock of 
millete in granaries befor e the next rainy season.  
 Loss of forest cover and spec ies: Deforestation and desertific ation; frequent forest fires; changes in forest 
types, species composition and distribution; and the disappeara nce of medicinal plants. Vulnerable species 
are those that have limited geog raphical ranges, drought/heat i ntolerance, low germination rates, low survival 
rate of seedlings, and limited seed dispersal/migration capabil ities. Unsustainable supply of forest, products 
and services. Decrease in employment and foreign exchange earni ngs through forest-based industries and 
trade  
 Inadequate access to climate information: This is a serious co ncern for CBNRM who depend on land and 
natural resources and need to know what climate to expect. This  is especially true as residents incur the 
direct costs of damage from incre ased extreme weather events.  
 High temperatures: Extreme high temperatures over the past 15 years have been associated with the 
outbreak of pests and diseases t hat impact both crops and anima ls. Over the years, t here has been outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease, anthrax, and rabies. These diseases have profound impact on both livestock 
production and wildlife management resulting in loss of revenue s to support livelihoods. Sensitivity for those 
on social grants, such as the elderly and those living with HIV /AIDS was seen to be high, because they will 
not be able to work long hours in their fields if it is too hot . Small-scale traders are less sensitive because 
they do not directly depend on natural resources. However, thei r products are likely to expire faster due to 
heat stress.  
 Biodiversity loss and species movement: There is indication th at recent and ongoing climate change is 
leading to rapid changes in the distributions of species in Nam ibia’s protected area network. Species 
movements into areas where they were not previously found are o bserved, the disappearance of species 
from a region where they once were, or a shift in the abundance  and distribution of individuals within a 
species range (Midgeley et al. 2010). Changes in fire and preci pitation regimes continue to drive or 
accelerate shifts from one ecosystem state to another. Declines  in charismatic wildlife populations lead 
nature-watchers, photographers, and hunters to seek other habit ats that offer more substantial populations


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 59 
 
 E
and that have an impact on local livelihoods. The impacts of th ese changes includes, loss of income 
opportunities and jobs, loss of primary production to provide e cosystem goods and services, and increased 
levels of poverty as CBNRM resi dents depends on natural resourc e for their livelihoods. 
97. Gender related vulnerabilities: Women in Namibia tend to have unequal access to resources and c ontrol over 
resources particularly in rural areas (Iipinge et al., 2000). T his makes women more vulnerable to poverty. Climate 
change exacerbates these existi ng social problems. Gender equal ity, including fairness, just and equitable access to 
all resources, is an important p riority in Namibia‘s National D evelopment Strategy and is one of the Sustainable 
Development principles. The strategy acknowledges that gender i ssues have not been adequat ely addressed in most 
of the major government strategi es. The specific vulnerability of women in Namibia is notable in a number of areas. 
For example, almost half of the severely food insecure househol ds are headed by women, as well as a third of the 
moderately food insecure. These female-headed households, which  represent about a fifth of total households, also 
have a significantly higher overall incidence of extreme povert y. The EDA Project will promote women participation 
and equal voice to air their concerns and challenges, identify barriers that keep them out of the main economic, 
political and social spheres, and find sustainable solutions is  best achieved when women are directly engaged. Thus 
most of the women’s vulnerabilities will be addressed by creati ng platforms that ensure women’s participation, 
involvement and inclusiveness in all stages of the project life span. Gender concerns will be central to the design of 
business and economic instruments. The participation of both me n and women is a Constitutional mandate and fully 
enshrined in the National Gender Policy and Plan of Action, as well as part of the ruling party philosophy, which was 
fully applied with a zebra act ion (that is, 50/50) in 2015.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
98. To manage the long-standing aggr egate colonial impacts whil e curbing new threats, such as climate-related 
risks, Namibia proactively undertook a long-term development ag enda, encapsulated in the country’s Vision 2030 
that is premised on substance of healthy ecosystems for current  and future generations9. This is augmented by five-
year medium-term plans (the NDPs), presently at NDP 4 and curre ntly being rolled in the NDP 5. Current patterns of 
poverty, to a larger extent, mirrors (or reflects) the then une qual distribution of natural resources; which led to uneven 
allocation of resources, underdevelopment, and multiple depriva tions. The Namibian government is developing tailor-
made policies and strategies to curb the threats at the root so urce10. This is premised on the realisation that the pace 
and rate of reducing the poverty debt is low despite the countr y’s middle income country (MIC) status. This then 
needs newer refined and targeted interventions such as the EDA Project. Notwithstanding, some fairly large-scale 
public investments CBNRM, there has been a decline in the propo rtion of public funding going  in recent years, mostly 
in the agriculture, environment, tourism and housing services a nd sectors11. Hence, a de facto  ‘poverty - 
environmental degradation’ situat ion is kept within the rural p opulation groups.  
 99. The Government of Namibia’s 2015/16 budget has been describ ed as ‘pro-growth and pro-poor’ with a special 
focus on poverty eradication and improved access to social welf are, as the second highest priority after economic 
growth. With 18% of the budget a llocated to Education (N$11.32 billion), and N$6.4 billion to  Health, there is a strong 
indication of commitment to improving the social sector. This i s in addition to the recent increase of Old Age 
Pensions by 60% from N$600 to N$1 000, and with a commitment in  the Medium Term Economic Framework 
(MTEF) to increase the pension annually to N$1 200 by the end o f the current MTEF in 2017.  While overall inflation 
has been declining since 2013 from 5.6% to 3.6% in 2015, the fo od inflation has averaged 7.7% indicating food as 
the single most important driver of inflation in Namibia.  The causes of food insecurity in the country, which are 
                                                      
9 Republic of Namibia- National Planning Commission (2004), Nami bia Vision 2030. 
10 The skewed economic growth in Nam ibia is extreme, such that 10%  of the Namibian society (mainly whites) 
receives more than 65% of incom e, leaving 35% for the remaining  90% of the population (predominantly blacks and 
mixed races) (National Development Plans, 2002). Thus, even aft er 25 years of independence,  some of the Namibian 
language groups enjoy quality of life similar to those of devel oped economies, like Luxembourg and Greece at one 
end of the scale, and groups that suffer poverty similar to tha t of least developed economies, like Ethiopia and 
Mozambique (United Nations, 1999). 
11 Republic of Namibia –Ministry of Regional and Local Government , Housing and Rural Development (2012), 
National Draft Rural Development Policy.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 59 
 
 E
exacerbated by high poverty level s, include extreme weather eve nts (drought and flooding), massive environmental 
degradation, livestock diseases,  and limited access to agricult ural inputs, rising food prices, and the impact of HIV 
and AIDS, among others.  
100. Currently, the Namibian Govern ment spends about N$580 million p er year to cater for emergency response and 
relief efforts.  This includes all types of emergency such as d rought, flood, fire, diseases (for example, foot-and-
mouth (FMD)), and livestock and crop-related failures.  Due to the nature and extent of t he climate change risks in 
this effort, the government is not  able to invest substantial r esources towards CBNRM without the support of the 
GCF, as it covers for all other  types. CBNRM has the potential to transform the crop/horticul tural sub-sector, maintain 
health ecosystems, and improve national food security. While th e government is doing its utmost best to reduce 
vulnerabilitiesby availing domesti c resources to  education, hea lth and food-for-work programmes in times of 
emergencies, there are still huge financial gaps. Total estimat ed cost (excluding co-financing) is over 5 years. 
Namibia is applying for a grant, as opposed to loans from the G CF. While Namibia is considered a middle-income 
country, the majority of national wealth is in the hands of a m ere 5% of its population, making it one of the most 
unequal economies and societies in the world. This puts a burde n on the government to devote its resources to 
Public Investment Programmes for social development and the eco nomic upliftment of the majority. 
 101. CBNRM Financial Needs:  Communal conservancies and community forests operate exclusive ly in rural 
settings in Namibia. This renders them vulnerable to the effect s of a changing climate as they remain highly 
dependent on variable rainfall patterns and associated fluctuat ing natural resource yields. In addition, CBNRM 
entities in rural Namibia often have very limited access to the  financial, technical and human resources required to 
enhance their resilience to clim ate change. Rural activities re lated to land use, land-use changes, and the use of 
fossil energy sources, have a significant impact on the livelih oods of rural communities. Often, because of variable 
incomes resulting from fluctuati ng year-to-year natural resourc e yields, rural communities’ access to suitable sources 
of funding is less reliable and more constrained than that of t heir urban counterparts liv ing on regular incomes. 
 102. The need for investment in Communal Conservancies and Comm unity Forests is underpinned by the impact on 
rural development, job creation and the empowerment of communit ies and increasingly by both the project’s need 
and potential to encounter and adapt to the impact of climate c hange. However, there is a striking imbalance 
between investments in communal and commercial areas in Namibia . CBRNM investments are primed in communal 
areas. Market failure manifests itself as a result of the lack of secure tenure rights, from private banks and investors’ 
perspective. Even the current l easehold regime is not adequate enough to reduce the risk perspective involved. As a 
result, local communities lack the requisite equity/development  capital to engage into joint ventures to derive benefits 
from existing opportunities. Moreover, the risk premium of such  investments is increased further by the long cash 
flow gestation character of investments in CBNRM. The major det errent towards capital flows to the green industries 
are mainly very low investment returns as well as the long hold ing period required. This creates major uncertainty for 
commercial and at development banks, thereby creating a financi ng gap for such opportunities.  
103. Despite the positive CBNRM program outcomes and its huge p otential as a platform for local-level climate 
change adaptation and mitigation, NACSO (2012), through the CBR NM Sustainability Task Force, indicated the 
sustainability crisis that is engulfing the program in the pres ence of declining donor support. The rapid (mainly donor-
driven) growth in the number of communal conservancies since th e first four conservancies were registered in 1998, 
combined with the addition of community forests to the CBNRM ne twork, has outstripped the capacity of government 
and NGOs to respond to increasing demands for assistance. The C BNRM program faces funding gaps that need to 
be addressed w ith estimates of around NAD 40 million per annum.
 There are a number of ri sks to conservancies and 
community forests if support cannot be sustainably funded in th e future. The major risks are that CBNRM entities do 
not meet their full potential for revenue generation, are drive n by internal disputes because of mismanagement of 
revenue, and as a result lose the support of their members. Dec lining support from members could lead to collapse 
of CBNRM CBOs and the collapse of their conservation efforts, t heir contributions to rural development and their 
potential for local level climate action. The study by Humavind u & Stage (2015) underpins the need to ensure the 
financial sustainability of CBNRM in the face of its high socia l and economic impacts and ar gues for a quicker resolve 
of the overall program re sourcing requirements.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 59 
 
 E
104. CBNRM Institutional Needs:  One of the three pillars of CBNRM is institutional development  for good 
governance, founded on the understanding that good governance c reates the basis for effective resource 
management, benefit capture and distribution (NACSO, 2013). Goo d governance is essential for successful 
implementation of community-based projects. The conservancy man agement structures were designed to manage 
the wildlife and tourism resource s, therefore CBOs need support  for institutional capacity development to be able to 
respond to climate change thr ough adaptation and mitigation. Co mmunity-led initiatives to a ddress climate issues are 
going to require capacity-buildi ng of a new set of skills that these CBOs have not yet had  the opportunity to develop. 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ie s) ownership of, and capacity to impleme nt, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national c limate strategy and coherence w ith existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
105. By signing and ratifying the UNFCCC, Namibia has, respecti vely, committed to the adoption and implementation 
of policies and measures to adapt to climate change and to mana ge existing climate risks, including improving 
resilience preparedness and adaptation capacities. The project design is fully inform ed by the vulnerability 
assessments undertaken as part of Namibia’s preparations of the  INC, SNC, BUR1, and TNC. The objectives and 
activities are in line with the strategic aims of the 2011 Nati onal Policy on Climate Change (NPCC) and its 
accompanying strategy and actio n plan (NCCSAP) as approved by C abinet in 2014. The seven principles provide 
strategic guidance for a response  to climate change that is nat ionally appropriate, effective, efficient, fair, non-
discriminatory, inclusive and ti mely.  The project reflects the  voluntary intentions of Namibia enshrined in the INDC 
(2015), which is setting the supreme adaptation and mitigation options, targets and national focus - in the medium- to 
long-term. The GRN lead coordinating entity for climate change,  that is, MET, which is also the NDA for both GCF 
and AF has been part and parcel throughout the entire project f ormulation stage, thus ensured that there is direct 
and full alignment between this p roject and INDC, especially AF OLU priority actions. 
106. Namibia’s CBNRM program is a long-standing national progra m, which was established in 1990 by the 
Government of the newly independent Republic of Namibia under t he lead of the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism. The program is a joint venture between the Government of the Republic of Namibia and NGOs, CBOs, 
communities and other development partners. Since independence in 1990, the entire CBNRM program has 
therefore been supported by a highly enabling policy and instit utional framework on which the proposed program will 
be built on and benefit from. 
107. The proposed project enjoys full country ownership in the sense of alignment with national policies and 
priorities. The project directly responds to priorities as outl ined in 
 The Constitution of Namibia , which highlights the need to develop and implement policies t o maintain the 
ecosystems, ecological processes and biological diversity for t he benefit of the present and future 
generations. 
 Namibia’s Vision 2030  (GRN, 2004 p. 76 ff.), in which  expansion of the CBNRM program  beyond wildlife 
and tourism is favored. 
 Namibia’s National Climate Ch ange Strategy and Action Plan  (Ministry of Environment and Tourism, 
2015), in which the highest prio rity theme for adaptation activ ities is “food security and sustainable biological 
resource base”. The document states that “ Namibia’s biodiversity is a fundamental to livelihood generation 
and a national asset of significant value. In addition, it underpins an important nature-based tourism industry. 
Climate change impacts (sea level rise, changes in tem perature and rainfall) may affect natural resources: 
temporal and spatial shifts in habitat/habitat loss, loss  of biodiversity and ecosystems, species diversity, and 
invasive species among others.”


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 59 
 
 E
 Namibia’s National Policy on Climate Change (Ministry of Environment and Tourism, 2011a), stressing 
the strong role to be played  by local CBOs and NGOs: 
o “The policy recognizes the importance of meaningful participation in the planning, development and 
implementation of climate change activities at local, regional and national level. The policy 
recognizes the need to ensure the partici pation of women, children and other 
vulnerable/marginalized groups and individuals, as well as, the use of appropriate local knowledge 
for adaptation.” 
o “The policy recognizes the important role of the participation of Non-Government Organizations 
(NGOs), Community Based Organizations (CBOs)  and Faith Based Organizations and the private 
sector in climate change adaptation and mitigation.  In particular NGOs , CBOs and Faith Based 
Organizations should contribute to c limate change awareness and advocacy.” 
 INDCs of Namibia  (GRN, 2015), for which the great  majority of Namibia’s mitigat ion contributions is 
projected to result from changes in the agriculture, forestry a nd land use (AFOLU) sector, which CBNRM is 
closely linked to.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entit ies and executing entities t o deliver  
108. All the proposed activities are well within the technical scope of Namibian stakeholders. There is strong 
government and NGO technical support that covers natural resour ce management, business enterprise 
development, and institutional backstopping (including financia l management and governance). 
109. Namibia has a well-defined approach to corresponding natio nal development through the AE for the present 
proposal, the Environmental Investment Fund (EIF). The EIF was established by The Environmental Investment Act 
13 of 2001. The Fund is a statut ory entity outside the public s ervice with clear and separate roles and functions 
distinct from any government body  or entity. The Fund is a stat e-owned enterprise, whose Board of Directors reports 
directly to the Minister of Environment and Tourism. The EIF in vests in and supports projects and activities that 
promote the national development s trategy of the Government of the Republic of Namibia but for which it is currently 
unable to provide the required financial investments. There is thus a strong link between the EIF and maximizing 
country ownership. 
110. The Environmental Investment Fund’s (EIF) financial manage ment structures and systems have been 
scrutinized by the GCF and its compliance with GCF Standards is  what led to the accreditation of the EIF. Thus as 
an accredited entity, the EIF will be responsible for the manag ement of the finances (procurements, disbursements 
and auditing). Moreover, the F und was independently assessed an d rated by the Associati on of African Development 
Finance Institutions (AADFI), in collaboration with the African  Development Bank (ADB) that applied the Prudential 
Standards, Guidelines and Rating System (PSGRS) assessment tool . This is a rating system that assesses three 
areas of the Fund, namely: governance guidelines, financial pru dential standards, and operational guidelines. In 
2014, the Fund was awarded a B rating and in 2015, the Fund was  rated B+, an improvement in the financial 
management system. Implementation of the project will be done a ccording to the procedures of the EIF with full 
oversight of its Board. Furthermore, the EIF has an on-going gr ant making programme with policies, procedures, and 
systems in place and such experience will be beneficial for the  EDA Promoting Resilient Livelihood for CBNRM 
Project. 
111. It has been previously demonstrated through Integrated Com munity-Based Ecosystem Management Project, 
Integrated Sustainable Land Management Programme and the Millen nium Challenge Account that some Communal 
Conservancies and Community Forest entities managed to access g rant funding and successfully implemented their 
projects. However, to achieve such success more resources shoul d be directed towards capacity building for local 
level institutions before accessing grant funding and component  1 of the project is designed to serve such purpose. 
Furthermore, there is the Namibian Association of Community Bas ed Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) 
Support Organisations (NACSO). An association comprising eight Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) and the 
University of Namibia. The purpo se of NACSO is to provide quali ty services to rural communities seeking to manage


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 59 
 
 E
and utilize their natural resources  in a sustainable manner and  some of the vehicle for delivering grant financing will 
be channeled through these memb ers. See below the list of the N ACSO members.  
Table 7: List of NACSO member organizations. 
NACSO Member Role  
Integrated Rural Development and 
Nature Conservation  Field based NGO providing technical support to registered and 
emerging conservancies. Activitie s include: training in natural  
resources management; community capacity building; institutiona l 
development; facilitation of income generating projects; interi m 
financial and logistic assistance. 
Legal Assistance Centre  Legal advice to conservancies on constitutions, contracts, lega l 
conflicts and conflict resolut ion and advocacy on CBNRM issues.  
University of Namibia (Multi-
disciplinary Research Centre and Consultancy)  Research into the social effectiveness of CBNRM and conservanci es 
in Namibia. 
Namibia Development Trust  Advocate and foster development that is community based, gender  
inclusive, sensitive to the environment and sustainable. 
Namibia Nature Foundation  Provides assistance in grant adm inistration, fundraising, finan cial 
management and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Nyae Nyae Development Foundation of Namibia  Field based NGO providing technical support to San communities in 
the Otjozondjupa region 
Omba Arts Trust  Independent non-profit initiativ e supporting the development, 
marketing and promotion of Namibian craft with emphasis on fair  
trade. 
Save the Rhino Trust  Save The Rhino Trust focus areas include rhino conservation and  
management, training and capacity building in rhino management 
and responsible rhino  tourism ventures. 
World Wide Fund for Nature  Provides technical support to implementers in the field of natu ral 
resource management, enterprise and business development and 
institutional development. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civ il society organizations and ot her relevant stakeholders  
112. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism, which is the NDA for the GCF, fully supports the proposed project 
and confirms that the national process for ascertaining no-obje ction to the project has been duly followed. A 
corresponding NDA no-objection letter is attached to this fundi ng proposal. 
113. The EDA Project was fully developed with direct engagement  and inclusive of government ministries 
responsible for climate change, communal conservancies, communi ty forest and NACSO CBNRM partners. The 
MET, in its capacities as NDA for AF and GCF has proved to be c rucial, especially in ensuring that there were no 
duplications and overlaps in planned activities to be supported  except from strategic points.  The accreditation of the 
EIF was publicly announced by the Minister of Environment and T ourism at a press conference on 13 July 2015. The 
initial brainstorming session for this project was held on the 23-24 July 2015, at Gross Barmen, Okahandja, and was 
attended by representatives from the Ministry of Agriculture, W ater and Forestry (MAWF), National Planning 
Commission (NPC), Namibia National Farmers Union (NNFU), Minist ry of Mines and Energy (MME), Ministry of 
Environment and Tourism (MET), and environmental consultants fr om civil society. In line with the compilation of the 
feasibility study for this project, about 200 people were consu lted with the majority from the CBNRM rural 
communities during field visit and ground proofing. 
114. Namibia having a national policy and strategy on climate c hange as well as the NAMAS and INDC proved to be 
advantageous and valuable as these documents helped to guide –p roviding overall national drive towards adaptation 
and mitigation options that are suitable for Namibia. Most of t he relevant stakeholders and those with a stake


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 59 
 
 E
contributed greatly through these interactive processes, settin g a good baseline and foundation to formulate a well-
targeted and crafted project. The EDA Project has resulted from  a broad inclusive process involving all stakeholders, 
that is, national government, regional and local government, tr aditional authorities, local farmers, representatives of 
on-going project initiatives for example UN supported, GEF supp orted, EU, GIZ and others implemented via national 
and local NGOs, such as NNF, NCAP, etcetera.  Furthermore, to e nsure that there is public, private and civil society 
collaboration, the programmatic concept was presented to Namibi a’s Sustainable Development Advisory Council 
(SDAC), which is chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the MET.  SDAC primary function is to ensure collaboration 
and coordination between and amongs t entities pursuing sustaina ble development in Namibia.  
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fi nancial soundness of the  proje ct/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
115. Experience has shown that, although perceived to be admini stratively costly, small grants are often more 
effective at delivering tangibl e benefits that respond to direc t needs of beneficiary communities, and should thus be 
sustained. Direct community involvement through community-based  adaptation activities increases the chance of 
sustainability as community member s have a sense of ownership o f the projects and thus potentially an incentive for 
sustainability is created. 
116. The Adaptation Fund conduct ed a comparative analysis of a number of small grants Programmes in order to 
investigate the administrative costs of operating Programmes wi th multiple levels of execution. For the Programmes 
investigated, it was found that on average 25-30% of the total Programme budget was spent on administrative costs. 
The Global Environment Facility undertook a comparative study i n 2009 that focused on evaluating the efficiency of 
the Small Grants Programme in di fferent countries. They looked at the amount of grant resources delivered, the 
number of grants managed, the average size of these grants and their monitoring and evaluation requirements as the 
determinants of cost. 
117. For the proposed project, 80%  of the project budget will b e spent on grant projects, 9 % on capacity building, 8% 
on Project Management and Administration and 3% on dedicated M& E measures12. Overhead costs of the 
supporting organization for implementation of grant projects wi ll be limited to 25% of the to tal grant volume in order to 
ensure that the majority of fundi ng (75%) is utilized for imple mentation of agreed comm unity-level activities. 
 
118. An independent impact evaluation undertaken for the Namibi a/Swedish Environmental Small Grants 
Programme in 2005 concluded that 88% of the grants funded were successful and recommended a policy option for 
the Government of Namibia to appropriate funding for environmen tal grant making, which latter resulted in the 
                                                      
12 Note that the 8% project managem ent budget also contains signif icant budget lines for M&E, suc h as a M&E officer position.  USD 893,500 , 
9%
USD 7,980,000  , 
80%USD 312,753 , 
3%USD 813,747 , 
8%Program Budget Distribution
Component  I: Capacity
Building
Component  II: Grant
Facility
Project M&E
EDA Project
Management


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 59 
 
 E
introduction of a grant Programme by the EIF of Namibia in 2012 . This experience has shown that small grants can 
be enormously successful in delivering tangible and relevant be nefits to local stakeholders and beneficiaries. This 
enhanced direct access approach is in direct response to Namibi a stakeholders who called for a mechanism that will 
empower local communities to conceive and drive local adaptatio n responses directly. A single, large intervention 
would not permit this level of l ocal ownership or design.  
119. The EDA Resilient Livelihoods Project will be implemented through existing structures, and will thus save costs 
in project mobilization and ince ption. Another factor contribut ing to efficiency and cost-effectiveness is that potential 
grant recipients and small grant projects will be screened and prioritized against specific pre-determined selection 
criteria. These criteria will be used from the project concept through to project proposal development stage. Further, 
the EDA Resilient Livelihood Project will invest in climate cha nge adaptation interventions that fall into prioritized 
Investment Windows. These filter s will ensure that investments are targeted appropriately.  
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveragi ng and mobilized lo ng-term investm ents (mitigation only)  
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
120. It is estimated that CBNRM  contribution to the national ec onomy was N$530 million. Since 1990, the CBNRM 
program has had an economic int ernal rate of 23% and has earned  an economic net present value of some N$803 
million. This is a highly positive  economic return for a progra m investment. In addition to the annual contribution of 
CBNRM to the national economy, the capital value of some natura l resources has increased. The increased capital 
value of wildlife in northwestern Namibia between 1990 and 2014  is estimated at N$526 million. 
121. The project provides an opportunity for future allocation of do mestic resources, both from the public and private 
sector for continued grant funding for CBNRM. This will however  depend on the impact and results of the project to 
influence policy and decision-making on treasury. The EIF is a dedicated national funding and investment instrument 
that presents an opportunity to abs orb much of the activities o f the project and scale up funding for CBNRM in 
Namibia. From January 2017, the EIF intends to introduce enviro nmental levies on electronic and electrical 
appliances, lubricant oils and batteries. These are expected to  generate USD 9 million per annum. The EIF Board of 
Directors approved 20% of this  amount (USD 1.8 million per annu m) to be dedicated to CBNRM  grant funding as part 
of the exit strategy for the pr oposed project. A  corresponding confirmation letter is a ttached to this proposal.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
122. With the growing expectations for performance and the comp lexity of grant making initiatives, the EDA Resilient 
Livelihood Project realized the importance a well designed gran t programme that is clearly articulated in terms of 
funding strategy and goals setting from the onset.  Therefore s everal lessons and best practices available on grant 
making and design that have been integrated by the EDA Resilien t Livelihood Project. The best practices adopted by 
the EDA Project include capacity building; collaboration and pa rtnership approach; constituency building and citizen 
engagement; and project management and monitoring. These lesson s are extracted from a v ariety of experience and 
best practices approach from institutions such as the Global Fu nd, Global Environment Facility, Millennium 
Challenge Account, etc.   
123. Capacity building: Capacity building for prospective grant reci pients is critical to achieve the objectives of any 
grant-making programme. The EDA Resilient Livelihood Project wi ll introduce interventions t hat strengthen local level 
institutions and support agencies to access grant financing and  attain the desired results as set by the project. This 
will occur in many aspects of an organization, i ncluding progra ms, management, fund raising, financial management, 
and communications. Capacity building activities will include s taff training, peer exchanges, one-on-one consulting,


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 59 
 
 E
new equipment and staff, or even facility purchase or renovatio n. It is also closely related to the issue of core 
operating funding, which for many  organizations is the most cri tical need in establishing effective capacity.  
124. Collaboration and Partnership: Collaboration among environ mental organizations and with other sectors can 
produce significant and lasting benefits. To ensure that this p artnership achieves the desired outcomes, the EDA 
Project make the entire process in teractive, so that partners i n a collaboration are involved in a meaningful way in 
framing its structure and priorities, have enough flexibility t o learn and adjust, and help define an evaluation 
framework. This is contained in Component 1 of the project. Fur thermore, the project will look for issues with 
overlapping interests and readiness for new approaches, and ins ist that potential partners in collaboration are having 
initial discussions before app lying for funding support.  
125. Constituency Building and Citizen Engagement: Citizen enga gement, both in environmental organizations and 
in broader causes, is a crucial element in long-term environmen tal change and effecting adaptation at local level, but 
the success of grant making in i nvolving citizens is very uneve n. Several factors have been identified which help
to make citizen engagement more effective and that could be enc ouraged by funders: involvement of a range of 
stakeholders; partnerships; enlisting prominent local champions ; providing a diversity of opportunities for 
involvement; face- to-face intera ctions; reasoned arguments; an d maintaining a sustained presence and continuity of 
organizational involvement.  
124. Project management and monitoring: Good governance and man agement structure to assess, approve, 
contract, and monitor implementation of projects are essential for a successful grant-making program. The EDA 
Resilient Livelihood Project has i ntegrated those aspects in th e project by designing investment areas of the project, 
criteria, project steering commi ttee, and EDA Project Implement ation Unit. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and ef fectiveness indicators N/A


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 59 
 
 F
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
125. By diversifying land uses, the programme is unlocking new industries based on wildlife and tourism, as well as 
other natural resource use.  
 Wildlife provides the foundati on for tourism and sustainable u se  
 Tourism provides employment, inc ome and training, and facilita tes other economic activities  
 Crafts are generally produced fr om natural resources and capit alise on the markets created through tourism  
 Veld products provide alternat ive income opportunities within the health and beauty sectors  
 Forest products provide income  opportunities within the buildi ng, woodworking and other sectors  
 Sustainable hunting can utilize areas unsuitable for tourism a nd provides important food and significant cash 
income used to cover a high per centage of conservancy running c osts  
 Inland fisheries provide consider able income as well as a dire ct food supply  
 Conservation agriculture increases crop yields and minimizes w astage  
 Holistic range management improves livestock production and th e health of ecosystems  
126. By applying the climate change predictions to the current CBNRM scenarios, substantial declines in revenue 
were forecasted for the majority of conservancies in the study undertaken by Brown (2009). Revenue per ha is 
projected to decrease by up to 42% of its current value by 2050 , and up to 59% by 2080, with the largest reductions 
occurring in the central region (Brown, 2009). The average pred icted change in revenue across the sample of farms 
is a loss of 28% of current r evenue by 2050 and a loss of 42% b y 2080 (Brown, 2009). The consequences of losses 
in revenue on this scale are alarming. The mean revenue for CBN RM in this analysis is N$218/ha, and the mean area 
is 9,420ha. This amounts to an average loss of about N$575,000 for each highly productive  conservancy by 2050 and 
about N$860,000 by 2080 (Brown, 2009). Such large reductions in  income will be devastating to CBO members13. 
The above demonstrates the economic, financial need and the ret urn on investment towards CBNRM that goes 
beyond profit making to secure livelihood and enhancing vital e cosystem services. This feas ibility study states that an 
expected Economic Rate of Retur n (ERR) of about 20% could be ex pected from such climate change interventions 
even though the full impacts of climate may not be felt for man y years to come. This assessment (MET, 2013) also 
states that adaptation can be carri ed out in an economically ef ficient manner especially in the case of CBNRM 
activities where the benefits are anticipated to be greater tha n just the offsetting of potential losses due to climate 
change.  
F.2.  Technical Evaluation   
127. The practices and technologies to be promoted, adopted and  applied through the EDA Project are appropriate, 
gender sensitive and suitable based on the climate risks and ef fects to be addressed. They will be addressing the 
following adaptive capacity aspects, targeted at the communitie s and groups that are most vulnerable to climate 
impacts: 
 Access  (availability, gender se nsitive and affordability of) to technology and differ ent farming methods  
 Access  (availability, gender se nsitive and affordability of) to crop varieties and farming inputs 
 Access  (availability, gender sensitive and affordability of) to water (efficient use, conservation, harvesting, 
storage) 
 Access  (availability, gender se nsitive and affordability of) to land and soil conservation measures 
 Access (and applicability of) to  best practices and skills dev elopment 
                                                      
13 This analysis has made a number of simplifying assumptions, on e of which is that land use remains 
constant over time, and is based on values for revenue per hect are that are computed us ing current prices, 
therefore failing to take into account changes in prices of pro ductive output that will i nevitably occur over 
time.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 59 
 
 F
128. From a technical and scientific viewpoint, the pursuance o f sustainable natural resource management with good 
practices includes integrating biodiversity management into pro duction landscapes [for example agricultural (agro-
ecosystems)] is an important objective of land sharing as oppos ing to land sparing assumption of the then green 
revolution. Namibian landscapes (such as conservancies and comm unity forests) are multifunctional (with multiple 
land uses) thus provides examples  where agricultural production  and for example biodiversity conservation are not 
antagonistic due to their heterogeneity features. Beyond biodiv ersity (wildlife) itself, the protection function of 
multifunctional landscapes serves  a series of ecosystem service s, such as, carbon sequestra tion, water conservation, 
soil erosion control, provision of raw materials and genetic or  medicinal resources, sites of cultural value, all 
contributing to improved livelihoods.  
129. Thus the promotion of various technologies including rippe r implements (for minimum tillage) instead of disc 
fallowing farming practices; and micro-drip irrigation (for wat er pumping) instead of sprinkl ers; and solar water pumps 
instead of diesel or petrol generators are all proven technolog ies which are best suited for the CBNRM areas in 
Namibia. Furthermore, the adoption of micro-drip irrigation sav es water and is most suitable in rain-fed agriculture 
and applicable for dryland crop farming communities where droug ht and water scarcity are  constant occurrences.  
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment , including Gender Consideratio ns 
59. All proposals will be subjected environmental and social safegu ard assessment as there are cornerstones of 
technical and financial evaluation to achieve sustainable pover ty reduction and enhanced resilience of CBNRM 
livelihoods. Therefore, procedures for addressing environmental  and social issues are included in the project cycle 
management process. A driving principle of the project is to pr event and mitigate any harm to people and thus to 
incorporate environmental and social concerns as an intrinsic p art of project cycle management. The project will only 
approve proposals that are categ orized as Category C of the env ironmental and social safeguard policy of the EIF 
and in line with the GCF accreditation conditions. The objectiv e of these safeguards and associated policies and 
procedures is to prevent and mitigate undue harm to people and their environment and strive to develop benefits in 
the development process. More specifically, safeguard policies and procedures are designed to avoid, mitigate, or 
minimize adverse environmental and social impacts of projects a nd strategies, and to implement projects and 
strategies that produce positive outcomes for people and the en vironment. The Project Cycle Management Approach 
describes a project cycle of design, implementation and evaluat ion. The EIF addresses environmental and social 
issues within this  cycle as follows: 
 
Design  
 Inquire on, and assess, environmental, and social guidelines 
 Discuss with project designer s and study any reports as reques ted 
 Prepare comments and request s for additional information  
 Advise on any specific requirements for compliance 
 Review and assess for approval and/or any special measures req uired 
Implementation   
 Continue to inquire and review environmental and social safegu ard issues  
 Prepare any comments and requests for new information 
 Review and advise on implementat ion of any special measures re quired 
Evaluation   
 Ensure inclusion and review environmental and social safeguard  issues in final project reporting as well as 
any lessons learned  
Sharing of lessons  
 Provide platform for grant recipients and partners to share le ssons


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 59 
 
 F
Table 8: Checklist of environmental and social principles 
Access and Equity 
 Potential impacts and risks –further 
assessment and management required 
for compliance  Remarks 
Compliance with the Law    
Access and Equity   
Marginalised and Vulnerable Groups   
Human Rights   
Gender Equity and Women’s Empowerment   
Core Labour Rights   
Indigenous Peoples   
Involuntary Resettlement   
Protection of Natural Habitats   
Conservation of Biological Diversity   
Climate Change   
Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency   
Public Health   
Physical and Cultural Heritage   
Lands and Soil Conservation   
 
130. Following the EIF ESS Policy, the EDA Grant Facility will only finance projects classified as an environmental 
Category C requiring screening of activities and not an ESMP. T he proposed scope of activit ies will largely result in 
positive environmental and social impacts, and the minor social  effects will be largely micro site-specific impacts from 
small-scale farming practices. They include small infrastructur e such as craft market to fa cilitate sale of products, 
500-1000 kg granaries that prolo ng long storage of yields (alre ady tested and to be upscale) , household rooftop water 
harvesting activities, greenhouses for cash crops, etc.  From t his example of activities to  be funded, it is evident that 
they present much lesser or no environmental risk and damage wh ile other indicative soft activities includes value 
addition on indigenous natural products, introduction of drough t tolerate breeds and crops, co-management 
approaches to natural resources,  rehabilitation of degraded lan ds and wetlands, etc. Any environmental risk will be 
mitigated with integration of appr opriate measures and implemen tation of common sense good practice measures.  In 
line with the EIF ESIA, a screening is conducted for all Catego ry C type of projects. Imp lementation monitoring and 
reporting processes will be designed to have explicit focus on the monitoring of the identified minor risks, as well as 
any unintended environmental and social risks. These will apply  to the individual grant pro jects via the six-monthly 
reports that are compiled by the EDA Project Unit and the Envir onmental and Social Safeguard Expert, for 
submission to the PSC and NIE. M id-term and Final Evaluations w ill also have a specific f ocus on compliance with 
the GCF. 
131. Gender: Gender considerations remain ever present in the project approa ch. Indeed, this social category is the 
primary and most active and responsive workforce, while it rema ins strongly marginalized in the access to production 
means and responsibilities. The project gender approach therefo re is mainly twofold: (a) equitable access of women 
and men to production means, including land, training, financin g, etc., and to collective and community decision-
making centers; and (b) the distribution of roles and responsib ilities in production between men and women. It is 
understood that the project has no intention of challenging fro ntally and immediately the age-old social rules 
governing the life of local communities for fear of rejection a nd tensions because such a gender process should run 
over time. Still the project w ill contribute to reducing this b arrier by applying participation criteria and procedures 
marked with positive discrimination.  
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement 
132. The Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia has expertise  in working with donor funds and has a good track 
record in implementing 36 programs and projects using sound fin ancial management practices. The Directorate of 
Administration and Finance adheres to policies and procedures t hat meet donor agencies’ requirements. For this 
project, it will be responsible for fiduciary aspects and will be accountable for all financial and investment activities. 
International accounting financial reporting standards will be applied to the project. The standard accounting


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 59 
 
 F
procedures for auditing of Project expenditure is followed by t he EIF on an annual basis. The EIF assumes overall 
responsibility for financial management of the projects, and en sure that funds are used efficiently to support the 
intended activities. A certified external auditor will submit a ll accounts to the GCF on an annual basis. The audits are 
documented by a signed audit report. The public maintain the ri ght to inspect the account on request as well as study 
reports, accounts, i nventories and other rel evant materials. Th e EIF Procurement Policy is closely aligned to the GCF 
and national laws in order to fac ilitate services within standa rdized framework.  
 
133. The EIF, working wi th the governance structure of the proj ect will ensure: (i) the subst antive quality of the project 
implementation, (ii) the effective use of both international an d national resources allocated to it, (iii) the availability of  
time for national contributions to support project implementati on, and (iv) the proper coordination among all project 
stakeholders, in particular nati onal, sub-national and local pa rtners.  Government has indicated its wishes to escalate 
efficient and effective project management and delivery, thus h as agreed for the EIF (as an accredited entity of the 
GCF) within the approval of the EI F Board, to procure certain s ervices by means of signing Memorandum of 
Agreement (MoA) where, for instance, additional and extra speci alised national or global services providers may be 
required. The MoAs will govern t he contract arrangements, thus will clearly spell out the responsibilities and roles 
regarding the delivery of the project outputs and the judicious  use of the project resources allocated to them.  To 
expedite project implementation, the EIF will sub-contract civi l society as deemed appropriate and feasible within this 
project.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 59 
 G
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Climate change does not r emain remains a policy 
priority for the Governme nt of Namibia and the METOther Low (<5% of 
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measure  
 The Project Support Team from the EIF compromising of the CEO,  the Communications Officer, Director of Operation and 
Director of Finance must maintain communication with the NDA an d continue engagement with government by providing 
project updates in order to keep climate change a policy priori ty.
Selected Risk Factor 2:  
Description  Risk category Level o f risk Probability of risk occurring
Climate change awareness raising and training events 
do not have appropriate stakeholders attending  Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measures  
 ToRs documents for Component 1 to be prioritised so that they guide the EEs in developing proc esses that ensure targeted 
participants are invited and  their attendance facilitated  
 Similarly, drawing up the TORs for support organizations in su ch a way that they are responsible for ensuring that 
appropriate participants are ta rgeted and their attendance faci litated to participate in traini ng and technical support events .  
Selected Risk Factor 3:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Limited buy-in from targeted CBOs  Social and 
environmental Low (<5% of 
project 
value) Low 
Mitigation Measures  
 Two activities have been incl uded in the project framework to address this risk – the shari ng of climate change awareness 
materials to all CBOs and the r egional meetings to share inform ation about grant opportunities.  
 Local NGOs and MET with experience of local operational enviro nments will support CBO understanding and capacity to 
identify and utilize  opportunities. 
Selected Risk Factor 4:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Proposals developed and su bmitted by CBOs are 
unrealistic with regard to expected outcomes and 
benefits to be generated  Technical and 
operational Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) High 
Mitigation Measures  
 Develop clear guidelines for gran t options and grant parameter s. 
 Several opportunities have been created for information sharin g about grants. Included in the project framework are 
regional meetings planned in or der to share grant opportunities  and parameters. It should be ensured that the information 
presented to possible applicants is realistic and complete.  
 Provision has been made in the EDA Project Implementation Unit  for technical support to be provided to CBOs for proposal 
development. This support will be essential in mitigating this risk. This should be a conditional to a grant proposal being 
accepted and awarded. 
Selected Risk Factor 5:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Internal social or political c onflict within CBOs impacts 
successful access to direct funding  Social and 
environmental Medium (5.1-
20% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measures  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
134. Risk factors associated with the project implementation in clude mainly technical, oper ational, and institutional 
aspects, as equipment installation does not causes major social  and environmental impacts from the project (please 
refer to Section G2).


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 59 
 G
 In the inception phase of implem entation, a CBO diagnostic wil l be undertaken and this process should be designed to 
identify such risks. If a high ri sk of conflict is identified d uring the CBO diagnostic, evidence must be presented that it ha s 
been resolved before that CBO can be included in a grant propos al. 
 One of the roles that support organizations should fulfil is t he identification of s uch potential conflicts and facilitates 
appropriate conflict resolution interventions before they impac t on the implementati on of the Programme.  
 Since it is likely that several CBOS will jointly apply for a grant, this risk will be diluted (in comparison to the risk if only 1 
CBO is applying). 
Selected Risk Factor 6:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Extreme environmental conditions such as drought or 
flooding  Social and 
environmental High (>20% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measures  
 Several potential activity optio ns could be impacted by extrem e drought or flood conditions. This will mitigate to an extent by 
the duration of the planned interv entions. Since it is likely t hat most activities will be implemented over a 3-year period, 
extreme drought conditions are le ss likely to occur in 3 consec utive years.
Selected Risk Factor 7:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Insufficient co-ordination an d/or co-operation between 
implementing partners (inclu ding responsible government 
ministries) at regiona l level results in  lack of support for 
climate-resilient development interventions  Technical and 
operational Medium (5.1-
20% of 
project value) Medium 
Mitigation Measures  
 The role of the EDA Project Implem entation Unit i s essential f or mitigation of this risk.  
 Several opportunities have been created for information sharin g about grants. Included in the project framework are 
regional meetings planned in or der to share grant opportunities  and parameters.  
 Provision has been made in t he EDA Project Impl ementation Unit  for technical support to be provided to stakeholders. 
Selected Risk Factor 8:  
Description  Risk category Level o f risk Probability of risk occurring
CBOs lack capacity to  successfully implement CC grant activit i
and meet grant management, r eporting and monitoring 
requirements  Technical and 
operational High (>20% 
of project 
value) High 
Mitigation Measures  
 The CBO diagnostic will determine the capacity of each CBO and  this data will inform the proposal evaluation process. 
CBOs lacking the needed capacity should not be allowed to submi t a proposal unless jointly with other CBOs or a service 
provider. In addition to the di agnostic, a measure of capacity could be proven track record – with a previous grant, audit 
reports, successful AGMs etc.  
 The EDA Project Unit will provide support to proposal developm ent and will be able to encourage CBOs to propose realistic 
projects.  
 A group of CBOs can jointly dev elop a proposal and stronger CB Os will be able to support those with less capacity.  
 Provision is made for the inclusion of support organizations a s a partner with a group of CBOs in a mentoring and technical 
support role. This could provide the needed technical and grant  management capacity and also provide an opportunity for 
capacity building. 
Selected Risk Factor 9:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
 
Conservancies and community  forests are not receptive 
to monitoring climate change indicators that are relevant 
to their livelihoods.  
 Technical and 
operational Low (<5% of 
project value) Low 
Mitigation Measures  
 CBOs have already demonstrated commitment to monitoring throug h the EBS. The EE responsible for the development 
and introduction of the climate monitoring should dedicate time  and resources to ensuring t hat CBOs understand the value 
of this monitoring.  
 The EE developing the climate monitoring system must ensure th at this process is participatory and responds to the 
identified needs of the CBOs. The EDA Project Implementation Un it will monitor the development process to ensure 
compliance to these aspects. 
Selected Risk Factor 10:


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 59 
 G
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Market development for prod ucts (e.g. INPs) impacted b y
economic downturn  Technical and 
operational Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) Low 
Mitigation Measures  
 The cost of mitigation measures  could be impact ed by internati onal financial changes such as exchange rate. The EDA 
Project Implementation Unit should support grant applicants in making financial provision  for such impacts in their 
proposals.  
 Diversification of livelihoods is an intended buffer against s uch impacts however in the process of developing new 
diversification measures, inter national economic downturns coul d impact their successful devel opment. The diagnostic must 
include some evaluation of market potential, which will mitigat e these possible impacts.  
 Examples of climate change adapt ation measures identified duri ng the stakeholder consultati on process did not indicate 
interest in a high l evel of activities t hat would be subject to  this risk factor. 
Selected Risk Factor 11:  
Description  Risk category Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Remoteness of implementation sites  Financial Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) High 
Mitigation Measures  
 The EDA Project Implem entation Unit and service providers need  to support applicants in realistic estimates of service 
costs, logistical constraints an d time frames of p lanned activi ties. 
 The EDA Project Implem entation Unit will ne ed to allocate suff icient budget for support activ ities and mec hanisms that will 
accommodate regular communication and logistical needs in worki ng with hard-to-reach CBOs.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 59 
 
 H
H.1.  Logic Framework.    
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectiv es and Impacts at the Fund level14 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development Overall Project Objective: Empower Rural Communities of the Nam ibian CBNRM 
Network to Respond to Climate Change in Terms of Awareness, Ada ptive Capacity 
and Low-Carbon Development. 
Through Component I, the project will build and strengthen the institutional foundation for 
effective and sustainable communi ty-led local climate action in  the CBNRM network. 
Through Component II, the project will empower rural CBNRM comm unities by providing 
them direct access to climate finance for increased CBNRM livel ihoods resilience and low-
carbon rural development. 
Expected Result Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target 
Assumptions Mid-term 
(if 
applicable)  Final  
Fund-level impacts  
A1.0 Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions Number of males and 
females benefiting from 
the adoption of 
diversified, climate-
resilient livelihood options 
(including fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.) Livelihood grant 
reports; EIF 
EDA Project M&E 0 150 direct 
 
250 indirect 
(50% 
female, 
50% male) 15,500 
direct 
61,000 
indirect 
(50% 
female, 
50% 
male) Project uptake 
comparable to similar 
grant projects concluded in the past. 
Mid-term (end of year 
3) numbers relatively 
low since most grant 
projects will only be 
concluded after mid-
term 
A2.0 Increased resilience of 
health and well-being, and 
food and water security Number of additional  
food-secure households 
(in areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts)  Livelihood grant 
reports; EIF 
EDA Project 
M&E 0 0 2,400 No extreme climatic 
event such as drought 
or large-scale flood that 
undoes project benefits 
in more than one 
project year 
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem 
services Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems protected 
and strengthened in response to climate 
variability and change  EIF EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports from implementing 
organizations 0 0 7,200,000 
hectares 
(mainly tree and 
shrub 
savanna) Legal situation with 
regards to rights and 
responsibilities of local communities over 
natural resources in 
their area is 
maintained. 
 
 
                                                      
14 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicato rs are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/ 00_customer/documents/Operation s/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activit ies and Inputs at Project/Prog ramme level


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 59 
 
 H
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term (if 
applicable)  Final  
Project/programme 
outcomes Outcomes that c ontribute to Fund-level impacts 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory systems for 
climate-responsive planning 
and development Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation: 
Number of additional 
CBNRM entities who 
demonstrate compliance 
with MET's SOPs as 
result of project  
 
 
 
MET 
reports/EIF 
EDA Project 
M&E  
 
 
 
0  
 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
30  
 
 
 
No drastic changes in 
MET Standard 
Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risks  Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, businesses 
and public-sector 
services of Fund-
supported tools, 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond 
to climate change and 
variability 
Number of households 
implementing climate 
resilient agriculture 
actions 
Number of settlements 
whose vulnerability to CC 
has decreased 
Number of males and 
females benefitting 
directly from the adoption 
of diversified, climate-
resilient livelihood options 
Number of sustainable 
climate-resilient jobs 
generated, disaggregated 
by gender 
Number of households 
with improved water 
security, improved health 
and sanitation and at the 
same time increased 
resilience to slow 
onset/sudden climate 
induced disasters. Livelihood grant 
reports; EIF 
EDA Program 
M&E  
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0  
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
24 
 
150 
 
 
0 
 
 
120  
 
 
 
 
 
2,400 
 
 
90 
 
15,500 
 
 
186 
(50% 
female, 
50% male) 
 
450 Project uptake 
comparable to similar 
grant projects 
concluded in the past. 
No extreme climatic 
event such as drought 
or large-scale flood that 
undoes project benefits 
in more than one 
project year 
Number of males and 
females reached by [or 
total geographic coverage 
of] climate-related early Livelihood grant 
reports; EIF 
EDA Program 0 
 150 
 15,500 
(direct) 
61,000 Project uptake 
comparable to similar 
grant projects


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 59 
 
 H
warning systems and 
other risk reduction 
measures established/ 
strengthened M&E 0 250 (indirect) 
(50% 
female, 
50% male) concluded in the past. 
A8.0 Strengthened awareness 
of climate threats and risk-
reduction processes  Number of males and 
females made aware of 
climate threats and 
related appropriate 
responses EIF EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports from 
grant 
implementing 
organizations 0 
0 420 
250 510 (direct; 
40% 
female, 
60% male) 
61,000 
(indirect; 
50% 
female, 
50% male) Since training 
workshops will be held 
at regional level, it will 
be difficult to ensure 
equal participation of 
women and men as it is 
m o r e  d i f f i c u l t  f o r  
women to get away 
from household 
responsibilities 
Number of CBOs whose 
awareness on CC issues 
is enhanced EIF EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports from 
grant 
implementing 
organizations 0 60 80  
Project/programme 
outputs Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. Climate change awareness 
raised Number of CBOs whose 
awareness on CC issues 
is enhanced EIF EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports from grant 
implementing 
organizations 0 60 80  
2. Local climate monitoring established Number of CBOs who 
have adopted the climate 
monitoring system 
 
 
Number of CBOs who 
deliver annual climate 
and biodiversity monitoring reports to EIF 
and MET  Reports by 
implementing 
agency; EIF 
EDA Project 
M&E 
Reports by 
CBOs 0 
 
 
 
0 10 
 
 
 
10 30 
 
 
 
30  
3. CBNRM governance strengthened Number of additional 
CBNRM entities who 
demonstrate compliance with MET's SOPs as 
result of project MET 
reports/EIF 
EDA Project M&E 0 10 30 No drastic changes in 
MET Standard 
Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) 
4. Capacity of CBNRM CBOs for community-led initiatives 
increased Number of proposal 
applications submitted to 
EDA grant facilities from 
CBOs directly (i.e. without 
external support by 
implementing partner) 
that are approved for 
funding Proposals from 
CBNRM 
entities; EIF 
EDA Project 
M&E 0 5 10  
5. Grant facility for Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods 
implemented Number of grants 
awarded for community-
led climate action EIF EDA 
Project M&E 0 
 27 
 33


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 59 
 
 H
Number of grants fully 
implemented and 
reported on 0 4 33 
Activities Description Inputs (USD) Description 
1.1. Develop and disseminate 
CC training and awareness 
materials Development and printing of materials. 
Dissemination through media campaign 
(radio, TV) for CC awareness and at CBO 
meetings 55,000  
1.2. Regional training 
workshops on climate 
change awareness, monitoring, adaptation and 
mitigation 17 training workshops in 14 regions to train a 
minimum of 40 CBOs with at least 10 reps 
from each (30-40 people per workshop). Only for CBOs which were identified as 
qualified candidates under activity 4.1. 137,000  
2.1. Development and 
verification of a climate 
monitoring system with supporting training 
materials Development of approach, field verification 
and training materials development and 
production 
34,500  
3.1. Development or revision of 
governance and SOP 
training materials Materials development and production costs 
27,500  
3.2. Targeted training and 
technical support provided 
t o  C B O s  b y  s e r v i c e  providers Regional service providers (EEs) contracted 
to provide training and technical support to 
CBOs with regards to governance, management and monitoring processes 411,000  
4.1. Information sharing 
meetings grant facility 15 information sharing meetings in all 
regions and major centres - some regions will need more than one meeting to access 
most CBOs 23,000  
4.2. CBO diagnostic designed 
and carried out in all 13 
regions to identify CBOs 
support needs At start of project, diagnostic carried out for 
13 regions (all 14 Namibian regions except 
for Khomas region - no CBNRM CBOs there). Updated annually for regions where 
implementation activiti es are taking place. 68,500  
4.3. Training workshops for 
CBOs accessing grants 10 workshops and associated technical 
support for implementation 68,500  
4.4. Targeted support to 
potential grantees for 
proposal development and 
submission An independent service provider to be 
contracted to provide information, training 
and proposal development support 68,500  
5.1. Awarding and 
implementation of grants 
under investment window 1: Climate-resilient 
agriculture Minimum of 6 grants 
2,040,000  
5.2.  Awarding and 
implementation of grants 
under investment window 2: Climate-proof 
infrastructure Minimum of 15 grants 
1,200,000  
5.3.  Awarding and 
implementation of grants Minimum of 12 grants 4,740,000


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 59 
 
 H
 under investment window 
3: Ecosystem-based 
adaptation 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring , Reporting and Evaluation  
135. The EIF monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) proce dures for the grant will serve as basis for M&E. 
However, for the purposes of pro ject, the MRV will be adjusted to suit the project environment. 
Project Start-up 
 A Project Inception Workshop will be held within the first thr ee months of project start with those with assigned 
roles in the project organisation structure. The main purpose o f the inception workshop will be to inform 
relevant stakeholders abou t the project so that they: 
 Fully understand and take ownership of the project. This will include detailing the role s, support services and 
complementary responsibilities of NIE staff vis-à-vis the proje ct team. Discuss the roles, functions, and 
responsibilities within the projec t's decision-mak ing structure s, including reporting and communication lines, 
requirements and conflict r esolution mechanisms. 
 Based on the project results framework finalize the first annu al work plan. Review and agree on the indicators, 
targets and their means of verif ication, and recheck assumption s and risks. 
 Provide a detailed overview of reporting and M&E requirements.  The M&E work plan and budget will be agreed 
and scheduled. 
 Discuss financial reporting procedures and obligations, and ar rangements for the annual audit. 
 Agree on the ToR for the PSC and plan and schedule the PSC mee tings. Roles and responsibilities of all 
project organisation structures will be clarified and meetings planned. The first PSC m eeting will be held within 
the first 3 months. 
 An Inception Workshop report will be prepared and shared with participants to formalize various agreements 
and plans decided during the meeting. 
136. Grant Project Monitoring and Reporting: Each approved Grant Recipient will define a set of measurable 
indicators against which they will report progress, and will es tablish baselines for these indicators. In addition to 
quantitative reporting, it is env isaged that qualitative report ing will form an important compo nent of the project reporting 
processes. Particula r attention will be gi ven to the GCF result  areas and the detection, reporting on and management of 
any minor and/or unanticipated environmental and social risks t hat arise during implementation. These processes will 
be supported by the EIF and used to  capture learning and insigh ts that will inform overall project learning. 
137. Quarterly and Six-monthly –Grant Recipients: The PSC, EDA Project Unit and the EIF (occasionally and 
leading to audits) will undertake site visits to each of the pr ojects once every quarter. These site visits will support 
project implementation and management as well as financial and performance reporting processes. Particular attention 
will be given to the GCF results framework and the detection, r eporting on and management of any minor and/or 
unanticipated environmental and soci al risks that arise during implementation. During these visits, the Facilitating 
Agencies will support all grant recipients to submit their quar terly financial reports and 6 monthly progress reports. All 
reports will be reviewed by the EIF, who will compile summary r eports in a format prescribed by the GCF. The EE will 
receive all information, revie w it and include relevant compone nts for reporting to the NIE and PSC. 
138. Quarterly and Six-monthly – Overall project: Progress will be monitored quarte rly via quarterly financial re ports 
and six-monthly performance reports that are submitted to and c ollated by the executing entity and submitted to the 
NIE. These will include six mont hly screening and risk assessme nts undertaken by an Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Expert. These performance reports will align with th e agreed annual project work plan and will include 
qualitative, quantitative and financ ial information. Grant Reci pients will also report on financial progress quarterly, and 
this information will be compiled by the Facilitating Agencies for inclusion in the executing entity reports. 
139. Annually: Annual Project Implementation Reports will be prepared by the e xecuting entity and submitted to the


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 59 
 
 H
 NIE through the EDA Project Unit  in order to monitor progress m ade since project start and in  particular for the previous 
reporting period. 
The Annual Project Implementati on Reports shall include, but no t limited to, reporting on the following: 
 Progress made toward project objective and project outcomes – each with indicators, baseline data and end-of-
project targets (cumulative). 
 Project outputs delivered per project outcome (annual). 
 Lessons learned/good practice. 
 Expenditure reports. 
 Risks and adaptive management, inc luding a summary of GCF comp liance. 
140. A report template for the A nnual Project Implementation Re port will be prepared by the NIE in consultation with the 
GCF Secretariat within one month from the approval of this proj ect. This will constitute the basis for the submission of 
the GCF Annual Performance Report (APR) as per GCF Monitoring a nd Accountability framework and Accreditation 
Master Agreement terms. The exec uting entity will also be respo nsible for conducting annual audits of the project. This 
is budgeted for as part of t he executing entity fee. 
141. Periodic learning throughout the project: The project has been designed to support learning platforms at 
various levels throughout the project implementation period. Th ese will be used to track project progress and to adapt 
interactively as required. They will also form an important pla tform for formulating policy recommendations for 
sustaining, replicating and scali ng up positive project outcome s. 
142. Periodic Monitoring through site visits: The NIE will conduct visits to project sites based on the agree d 
schedule in the project's Inception Report/Annual Work Plan to assess first hand project progress. 
143. Mid-term of project cycle: The EDA Grant Project will undergo an independent Mid-Term Eval uation at the mid-
point of project implementation. The Mid-Term Evaluation will b e commissioned by the NIE and will determine progress 
being made toward the achievement of outcomes and will identify  course correction if needed. It will focus on the 
effectiveness, efficiency and timeliness of project implementat ion, will highlight issues requiring decisions and actions 
and will present initial lessons learned about project design, implementation and management. Particular attention will 
be given to the GCF investment and result framework and the rep orting on and management of any minor and/or 
unanticipated environmental and soci al risks that may have occu rred. Findings of this review will be incorporated as 
recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final ha lf of the project’s term.  The organization, ToR and 
timing of the Mid-Term Evaluation will be decided after consult ation between the parties to the project. The ToR for this 
Mid-term Evaluation will be pr epared by the NIE based on guidan ce from the GCF. 
144. End of Project: An independent Terminal Evaluation that is commissioned by the NIE will take place three 
months prior to project closure and will be undertaken in accor dance with NIE guidance. The Terminal Evaluation will 
focus on the delivery of the project’s results as initially pla nned (and as corrected after the Mid-term Evaluation, if any 
such correction took p lace). The Terminal Evaluation will look at impact and sustainability of results, including the 
contribution to capacity development and the achievement of glo bal environmental benefits/goals. Particular attention 
will be given to the GCF investment and result framework and th e reporting on and management of any minor and/or 
unanticipated environmental and soci al risks that may have occu rred. The ToR for this evaluation will be prepared by 
the NIE based on guidance from the GCF. The Terminal Evaluation  will also provide recommend ations for follow-up 
activities and requires a management response.


---
*Page 63*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 59 
 
 I
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
 NDA No-objection Letter 
   Feasibility Study 
☐ Integrated Financial Model that p rovides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing c ommitment (If applicable) 
  Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/bud get breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) –  see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact A ssessment (ESIA) or Environme ntal and Social Management Plan  
 (If applicable) 
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project ( If applicable) 
☐ Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☐ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 65*
---

 
GCF/B.14/07/Add.07 	
	
 
 Environmental 	and	social	report(s) 	disclosure 	
Basic	project/programme 	information 	
Project/programme 	title	Empower	to	Adapt:	Creating	Climate‐Change	Resilient	Livelihoods 	
through	Community‐Based	Natural	Resource	Management	in	
Namibia	
Accredited 	entity	 Environmental	Investment	Fund	of	Namibia	
Environmental 	and	social	
safeguards 	(ESS)	category 	Category	C	
Environmental 	and	social	report	disclosure 	information 		
Date	of	disclosure	on	
accredited	entity’s	website	N/a	
Language(s)	of	disclosure	 N/a	
Link	to	disclosure	 N/a	
Other	link(s)	 N/a