=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/CreationDate: D:20160927202039+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20160927202039+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration	of	funding	
proposals	–	Addendum	V 	
Funding	proposal	 package	for	FP022GCF/B.14/07/Add.05 
27	September	 2016	Meeting	of	the	Board	
12	–	14	October	2016	
Songdo,	Incheon,	Republic	of	Korea	
Provisional	agenda	item	11(f) 	
Summary		
This	addendum	contains	the	following	three	parts:	
a)A	funding	proposal	 titled	“Development of Argan orchards  in Degraded  
Environment - DARED” submitted	by Agency for Agricultural Development (ADA);
b)A	no‐objection	letter	issued	by	the	national	designated	authori ty	or	focal	point;	and
c)Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure.
The	documents	are	presented	as	submitted	by	the	accredited	enti ty,	and	national	designated	
authority	or	focal	point,	respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.05 	
Page	b	
Table	of	Contents 	
Funding	proposal	submitted	 by	the	acc redited	entity	
No‐objection	letter	issued	by	th e	national	designated	authorit y	or	focal	point	
Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

	
Project/Programme Title: Development of Argan orchards in Degraded Environment - DARED  
Country/Region: Morocco  
Accredited Entity: Agency for Agricultural Development  
Date of Submission: 26 september 2016


---
*Page 4*
---

	
				
Contents 
  
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAIN ST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AN D MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template    
 Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accre dited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, a ccredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information . Accredited entities can either  directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary info rmation in the proposal with c ross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name c onvention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[ADA]-[20160926]-[DARED 01]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 63 
	A
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / p rogramme title Development 	of	Argan orchards 		in	Degraded 	Environment 	
‐	DARED  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     Morocco 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) Ministry Delegate to the Ministry of Energy, Mines, Water and 
Environment, responsible for the environment  
A.1.5. Accredited entity Agency		for	Agricultural	Development  
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☒  Direct ☐  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary Executing Entity: National	Agency	for	the	Development	of	
Oases	and	Argan	Zones	(ANDZOA)	
 
Beneficiary: 26 000  
A.1.7. Project size catego ry (Total investment, million 
USD) ☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒    Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☒  Mitigation ☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission  
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, position Mr	Hamid	FELLOUN,	Director	of	Projects	Management	  
Organization Agency	for	Agricultural	Development	of	Morocco	‐	ADA  
Email address h.felloun@ada.gov.ma 	/	hfelloun@gmail.com  
Telephone number (+212)537	57	37	12/	( +212)	6	61	11	02	42	
 
Mailing address www.ada.gov.ma   
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapi d bus system, etc.)  
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-ef ficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, et c.)  
☒ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and ma nagement, agroforestry, agricul tural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate ch ange – diversification of supply sources and supply chain manag ement, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, e fficient irrigation systems, et c.)
☐ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 63 
	A
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/p rogramme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in  Section C.	
 
 The recognition the natural argan forest (Argania spinosa (L.) Skeels), by UNESCO since 1998, as a Biosphere Reserve (RBA) hig hlighted its rich 
biodiversity and the economic opportunities.  The argan oil “m arket boom” and its rising demand improved household income but g enerated serious 
pressure on the natural forest and reduced its natural regenerati on thereby threatening its sustainability.  Morocco vulnerabil ity to climate change 
exacerbate such negative trend.  
Morocco committed, also, within its INDC, to reduce its Greenho use Gases (GHG) emission by 32% by 2030, through NAMAs.  Arganic ulture, 
aiming to plant 43.000 hectares of argan tr ee orchards, is a priority NAMA.   
Through a large stakeholder consultation pr ocess involving 8 provinces and 31 rural communes, spread over six years and will re quire funding of 
$ 49,2 million and target a 80 % grant from GCF and 20% as co-fi nancing.  The project aims to strengthen the resilience of rura l communities and 
the arganeraie biosphere reserve through planting 10.000 ha of argan tr ee orchards with soil conservation and rain water harves ting capabilities, 
and supporting argan fruit producers’ profe ssional organizations and market access, and promoting beneficiaries capacity buildi ng, knowledge 
sharing and natural forest co-management. The activities once achi eved pursue to contribute to relieve the anthropic pressure o n the natural forest, 
improve livelihoods of the communities members mainly women.  In the long-term, carbon sequestration is estimated at 604 223 Mt  CO2 eq.  this 
will contribute to set off a new business paradigm that stimulat es change in “doing business as usual” from fruit collection fr om natural forest towards 
private investments to address the issues of climate change and unleash the full business potential of the biosphere value chai n. 
. 
	
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 30/10/2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 26/12/2016  
Estimated implementation start and end date Start: 01/01/2017 
End:  30/12/2022 
Project/programme lifespan 5 years ____0__ months


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 63 
	
	B
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Program me 
Please provide: 
 an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF fi nancing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme 
 
The use of GCF grants is justified by the lack of climate fund ing raised by Morocco so far and the African continent’s share in  
terms of donations from the international community. The funding in grants for the project will be 80 % of the total project bu dget. 
This request is justified by the lack of locally available fundi ng for this type of project as Morocco is a developing country and 
as such will need the support of the international community to contribute to the preservation of the RBA which is classified a s 
World Heritage. The requested funding will help preserve the Ar gane natural forest and limit its degradation mainly resulting 
from climate change factors.  
 
COMPONENT  
GCF ( USD)  ANDZOA (USD) ANDZOA's Partners 
(USD) TOTAL 
BUDGET 
(USD) 
Component 1 26 996 000,00 2 484 000,00 5 800 000,00 35 280 000,00 
Component 2 7 773 600,00 836 400,00 0,00 8 610 000,00 
Component 3 4 523 000,00 775 000,00 0,00 5 298 000,00 
Total budget of 
Project  39 292 600,00 4 095 400,00 5 800 000,00 49 188 000,00 
 
 
The project will be  implemented  in three components: 
 
Component 1 (35,3 Million USD) : planting argane tree orchards on an area of 10 000 hectares with grants of 35,3 million US 
dollars. This financing requirement is justified by the difficu lty of raising alternative sour ces of funding given the vulnerab ility of 
beneficiaries and the difficulty of access to universal financi al products in Morocco. The contribution of ANDZOA and its partn ers 
including the beneficiaries will amount to 24% of component 1. This co- funding in grants allocated from ANDZOA’s operating 
budget will contribute to the implementation of NAMA Arganicult ure. The beneficiary’s contribution will focus on the maintenanc e 
of orchards (trimming and maintenance) after the first two years of planting. Land cont ributions to the project in kind will be  
made by some of the beneficiaries. 
Water resources availability for irrigation is a key success fa ctor for this project. The  Agence du Bassin Hydraulique Sous-
Massa Draa, an important partner involved in the project, conducted a study on rainwater harvesting and identified the 
implantation sites and the appropriate techniques1. The need for funding for this activity is justified because of the low budget 
available from the implementation partner for the construction and/or rehabilitation of such infrastructure. The proposed co-
financing will address the technical assistance of the catchment works and the supervision of their construction. 
The success of plantations necessarily requires technical assistan ce for the duration of the project as justified by the large 
areas to be planted and given the innovative experience for the domestication of the Argane tree in the orchard. Technical 
assistance during this project will be funded by the grant. Th is contribution will be downgraded in the next phases of NAMAs 
Arganiculture program. 
 
Component Sub-component  budget 
(for entire 
project) in  
Million 
USD  budget (for 
entire 
project) 
Million 
dollars USD funding 
request 
from GCF  ($ 
Million  US) Currenc y 
disbursement 
recipient 
																																																													
1	Beside securing water delivery and safeguarding water resources, the Water Resource In tegrated Development Master Plan for the Souss basin A [19] aims to 
protect the argan ecosystem and boost the up/downstream solidarity.The average water demand in 2030 is estimated at 654 M3 in t he souss basin with a 15% 
gap; to satisfy this demand an investment plan of approximately 1, 273 billion dollars has been designated.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 63 
	
	B
Component 1: 
implementation of  
arganiculture on 
10 000 ha 1.1. Arganiculture on 10,000 ha 26,0 26,0 20,0 Million dollars USD 
1.2. medicinal and aromatic  
plants Intercropped with argane on 2000 ha 2,2 2,2 2,2 Million dollars USD 
1.3.Water harvesting and water 
and soil conservation 5,2 5,2 3,0 Million dollars USD 
1.4.Technical assistance and 
works supervision 1,8 1,8 1,8 Million dollars USD 
total component 1   35,3 35,3 27,0 Million dollars USD  
 
 
Component 2  of the project ( 8,6 Million USD) :  is about the or ganization of the upstream components of the argane value-
chain through support of fruit producers cooper atives and “Groupement d’Interet Economique” (GIE) or interest groups in order 
to improve market access for the products. The implementation of  this component requires funding in the form of a grant from 
the GCF and co-financing by ANDZOA’s budget  and contributions of  beneficiaries.  
 
Component Sub-component budget 
(for 
entire 
project) 
in  
Million 
USD  budget 
(for entire 
project) 
Million 
dollars 
USD funding 
request 
from GCF  
($ Million  
US) Currenc y of disbursement  
Component 2:     
Organization of 
the upstream 
components of 
the argane 
value-chain  
 2.1: Professional organizations 
on the upstream of Argan sector 
structured and GIE 0,9 0,9 0,9 Million dollars USD  
2.2: Argan's products are valued 
7,7 7,7 6,9 Million dollars USD  
total component 2   8,6 8,6 7,8 Million dollars USD  
 
Component 3  ( 5,3 Million USD) aims to strengthen the Arganeraie Bi osphere actors’ capacities to manage and adapt to climate 
and will contribute to rehabilitate the Argan naturel forest. The pr oject will address these shortcomings in the sites that hav e not 
had the opportunity to benefit from major field training on adapt ation to Climate Change. Local communities have valuable 
ancestral indigenous knowledge they used in adapting to clim ate change and resources scarcity. The consultation workshops 
organized while developing this proposal confirmed that there is an awareness that climate change exacerbated usual risks. 
The GCF grant will contribute to the establishment of the  Argane national center of excellence that will channel the efforts 
of all scientific and professional actors and will prom ote a cluster of cultural heritage of the Argan tree. 
 
Component Sub-component (if applicable) budget 
(for 
entire 
project) 
in  
Million 
USD  budget 
(for entire 
project) 
Million 
dollars 
USD funding 
request 
from 
GCF  ($ 
Million  
US) Currenc y of disbursement  
Component 3 :  
capacity building, 
knowledge 
management, Co-
management of 
Natural Argan 
Forest and 
scientific 3.1: Climate change management 
Capacities of institutional actor,  
elected representatives and 
professional organizations are 
reinforced and developed and RBA 
co-management are implanted  3,4 3,4 2,7 Million dollars USD  
3.2: Argan research is consolidated and encouraged 1,9 1,9 1,8 Million dollars USD


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 63 
	
	B
research 
promotion 
total component 3   5,3 5,3 4,5 Million dollars USD  
 
 
 a description of how the choice of financial instru ment(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project 
objectives, and leverage public and/or private finance 
 
The funding through grants helps to contribute to the implementa tion of NAMAs arganiculture but will also accelerate the 
implementation of the Argan program which aims to address c hallenges and pressure on the bios phere, promoting arganiculture 
and carbon sequestration as demonstrat ed in the NAMAs arganiculture. Also, Morocco committed to contribute to the 
international efforts of reducing greenhouse gases and has already set clear objectives and plans in its national plan ( INDC )  
officially presented in June 2015.  Morocco’s INDC committ ed to 32% greenhouse gases emission reduction by 2030 compared 
to its projected emissions for the same year according to it s "doing business as usual" scenario. This commitment requires that  
Morocco gain access to new sources of funding and additional su pport compared to that received in recent years .The need for 
additional financing was raised by Morocco at the United Na tions Climate Conference.  The required budget is around $ 45 
billion USD of which 35 billion are conditioned by internat ional support through new mechanisms of climate finance. 
 
Moreover, the argane natural forest faces major challenges bec ause of its geographic location at the frontier of one of the 
hottest deserts in the world, and the predicted impacts of clim ate change on the area predict a temperature Increase of 0.6 to 
1.1 °C , and a rainfall decrease between 10 to 15 % by 2020 2. Such trends threaten fruit production and the stability of vital 
ecosystem services provided by the natural forest.  Without in ternational support Morocco will not be able to face these seriou s 
threats.   
 Another key outcome of the grant program is to promote self-f inancing by the interest groups by developing their capacity to 
gain access to equity finance. This process will make these interest groups and cooperatives bankable and attract investment 
funds to Arganiculture and create interest for new financing me chanisms (In a way similar to what happened in other sectors 
like( Citrus , OLIVE ... ) where the regular  banking system took more interest as the industry became more structured and 
profitable). 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 Financial Instrument Amount Curren
cy Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  ……49,2…
………… million 
USD ($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  
(i) Senior Loans (ii) 
Subordinated Loans 
(iii) Equity (iv) Guarantees (v) 
Reimbursable grants* 
(vi) Grants * ……………  
……………  
……………  
…………… 
 
  
 
…39,3… Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million 
USD ($) (  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
  
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
  
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that 
GCF is expected to provide, particularly in the ca se of grants. Please specify difference in tenor 
and price between GCF financing and that of accredi ted entities. Please note  that the level of 
concessionality should correspond to the le vel of the project/programme’s expected 
performance against the invest ment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  39,3… million 
USD ($)  
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 Financial 
Instrument Amoun
t CurrencyName of 
Instituti
on Tenor Pricin
g Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 4,10 
5,0 million 
USD ($) ANDZOA
DRA SM(  )  
years (   ) %  
(   ) %  Options  
Options  
																																																													
2 : http://www.fao.org/nr/climpag/pub/FAO_WorldBank_Study_CC_Morocco_2008.pdf


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 63 
	
	B
Grant 
Grant 0,80  
 million 
USD ($) 
      
      ABH SM 
 (  )  
years 
 (   ) % 
IRR 
 Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: ANDZOA 
*  
(d) Financial 
terms between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deplo ys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, 
(i.e. the GCF financing passes directly from the GC F to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE 
is the recipient itself, in the proposed financial in strument and terms as described in part (b), this 
subsection can be skipped. 
If there is a financial arrangement between t he GCF and the AE, which entails a financial 
instrument and/or financial terms separate from th e ones described in part (b), please fill out the 
table below to specify the proposed inst rument and terms between the GCF and the AE. 
Financial 
instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
Choose an item.  …………………. Options  (  )  years (   ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in  the financial instrument and/or terms between 
what is provided by the AE to the recipient a nd what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non -concessional)  determined?  
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which could be tapped to 
finance the proposed project/programme. 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1-year T-Bill,  5-year government bond, 5-year corporate bond (specify credit r ating) and 5-
year syndicate loan. 
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.   
 
No other potential funding sources have been identified. Climate change mitigation activities have concentrated resources in 
the Green Climate Fund (GCF) as a strategy to centralize the de cision-making process, thus providing clear, transparent and 
fact-based guidance and developing funding criteria through a consensus-building process between donors and developed and 
developing nations.  
Local population lack access to finance especia lly for arganiculture.  In addition, the arganiculture sector in Morocco is a ne w 
agriculture sector and is not an attractive investment opport unity for banks because of its perceived high risk today. Due to t his, 
private sector financing is not available.  The project aims to address these barriers in order to allow the local population an d 
community to access funding.  
ANDZOA remains the only entity responsible for promoting the sector of arganiculture in the area and is the sole financial 
contributor for the implementation of this project. Other En tities (ABH and DRA and beneficiaries) will help finance the projec t. 
Their contribution is reflected in the financing set up of the project.


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 63 
	
	C
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as  these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of t he project / programme.  
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-nati onal, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to contextualiz e the proposal, 
including existing national and sector policies and strategies. 
 
1. NATIONAL  CONTEXT  
1.1. Argan  Biosphere Reserve (RBA)  in Morocco  
Morocco is the universal depositary of the Argane tree and UNESCO had labeled the argan tree's geographic range as the Argan Bi osphere 
Reserve3  (RBA) in 1998. This Biosphere covers an area of approximately 2.5 million hectares where the Argan tree holds first place with  a total 
covered tree area of 829,087 ha, or 60% of the total forest area. 
Several studies and research tried to measure degradation trends of the argane natural forest by 
monitoring the evolution of its general area and land cover density4. These studies were implemented 
in different sites of the RBA. Reported degradat ion levels vary from one area to another and depend 
on the nature of the pressures they are subjec ted to. The Ademine argane forest, is undergoing 
pressure from urbanization because of its location on the frontier of the faste growing city of Ait 
Melloul, and its annual loss is estimated at 600 ha (EL Yousfi, M.S., 1988). 
Another study investigated an area of 100,000 hectares  in the province of Taroudant where the argane 
forest degradation in terms of density was measured on the basis of aerial photos and satellite images. 
This study revealed a density loss of 44, 5%  between 1970 and 2007, mainly due to desertification 
(Polain Waroux, 2011).  Airborne Data collection and satellite sensing of the Haha Argan forest 
revealed a density loss rate estimated at - 2.04% in 22 years and a surface loss of  - .21% in 13 years. (El Wahidi, 2013). 
In the mountainous area of Ait Baha, data showed that argane tree cover appears to be stable 
between 2003 and 2011, however, an estimated 2 to 3% of the trees present in 2003 disappeared in 
2011. This relative stability confirms that, in th e mountainous area, no significant degradation of the 
"arganeraie agro-ecosystem is noticed. (Aouragh, 2012).
  
The study on the state of degradation of the Mesguina forest at the frontier of Agadir city, between 
1988-2015 revealed a surface loss of 203 hectares of argane due to urban settlements (an annual rate of 7.5%).  Major differences are noticed from  mountain areas with 59 ha (an annual rate of 2.2%) 
and 416 ha in the plain area (an annual rate of 15.4%). A density loss was recorded in the plain area of 381 ha (an annual rate of 14.1%). (Eddaif, 2016).
  
1.2. Importance of Biodiversity  RBA   
Since the argan woodland serves as foundation s pecies for over 1,200 species (Aymerich and 
Tarrier 2010), the intensifying pressure on the natural argane forest may threaten the broader 
biodiversity of the Acacia-Argania eco-region.  
																																																													
3 : www.unesco.org 
4. EL Yousfi, S.M. (1988). La dégradation forestière dans le Sud marocain. Exemple de l’arganeraie d’Ademine (Souss) entre 1969 et  1986, mémoire de 3e cycle, I.A.V. Hassan II, Rabat, 117 p./Benzyane. M, 1995 -  
Le rôle socio-économique et environnemental de l'arganier. /Polain  de  Waroux. Y, 2011 - La dégradation de l’arganeraie et ses  causes dans la province de Taroudant. /El Wahidi. F, 2013 – Thèse de doctorat : 
Dynamiques des dégradations de l’arganeraie et modélisation spatiale de l’évolution forestière : scénarios d’aménagement pour u ne gouvernance locale.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 63 
	
	C
1.3. Arganiculture and climate change 
It is obvious that the success of the regeneration of the natural forest is closely 
dependent on rainfall. However, the mobilization and effective participation of the 
local users is also important. At this leve l, the capacity for action and the availability 
of resources are most critical.  Ec ological factors alone cannot guarantee the 
success of its artificial regeneration. This  is considered to be a long process 
requiring in addition to technical resources significant contributions from the social 
environment (fig.3).  
Climate change impact on argane woodlands is of great interest as this ecosystem 
is of vital importance for human livelihoods and local biodiversity. In fact during the 
last glacial period maximum (21,000 BP) suit able for forest growth occurred at more 
southern latitudes, where the Sahara desert cu rrently lies, while suitable areas in 
the mid-Ho locene period shifted northwards, occupying areas similar to those of 
today.  The current range constitutes 44% of  the potential land distribution of the 
forest, primarily reflecting anthropic land- use patterns.  Future climate change is 
forecast not to cause latitudinal/altitudi nal range shift, but rather an overall 
contraction of its range. (fig4)5.  
Considering the climate-based predicti ons and the important role of argane 
woodlands in preventing deserti ﬁcation and maintaining the local social and 
economic systems dependent on this key ecosystem, vigorous efforts should be 
made to protect all currently established argane woodlands6  
1.4. Arganiculture to reduce pressure on the naturel forest  
There is a serious mismatch between loca ls’ conservation incentives and the long 
run sustainability criteria for maintaini ng a healthy argan forest. Fruit collection and market prices are the most important m otivations for locals.  
The project, offering additional fruit resource s, will contribute to solving this mism atch through supporting the emergence of a high value kernel 
market from sustainable production practices.  This will allow users to sell higher quant ities of harvested kernels and is the b est way to solving real 
rural poverty alleviation. 
1.5. Sensitivity to desertification and land degradation 
The most decisive factor of sensitivity to desertification and  land degradation in the argane woodland is the pressure due to o vergrazing, which is 
visible on almost 67% of this area.  Low levels of pasture productivity and frequent use by her ds from outside the argan forest  range worsen land 
degradation of the biosphere. 
2. NATIONAL  STRATEGY 
2.1. Climate Change Policy In Morocco (CCPM) 
Climate Change Policy in Morocco (PCPM) in clude strategic, horizontal and sectoral perspectives, for both mitigation and adapta tion. This policy 
puts “green growth” in its economic and social priorities; these pr iorities are  embodied in four pillars which aim to achieve a reduction in  the overall 
carbon footprint and build a  development model that is more resilient to the impacts of the climate change: 
‐ Governance pillar favouring a parti cipative and decentralized approach;  
‐ Economic Pillar, implementing an inclusive  green economy;  
‐ Social Pillar, for the integration of  social aspects in all  public policy;  
‐ Environmental Pillar, for the integration of the environment as a central concern of all socioec onomic and territorial developm ent. 
The sectoral strategic axes hold back national priorities of vari ous ministerial departments, in their sectors of mitigation an d adaptation to climate 
change. Eventually, a process of identification and coordination of  policies and the sectoral measures will be set up to insure  a complete plan of 
action to realize the CCPM. The six transverse strategic axes of the CCPM aim at: 
																																																													
5 Alba-Sanchez F. J. Lopez-Saez ; D. Nieto-Lugilde ; JC. Svenning.  2015.Long-term climate forcing to  assess vulnerability in Nor th Africa dry woodlands. 
Appmied Vegetation Science. 18: 283-296 
6 Alba-Sanchez F. all 2015 in long-term c limate forcing to assess vulnerability in north Africa dry argan woodlands.  	
Fig 3: Argane natural forest regeneration area evolution fro m
1998-2012 and the link with the variation in rainfall (Cumulativ e
area 14,600 ha). (Source, HCEFLCD, Congrès  International d e
l’Arganier 2011 Agadir Morocco)


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 63 
	
	C
o Strengthening the legal and institutional framework, by concrete legal and statutory measures, according to the capacities of o utline 
law of the National Charter of the Environment and  Sustainable development published in 2014; 
o Improving knowledge and observation  to strengthen the capacities of  observation, follow-up and forecast  the impacts of  clima te 
change; 
o Commit to territorial implementation, by the taking into consi deration the territorial specificities and the active commitment of local 
communities to implement the national objectives in Territorial Plans to fight  Global warming (PTRC). 
o Early warning to Reduce Climate Risks in order to im prove ecosystems’ and population’s adaptation capacities  
o Stakeholders empowerment through capacity building and awareness ra ising for better skills necessary to adapt and mitigate clim ate 
change impacts; 
o Promote research, innovation, knowledge and technology transfer in order to develop the scientific and technological capacities  for  
forecasting, mitigation and adaptation 
In this dynamic, national initiatives were engaged to improve t he resilience to climate change and reduce the emissions of GHGs . We shall quote, 
for illustrative purposes, the adoption of the National charter of the Environment and the Sustainable development in 2011; thi s charter defines the 
rights and the obligations of the State and the citizens for protection of the environment and sustainable economic development . In the same trail, 
the new constitution of July, 2011 puts the "accent on the objective of sustainability of the environment. Morocco signed in Ma y, 2012 Declaration 
on Green growth of the Organization of Cooperation and of Economic dev elopment (OECD), to reach  economic recovery and a long-l asting 
economic growth on the environmental and social fronts. Also, t he Government of Morocco published in March, 2014 an outline of the National 
Charter of the Environment and the Sustainable development laws. T he Government aspires to promote investments in green industr ies and   
technologies to strengthen sectors such as the fish farming and the ecotourism, and to contribute to efficiencies in sectors su ch as agriculture. 
a. National Plan of Adaptation (National Adaptation Plan -NAP), 
For the adaptation sector,  a National Plan of Adaptation (National Adaptation Plan -NAP) , in an ongoing process, will  identify the priority 
activities to fulfil the urgent and immediate needs for adaptation to climate change.  For the agriculture sector, MAF has a wi de range of projects 
dealing with adaptation to climate change, most of them have already been implemented.  
b. Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions - NAMAs 
Regarding mitigation, a low carbon emissions development Strategy ( Low Emission Development Strategy - LEDS) is in the course o f finalization. 
And Morocco’s INDC committed to a 32% greenhouse gas es emission reduction by 2030 compared to its projected emissions for the same year 
according to its "doing business as usual" scenario. T his strategy will take into account the mitigation Measures suited to the national level (Nationally 
Appropriate Mitigation Actions - NAMAs) covering the ma jority of the  branche of industry generating  GHGs. 
‐ Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions – NAMA Arganiculture  
NAMAs which are part of the low carbon development strategy (Low Emission Development Strategy - LEDS) as adopted at COP15 in C openhagen. 
NAMA Arganiculture is selected as on the top the three pr iority NAMAs for the agricultural sector in Morocco. 
The purpose of the Appropriate Mitigation M easures at the National Level (NAMA) is to develop the arganiculture program (cultiv ation of the argan 
tree in orchards), mainly through domesti cation of the argane tree (Argania spinosa (L ) Skeels) and establishment of a farming system that will  
include intercropping and associations with forage crops or arom atic plants on an area of 43,000 Ha, with a total potential est imated area of 3 million 
Ha.  
This program will increase the carbon st orage in biomass and soils. It will mitigate the industrial and anthropogenic pressure on natural argane 
forest. NAMA arganiculture program plan proposes offering natural forest users new options and agricultural model based on the cultivation of the 
argan tree as a high value plant within the Pillar II of the Green Morocco Pan.  This is implemented to support and sustain the  actual Agroforestry 
system.    
The domestication of the Argan tree and its cu ltivation in orchards would turn it into an oilseed crop for oil production. Thus , next to the wild Argan 
tree (Protected areas as a priority), planting argan trees in orchar ds while combining their oil with that from other cultures will consistently increase 
its productivity and the quality of the oils . Argan trees will be produc ed from healthy plants with good genetic qualities allowin g for a controlled 
process (Tree Resource Domestication) of cultivation and monitoring of the environment as well as selection of cultivars to ens ure consistent quality. 
The domestication of the argan tree opens up significant economic oppor tunities for Morocco because it is expected to face a gr owing demand year 
after year for quality argan oil and will help reduc e and eliminate pressure on the wild Argan forest. 
 
2.2. Morocco Green Plan - PMV


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 63 
	
	C
Integrating climate change in the Green Morocco Plan7 was a prerequisite. This is illustrated in par ticular through the guidelines and the following 
priority action plan: 
‐ The formalization and implementation of projects within the framew ork of improving the resilience of agriculture to future clim ate change 
and the preservation of land and biodiversity; 
‐ The promotion and integration of climate change into adaptation technologies through projects and through the dissemination of 
selected and certified seeds, the use of water and soil conserva tion techniques, wider use of fertilizers and good agricultural  practices; 
‐ Support  the development of renewable energy use in  agriculture, particularly solar, wind and biogas; 
‐ The establishment of an ambitious program around the development of water resources: National Irrigation Water Savings Program;  
- The contribution of Agriculture, through the measures taken under the PMV to allow the sequestration of 61.7 million T.eq. of C O 2 
As part of the PMV, Morocco has redefined its objectives in a global context concerning  food security, climate change, the ris ing prices of agricultural 
products, producer responsibility and the fight against poverty. 
The PMV is based on redesigning the sectoral  framework and the improvement  of cross-cutting factors, particularly in regard to water policies, land 
and inter-professional organization. 
The dimension of climate change  is the subject of the seventh foundation of the PMV, which is the preservation of natural resources for sustainable 
agriculture. The seventh foundation is based on: 
 The implementation of projects within the framework of improv ing the resilience of agriculture to future climate change and the  preservation 
of land and biodiversity; 
 Integration in PMV projects, technologies for adaptation to c limate change through the dissemination of selected and certified seeds, the 
use of water and soil conservation techniques, fert ilization of crops and good agricultural practices; 
 Supporting the development of the use of renewable energy, particularly solar, wind and biogas; 
 The establishment of the National Water Saving Irrigation Pr ogram (Programme National d’Économie d’Eau en Irrigation) ; 
 Development of Cultivated Soil Fertility Maps, for better crop productivity at the national level; 
 The National Programme for Agricultural Lands Mapping (programme national  de  Cartes  de  Vocation  Agricole  des  Terres) for  efficient 
use of agricultural land. 
It is primordial to highlight that Arganiculture is a main co mponent of the Green Morocco Plan (GMP) which aims to support gove rnment efforts in 
order to relieve the pressure on argan forest zones, improve the living conditions of local populations by increasing their inc omes, and increase 
their resilience through diversification of activities with le ss reliance on the argan forest areas and critical water resource s. 
 
2.3. Argan policy development  
The strategic orientations on Argan were formalized through t he "contrat programme arganier" (C PA) a collaborative agreement si gned in 2010 in 
order to support economic and social developm ent through promotion of argan ecosystem conservation and argan value chain develo pment. This 
agreement involves the MAF, the HCEFLCD, the Moroccan Argan Prof essional Organization (FIMARGAN), the National Agency for Devel opment 
of Oases and Argan Tree Zones (ANDZOA) is the institution in ch arge to coordinate this CPA and develop synergies with all stake holders.   
3. INSTITUTIONS,  ORGANISATIONS AND LAW  
3.1. National Agency For The Development Of  Oasis And Argane Tree Zones (Andzoa)  
The National Agency for the Development of Oases and Argan tree Zones (ANDZOA) was created in 2010 under the supervision of Min istry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries to promote integrated development of tw o major Biosphere reserves of Morocco Arganeraie and Oasis of Morocco. The 
specific mission of ANDZOA is to design, in coordination with  government authorities, elected representatives and all stakehold ers, a global 
integrated development program of the territories under its authority to ensure its implementation and monitoring.   
The Oasis and Arganeraie territories covers almost 40% of the national territory. It includes 5 administrative regions, and 16 provinces, and 388 
local communes. The specific goals in the argane areas for ANDZOA are to: 
 Ensure the argane tree areas preservation, protection and developm ent including the implementation of socio-economic projects; 
																																																													
7The agricultural strategy aims to accelerate growth, reduce pover ty, ensure the long-term sustainability of the sector and cons olidate its 
integration into national and international markets. 
 Pillar I focuses on the development of productivist and modern agriculture and responding to market rules based on private inve stment 
in high-value and high-productivity sectors. 
 Pillar II concerns the accompaniment of a solidarity agriculture and the fight against poverty particularly in areas with fragi le economy 
and, improving incomes of poor farmers through intensification, diversification and the valorisation of local agricultural prod ucts.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 63 
	
	C
 foster Argane forest rehabilitation in accor dance with forestry laws and regulations  
 Conduct or supervise the projects implementation for argan tree  products valuation, marketing,  promotion and labeling, especia lly under 
contracts or agreements- program to be concluded with the Agency; 
 Structure argan tree  production and marketing  in the partner ship with different stakeholders including the concerned people; 
 Encourage scientific research for the protection of the argan tr ee protection, its development as a viable tree crop, and incre ase  valuation 
of the supply chain of its products.. 
To promote and develop the argan value chain, a contract-prog ram was signed in 2011, between the government and the Argan Moroc can 
Federation Interprofessional (FIMARGANE). This c ontract- program plans, in 2020, to : 
 Rehabilitation of 200,000 hectares of natural argan tree; 
 Domestication of the argan tree and extension in modern orchard (arganiculture) on 5,000 Ha; 
 Promotion of the argane "Protected Geographical Indications " Label  and  its products and derivatives on the international mar ket; 
 Increasing argan oil production to reach, in 2020, 10.000 tons / year (currently estimated at 4.000 tonnes / year); 
 Establishment of argan Pillar I and Pillar II projects to integrate in a more efficient manner the international market. 
Regarding the natural conditions which are favorable, the potentia l land area for arganiculture identified is 43.000 hectares d istributed in 8 provinces 
(cf NAMA- Arganiculture) and considering ADA’s size by pr oject category and accreditation the necessary implementation delay fo r achieving its 
completion we suggest executing it in three phases by 2030. 
 
3.2. Professional Organisation   
The argan sector has undergone an evolution ma rked by   organizational aspects and 
support to producers. Since the first women's cooperative of production and marketing, in 
1995 there has been the creation of the first group of women cooperatives producing Argan 
(UCFA) in 1999.  The recognition of the argan tree fo rest as Biosphere (RBA) also revitalized 
the cooperative sector with almost 300 cooperatives today.   
With the airm of supporting the structuring of the professionals in the sector, a new stage 
was marked by the installation of a geographica l protected indication “IGP Argane” within 
the framework of a new law on the Characteristics  of Origin and Quality (SDOQ).  In order 
to consolidate the professional organization of the sector a Moroccan Interprofessional 
Federation of Argan (FIMARGANE) was created in  2011. It represents a new structure for 
strategic consultation and management which includes major components of the argane 
value-chain.  It includes the National Federation of Natural Forest Users, which counts 7 
provincial associations r epresenting fruit producers. 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissi ons baseline, climate vulner ability baseline, key barriers,  challenges and/or polici es) and 
the outcomes and the impact t hat the project/programme will aim to ac hieve in improving the baseline scenario. 
The first challenging achievement of this project is to launch a first phase of t he NAMA-Arganiculture program through: argane tree domestication 
and orchards planting and implementation of innovative and well- designed professional organizati ons, and supporting measures an d capacity 
building approaches in order to improve ec osystem and communities’ resilience.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 63 
	
	C
The second challenge is to contribute to mitigate climate change 
effects while improving natural resource preservation of the RBA 
and its sustainability.  
The third challenge is the promotion of Arganiculture as both a 
profitable industry but also as a solution to mitigating climate 
change. The logical framework show s how project activities can 
mitigate the impact of climate change in the region while reducing 
local risks as well as provides the means to deal with the carbon 
sequestration problem. 
 
The project seeks to improve the organization of the upstream and 
downstream sectors through the adoption of a value chain 
approach of the argan tree and therefore fits nicely within the 
logical framework of the Green Morocco Plan. The project 
addresses the following: 
‐ Complementarity in dynamic development: the 
project will strengthen the initiatives for the promotion 
of the sector by namely strengthening the upstream and 
downstream activities. 
‐ Capitalizing on the achievements and sustainable 
development initiatives in the region: the logical 
framework of the project capitalizes on advances in 
the Green Morocco Plan , including investments in 
the organization of the sector and improving the 
performance of Argan oil cooperatives and linking 
them effectively with  growing global markets. 
 
EMISSIONS BASELINE, 
Project objective is to implement modern argan tree orchards (arganiculture) on 10, 000 hectares and build innovative institutio nal and a performing 
professional organizational environment. This will support the dec rease of anthropic pressure on the natural forest which is on e of the key carbon 
sequestration sources. The Project will allow carbon sequestrat ion of -604 223,30 T.eq.CO2 toward 2030 as  compared to a 'witho ut project’ scenario 
(-80 234,65 T.eq.CO2), broken down as follows: 
CLIMATE VULNERABILITY 
Most of the argan tree in the natural forest grows on shallow, rocky and poor soils.  The v egetation land cover in the argan fo rest decreases because 
of wind and water erosion, particularly in watersheds. Somme studies ’ estimate of soil erosion rates in the Souss-Massa reached  critical levels of 
400MT/km2/year with a peak of 600MT/km2/year in the Abdelmoumen w atersheds.  The severe climate prevailing conditions, coupled to a 
mountainous and hilly topography, are causes of significant eros ion and concern. This situation is aggravated by the slow rate of soil recovery due 
to the use of inappropriate farming methods and continual overgrazing. 
The climate in Southwestern Morocco is highly arid with annual ra infall trends showing significant variations with very dry sea sons and rainfall below 
100 mm. The alternation of long dry periods and short rainy periods  is one of the characteristics of the climate of the region with long dry periods 
contributing to degradation of the vulnerable eco systems. The biodiversity of this region is composed of many endemic plant spe cies associated 
with the argane wild forest. These plants have many different uses ranging from food, aromatic, medicinal, nutritional...etc.  
 
CHALLENGES AND/OR POLICIES 
The actual natural argan forest is ruled by a specific forestry law. It is managed under a complex tenure system in which the t rees are state property 
but user rights include fruit harvesting are granted to resident co mmunities and regulated by traditional practices that vary f rom private ownership 
to open access. However, the local population is abandoning these tradi tional usage rights as a result of the “argane oil boom”  and socio-economic 
mutations. Recent studies show that the argane forest is losing   its density and decreasing area due to climate change and uns ustainable practices. 
 
Local communities have developed important knowledge and skills related to forest use and conservation.  This knowledge coupled  with scientific 
research results will be of great use to support managing argani culture farms. To ensure that individual knowledge is developed  and shared, the 
project includes several actions for managing and sharing knowledge.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 63 
	
	C
It is primordial to highlight that the Arganiculture, a main component of the Green Morocco Plan (GMP), aims to support governm ent efforts to 
relieve the pressure on natural argane forest, improve the livi ng conditions of populations by increasing their incomes, and in crease the resilience 
through diversification of activities which are less re liant on argane forest areas and scarce water resources.  
 
UPSTREAM AND DOWNSTREAM ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIER OF VALUE CHAIN  
 
Baseline :  The current organization of the collection of afiyach represents a structural organizational barrier to the protection and deve lopment 
argan tree. Indeed, the study by  ANDZOA on promoting the sector of Arganiculture revealed that the lack of a well-organized up stream sector is 
evidenced by a shortage of harvesting and gat hering cooperatives and interest groups.) 
With the project:  
 
The arganiculture sector will contribute to better organized ups tream of the value-chain through improved fruit collection and storage to meet market 
demand with best quality.  The development of cooperatives wi ll help strengthen and complete the organizational mesh throughout  the industry 
value chain. 
Without this project, 90% of the forest production will be channel ed through the formal distribution network and with this proj ect, we estimate the 
overall production levels to be  multiplied by 4 annually,  adequately meeting international demand and contributing positively  to the livelihood of 
the beneficiaries. 
 
Downstream organizational barrier: 
 
Current estimated annual turnover is a meager 50 million US dollars only as in exports. Without intervention, this revenue will  unavoidably deteriorate  
due to the pressure on the forest and the consequential annual losses to production and the biosphere.  
 
FINANCIAL BARRIERS 
Baseline: 
A 5,000-hectare plantation project contract for arganiculture was started in 2013. To date, only 600 hectares have been planned  and 25 ha achieved 
due to lack of funds for implementation. In addition, investment dedicated to arganiculture remains very modest compared with t he actual request. 
To date 3,000 hectares have been identified and formal requests have been made since 2014. 
 
With the project: 
Planting 10,000 hectares of argane trees will generate an additi onal added value of more than 375 million Moroccan Dirhams annu ally. 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and 
outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic framework in section H. 
 
The goal of this project is to support rural communities of the RBA in building resilience and climate change adaptation capabi lities. 
Project objective is to implement argane tree modern orchards (Arganiculture) on 10,000 hectares and build innovative instituti onal and 
organizational environment.  The project will contribute to im prove soil conservation and fertility and to increase carbon stor age in soil and biomass. 
It will directly improve the livelihood of local population, and especially women. This will support the decrease of anthropic pressure on the natural 
forest while improving argane fruit production and then help combat ing desertification.   Some of the argan orchards will be im plemented on 
converted private land from conventional agr iculture. This program will also adopt water efficient technologies coupled with so lar pumping system.  
The project will develop a set of coherent and integrated actions for preserving the Ar gane ecosystems in the context of climat e change in the 
selected zones.  
A major shift will be at beneficiaries level perception of argane fruit as a collected product from natural forest to an "agric ultural commodity" produced 
in planted orchards. This will improve fr uit productivity and support the major shift of argane oil from local and household us e to commercial use.   
Sustainable management of natural resources in general and of ar gan ecosystems in particular must rely on an integrated strateg y for managing 
land, water, and biological resources, which considers the loca l population as an essential component of these ecosystems. 
ANDZOA as the executing entity is respons ible for the execution of this program has the capabilities needed to develop the nece ssary synergies 
and mobilize all stakeholders in order to achieve the objectives and implement the results.  ANDZOA is represented in provincia l territories by 
Departments that will ensure the execution and monitoring of planned activities.


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 63 
	
	C
The project focus is the development and promotion of a new farm ing system "arganiculture" that will contribute to the increase  of argan tree 
productivity.  For more many products are generated from argan tr ee in addition to oil.  When considering also fodder productio n or other crops and 
animal products, the economic profitability will be important and easy to prove.  We should also consider all the other benefit s related to 
environmental protection, social empowerment, biodiversity preservation...etc.    
In order to accomplish these objectives, five main ac tivities are proposed for each component as developed bellow.  
COMPONENT 1: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ARGANICULTURE ON 10 000 HA 
This component involves the planting of 10,000 ha, preceded by a pilot project on 500 ha during the first years. The component also provides an 
extension on 2000 ha, of aromatic herbs and medicinal (PAM) as we ll as the supervision, the technical assistance of the work an d training and 
training and mentoring of the rights holders and beneficiaries. The first component of the project aims three results: 
‐ Result 1.1: Arganiculture on 10,000 ha implemented; 
‐ Result 1.2: intercropping Argan/ Medicinal and aromatic plants promoted and practiced; 
‐ Result 1.3:.Rainwater harvesting strengthened 
‐ Result 1.4: technical support provided and skills and knowledge of beneficiaries strengthened and developed.  
RESULT 1.1:  ARGANICULTURE ON 10,000  HA IMPLEMENTED  
Activity 1.1.1: Plantation of argan trees on 10,000 ha:  
This activity is the domestication of argan trees  on private land, through the following operations: 
o Planting selected argane seedlings at a density equivalent to t hat in semi-intensive orchard (180- 200 plants / ha) and intensi ve (300-
400 plants / ha).   
o Use of modern orchard management horticultural techniques; 
The overall program of 10,000 ha is implemented in  31 rural communes of the 8 targeted provinces.  
The first leading pilot experience is conducted currently under Pilie r II of the GMP in the Province of Tiznit with support fro m the Agriculture Provincial 
Directorate of Tiznit in a partneship with Association Iklaln  in Rasmouka rural commune; a 600 ha project has been identified a nd a first phase of 
25 ha is already established. 
RESULT 1.2:  INTERCROPPED  SEEDLING PROMOTED AND PRACTICED  
Activity 1.2.1: Intercropping with  me dical and aromatic plants  on 2000 ha 
The project targets to promote an intercropping farming system  based on planting argane trees with aromatic and medicinal plant s (PAM). Generally, 
the PAM farming is widespread in Morocco with a large and diversified species (Basil, Thyme, Fennel, Mint, Verbena, Saffron, Fe nugreek, etc ..). 
This operation should allow especially ensure: 
 Complementarity between the 'cultivated' and the 'spontaneous' par ticularly with regard to regularity of product offering. 
 Product quality (traceability); 
 the balance between supply and demand for PAM; 
 the valuation of the land in the targeted areas; 
 the preservation and protection of certain endangered plant species. 
In the case of the Project, in addition the abovementioned elements the main objective is to ensure to the farmers / beneficiar ies additional income 
while waiting for fruit production of the argane trees and have access to additional income. 
Its worth mentioning that tests of Medicinal and Aromatic plants were conducted under a project by MAPM in the region Souss Mas sa (Project 
ASIMA) and the results are already available.  
The first year of the project will cover an area of 100 ha in ru ral pilot site. Pilot plots will be developed to test the speci es that bests fit the area. 
Capitalizing on existing results, it is proposed to test three s pecies of PAM by province (thyme, fennel and mint / lemon verbe na). The final choice 
of species to plant will be at the end of the first year. Thes e will be tested PAM planted in dividing strips beside the argan tree to encourage the 
development of an ecosystem in the area. 
In light of the results of the pilot sites, there are plans to  extend the culture of PAM over an area of 1,500 ha. According to  the local surveys and 
meetings with local stakeholders, the PAM sector is booming. This  could bring significant added value to contribute to the impr ovement of living 
standards of the vulnerable populations.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 63 
	
	C
It should be noted that the PAM sector is organized and structured in  such as way that the “produc tion of biomass” (collection)  and "transformation" 
and is characterized by the diversity of stakeholders and operator s along the value (extraction, drying, distillation, packagin g, cold storage, 
herbalism, pharmaceutical, extraction, preparation, etc.) 
RESULT 1.3:  IMPROVING RAINWATER HARVESTING AND CONSERVATION OF WATER AND SOIL  
The climate in Morocco is arid or semi-arid character and is ma rked by recurrent droughts; its rainfall regime is very irregula r in time and space with 
a sequential alternating years of high runoff and then severe drought, which can last several years.  
The current PDAIRE of the Project area revealed that the groun dwater resources are in deficit; the only potential water resourc es available are 
surface water in medium, small dams and rainwater harvesting infr astructure. Other less known and uncertain resources, such as artificial 
insemination of clouds, and the exploration of deep groundwater. In the non-conventional water component, the identified option s are the use of 
desalination of sea water and reuse of treated wastewater.  
Capture and storage of runoff water and its harvesting for domes tic, agriculture and environmental management. The capture tech niques and 
rainwater harvesting could be a promising so urce given their wide area distribution covers remote areas with difficulty to reac h and supply, 
particularly in the mountainous rural areas. Many technologies have been developed within this framework; collection in rainwat er is used for 
irrigation (as supplemental irrigation) and for pastoral wate r points along the rangelands and in the municipalities engaged in  farming (collective 
tanks on course the Ghdirs, hill lakes, etc ...) The studies under taken by the ABH-MS has identified a significant need for rai nwater harvesting. It 
needs amounts to over 1 billion MAD over 3 years (2017-2019). Assuming the in tegration of activities of the First Draft and aft er the various meetings 
and consultation with the various stakeholders, a preliminary program has been identified and recommends the construction of 95  macro and micro 
ground catchment systems for rainwater harvesting with an average storage capacity of 600 m3 each. The average unit cost per sy stem of 65 
thousand US $. The overall amount s' amounted as mentioned on financ ing program with funding from 5% to be provided by the ABH.  
RESULT 1.4:  PLANTATION ACCOMPANIED  
Activity 1.4.1: Supervision, technical assistance work  
This assistance concerns the monitoring of the work and the fi nalization of site selection and planning for the duration of the  project among the 
identified potential. 
The choice of priority areas will be done through a participator y approach with beneficiaries and based the date of submission request for funding 
par stakeholders. Also, the implementation will be  based on the follow criteria that includes:  
‐ General geographical zoning 
‐ Specific criteria of the perimeter: 
‐ Commitments and responsibilities of beneficiaries 
‐ Adaptability to the argan plantations  
‐ Balance between the potential areas identified 
COMPONENT 2: STRUCTURATION ON UPSTREAM AND DOWNSTREAM ARGAN VALUE CHAIN 
This component will lead to two results that are: 
‐ Result 2.1: Professional organizations on the upstream of the sector of Argan structured and GIE created and accompanied 
‐ Result 2.2: Valuing of argan products  
RESULT 2.1:  PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS ON THE UPSTREAM OF THE ARGAN SECTOR STRUCTURED AND GIE  CREATED AND ACCOMPANIED  
The different evaluations of the current state of the argan spac e raise the weakness or absence (in the majority of the ecosyst em) of economically 
viable professional organization of fruit producers. The aforementioned evaluations also raise the insufficiency amongst active  economic actors in 
the aspect of marketing of argan nuts as regar d to the recorded potential of production. 
In fact, the segment of agro industrial and cosmetics companies  monopolizes most of the added value generated by the sector of the argan when 
that of fruit producers has remained on the sidelines  of this dynamic sector and its recorded development. 
Concerned with this situation, the study initiated by the ANDZ OA confirmed the need to structur e territorially geographical are a of the argan in 
homogeneous production areas as the social and technical plan is in concern. Aforementioned study suggested setting up models o f organization 
of fruit producers to create perimeter incl uding their federation into GIEs (interest groups), while ensuring the technical, fi nancial and economic 
viability of these new institutions.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 63 
	
	C
It is accordingly that is registered the outputs of this result 2.1 which aims at the structuring of the actors especially thos e operating in the upstream 
of the sector of argan this through the accompaniment of  the professional organization of the fruit producers.  
These second-order organizations allowing both to operate at the level of argan and also to position themselves for the new per imeters of 
arganiculture planned as part of the project in question (see component 1). 
The support expected under this project to cooperatives and GIE organizing the upstream sector of the argan, besides financial support, will focus 
on technical assistance, knowledge improvement (statistics and socio -economic ) concerning the sector, the professional organi zation and the 
preservation of the environment. 
Activity 2.1.1: mobilization and supervis ion of the entitled persons and farmers and their professional organization (OP). 
The mobilization and the framing of the fruit producers constitu tes the key to the success of the project. Indeed, it is themse lves which are organized 
to constitute their OP and themselves which influence its performance. 
The mobilization in question will pass by their sensitizing and th eir information on all opportunities offered currently to mak e a success of their 
project, and especially, to integrate the sector of the argane in order to develop the production.  
A set of messages must be transmitted, inter alia: 
- The imperative to transform their organization into a viable OP  (autonomous and efficient) able to mobilize the fruit producers   for collective 
management to guarantying subsequently a consistent quality product on the level of identified perimeter; 
- The importance of the organizations of second order for valori zation and/or marketing. Other messages can be added according to  
regional specificities and specificities of the perimeters.  
The project teams will define a communication and animation plan in li ght of the results of social diagnosis (D.S.). Simple com munication media, 
and depending on the target groups, must accompany the awareness sessions.   
 Awareness and information of farmers an d their OP in the Arganeraie.   
This is a vast operation to launch across the whole geographical ar ea of the argan in the shortest possible time in order to ra ise the fruit producers’ 
awareness on the vital role their professional organizations can play; the latter will, indeed, likely secure over the long ter m, the benefits they receive 
in the exploitation of the argan and enable them to derive substa ntial profits that can improve their income and living conditi ons. 
 Training and support to farmers and their OP 
This proposed training for farmers and fruit producers and their OP aims to make these organizations more dynamic and to equip them with 
management tools that allow the operation exploitation respecting a ll governing and regulatory requirements. They must be: I) i nformed on their 
project and the context characterizing it, II) aware  of the va lue  of their  cooperative and how to manage it daily  III) info rmed on the interest of a 
collective management system and the basic guidelines of this process 
In addition to training, the farmers and their organizations will  be informed, trained and mentored on the possibilities of adj ustments and conversion 
of associations into cooperatives to prepare the creation of c ooperative unions, or to integrate the GIEs (interest groups) tha t will be created and 
processed in activity 2.1.2. These organizations of second or der will be the adequate models to deal with, later, the activitie s of valuing and marketing 
of the argan biosphere products. 
This approach will thus ensure first, improving productivity and secondly, prepare for the development of products and marketin g. The farmers and 
fruit producers and their organizations will be initiated to promote partnerships between the various actors operating in the s ector. 
Activity 2.1.2: Support cooperatives and GIE  creation   The projected organization comprises two levels: 
 The creation of cooperatives to the upstream of the sector of t he argan whose main object is the collection of the harvest of t he fruits of 
argane within the limits of a zone identified within a perimeter of production; 
 The federation of the cooperatives in GIEs (interest groups) wh ich give them supports in the conditioning of the product and th eir operation 
(organization, financing, administrative approaches, etc) and deal with the management of marketing. 
Methodology for determining the number of cooperatives and GIE
 : The determination of the number of cooperatives and GIE to be created in 
the zones of action of the perimeters of production is based on crit eria of viability of these institutions as well as human an d space homogeneity 
and finally of efficiency of the interventions. 
Number of Cooperatives: Affiliates and members of cooperat ives will be necessarily the fruit producers of the argan. 
To determine the number of cooperatives to create, it was taken into account criteria of viability based on the surface of the perimeter and the 
volume of its production. The followed approach consisted of:


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 63 
	
	C
 Fixing a level of production ensuring sus tainable viability fruit collection to an argan cooperative; this level is set around 6,000 tons of 
dried fruit / year (one ton of fresh frui t provides 0.6 tons of dried fruit); 
 Beyond this level, the calculation of quotients surface/production will allow to 
take into account the importance of the surface and its space distribution\; the 
more important the surface is, the more heterogeneity on the level as of human groupings is large, which implies the creation of more cooperatives. 
Number of de GIE : With the objective to strengthen the homogeneity and increase the 
cohesion and effectiveness in terms of mas tery of the marketing of raw materials and 
knowing that it will require a minimum of two (2) cooperatives to  form a GIE, the number of GIEs retained is 11 centered on the following production areas: Smimou, Tamanar, 
Tamri, Agadir, OuledBerhil-Taliouine, Ta roudant - Argana, Ouled Taima - Ighrem, Ait 
Baha, Anezi, Ifni and Tiznit. 
technical package : The main mission of the GIE is to take address of the fruit market i ssues for its members with a specific focus on quality and 
certification concerns. In the long term GIEs may develop argane oil extraction and marketing. 
It is noteworthy that the model of the GIE that was used in developi ng the business plan is a pilot model representing a minimu m production capacity 
considered, of 9000 tons of dried fruit, given that this model is  destined to be resized according to the production areas, the  volumes of harvest of 
argane fruit and the subjective criteria of fruit producers interest groups. 
The pilot diagram selected as bases for the study is compos ed of a GIE of fruit gathering, initially, composed of three coopera tives of fruit producers. 
The number of cooperatives members may experience an evolution linked to the organization of the fruit producers. In other word s, the GIE can 
integrate any new cooperative created in its area of activity. 
In the short term, the main mission of GIE, is collecting the produc tion of Argan dried fruits, proceedings it fully or partial ly, depending on market 
demand, to transformations, including pulping, packing and crushing, and selling the product to operators of argan oils manufac turing or export 
sector. 
In the medium term (after about five years of existence), GIE can expand its activities to the production of argan oil and poss ibly include other 
economic operators in the context of a community development at the le vel of its entire action area. Such a development will no t be carried out 
unilaterally but in cooperation. They are expected to play a parti cipatory and dynamic role in improving the economic and socia l situation of the 
aforesaid project area and thus at all the levels of argan supply chain. 
For each of the identified production areas, it was retained to impl ement a maximum of one GIE and that, pursuant to well-defin ed criteria, namely: 
 To have a critical argan fruits production with a ce rtain economic interest for the fruit producers ; 
 Gather fruit producers  groupings  which can create cooperatives that will be integrated into the GIE; 
 Fit into existing administrative limits. 
Within each cooperative member of the GIE, shall be created tran sformation farming centers which will act as collection centers  of argan fruit.  The 
aforementioned centers are members of the cooper ative, and their presidents will sit on its board of directors and its general meetings. 
The number of centers, their areas of action and their functioni ng are defined by the board of directors of the cooperative. Th e main activities   of 
these centers are:: 
 To collect the production of the fruits of argan from the fruit producers ; the conditions, standards and purchase prices are f ixed by 
the GIE and shared with the cooperatives; 
 Inform fruit producers about the activities and results of the cooperative. 
It is to be announced that all the process of collection, transfor mation and marketing will be carried out by applying the stan dards of traceability 
required for certification of the finished produc ts. These standards will have to be appli ed as of the first operations of coll ection. The architecture of 
the organization of the fruit producers  in cooperative s and GIE is described by the following diagram:  
The technical assistance provided in the project will work accord ing to this scheme. The aim is to set up, like what has been c ommitted in the 
framework of the Green Morocco Plan for the two sectors of the Oliv e and Date palm, the GIE organizational model, which aims to  establish a self-
aggregation mechanism of solidarity development projects, viable a nd sustainable economically, with a corporate vision for proj ects able to integrate 
and even compete in the market. 
This support will concern women and young people to interest them and integrate them into the links of the value chain of the s ector. The 
aforementioned support will also address:  
 The implementation of a full and participatory appr oach for the professional organization of all farmers into cooperatives so t hat they can 
integrate the newly formed GIE.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 63 
	
	C
 The training and the mentoring of the GIE and the adherent cooperativ es in areas of management, marketing, communication, accou nting 
and access to financial services. To do this, information sessions and training and demonstration tours inside and outside the country will 
be organized for the benefit of selected cooper atives and or  GIEs (interest groups); 
 The training of the   collection centers in the best practi ces with regards to storage, conditioning, packing and adoption of a dequate 
practices and suitable value add processes..  
 The organization of work and the implementation and training of  quality and its best global practices and standards, ,  through out the  
production process and value added steps.;  
 The necessary training in developing opportuniti es and the marketing of the GIEs’ products. 
 The design, development   and field roll out , in a participativ e manner, of a framework for dialog and coordination of the GIE s and 
professional organizations of the argan sector; 
RESULT 2.2:  ARGAN 'S PRODUCTS ARE VALUED  
The main target  in the short term for the interest groups creat ed as a result of  2.1, is collecting the production of dried A rgan fruits, processing it 
fully or partially , depending on market demand, including pulpi ng , packing and crushing, and selling the product to argan oil  processing cooperatives 
or companies. 
In the medium term (after about five years of existence), t hese interest groups can expand into the production of argan oil and  possibly include 
other economic operators in the context of a community development  effort covering its territory. Such a development will invol ve the beneficiaries 
acting together as one team. They are expected to play a partici patory and dynamic role in improving the economic and social si tuation in their area 
and eventually for the overall Argan biosphere. 
 Activity 2.2.1: Implementation of argan product collection units  
The project will support the development of 11 centers for collecting and storing the Argan fruit. The unit size chosen as a ba se model, is an interest 
group consisting of three (3) cooperatives. The overall collecti on and storage capacity totals 9,000 tons of dried Argan fruit,  with an average of 
3,000 tons per cooperative. A varying proportion of these quantities is transformed to be sold as kernels and the rest is sold as is. 
Activity 2.2.2 : Installation of argan oil extraction pilot unit  
In order to reduce the pressure on the natur al resources of the biosphere, it is imperative to diversify the activities and to increase the incomes of 
the local populations and to keep most of  added value from these producing activities in  at the community level. 
In this perspective, it is important to support the developm ent of argan oil products and its other byproducts through new trad e and professional 
organizations in the form of new operating cooperatives and GIEs.  
To implement this approach, the project will support the establis hment of pilot Argan oil extraction mills. These units work wi th quality standards 
that meet the requirements of the national and international ma rket by ensuring maximization of the added value in the country and best product 
quality. All tender specifications are indi cated in the Argan Oil IGP. In light of the results of these pilot projects, tools a nd methods will be 
recommended to generalize best practices for the extraction process. The investment costs for this activity are shown in the fi nancial summary. The 
funding contributions by the beneficiaries will reach up to 10 % in the form of land.(cost of land acquisition). 
. 
COMPONENT 3: CAPACITY BUILDING, KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT, CO-MANAGMENT OF NATURAL ARG AN FOREST AND SCIENTIFIC 
RESEARCH PROMOTION 
Three results are sought through the third co mponent of the project. These results are : 
‐ Result 3.1: Climate change management Capacities of institutiona l actor, elected representatives and professional organizations  are 
reinforced and developed (RBA Co-management). 
‐ Result 3.2. Consolidating and promoting resear ch on the Argan Tree. is consolidated and encouraged. 
RESULT 3.1:  REINFORCED AND DEVELOPING THE CAPACITIES OF INSTITUTIONAL ACTOR , ELECTED OFFICIALS AND PROFESSI ONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE 
FIELD OF CHANGE CLIMATE MANAGEMENT AND CONTRIBUTE  ON CO -MANAGEMENT OF ARGAN NATURAL FOREST  
Through this subcomponent, the project stakeholders (managers, partners and beneficiaries) can enhance their design capabilitie s and project 
implementation and adaptation to climate change. Meetings and contacts  made at the time of the surveys, have identified the mai n gaps. On one 
hand, strengthening the participants' knowledge on adaptation methods  to climate change and their relationship to the Biosphere  Reserve of the 
Argan tree (RBA). On the other hand,, building skills in financi al partnership management and conflict management In the field of adaptation to


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 63 
	
	C
climate change / RBA. Capacity building needs vary between the st akeholders: the beneficiaries find their livelihood directly i mpacted whereas the 
role of the public officials requires them to manage and antic ipate the effects of CC / RBA on thes impacted populations. 
- Activity 3.1.1: Training of institutional actors and elected of ficials on the challenges of clim ate change to integrated local 
planning in the RBA  and training on co-management of Argan Natural Forest 
In areas of the Argan tree, information / training of actors for CC / RBA and CC ad aptation is uneven. The project will address  the information and 
training gaps in selected sites that have not had the opportunity to benefit from major training or knowledge transfer activiti es on adaptation to CC. 
Populations have acquired expertise and adaptation techniques to CC because of their ancestral management experience in facing scarcity and 
natural hazards. The consultation workshops confirmed that t here is an awareness of aggravated risks posed by climate change in  all locations and 
areas affected by the project components. The said project aims to undertake the following actions:  
  Development and implementation of a traini ng program on climate change in RBA.  
The project will issue a call for expressions of interest (EOI ) with training organizations to develop a skills development pla n and implement it with 
all required participants.  Overall, these modules must cover most sectors affected by climate change related to the Argan tree . These modules 
should also address aspects of climate finance, conflict managem ent and mediation, biodiversity conservation, green economy, et c.  
All selected modules are in line with the Green Climate Fund strategy: 
  Participation in events and scientific meetings and forums: This action intends to support, according to an annual program prepared 
by the Project Unit, the costs of participation of technical o fficials at scientific meetings for climate change and local stak eholders 
awareness forums organized around the topics related to  the argan tree and its preservation and development.  
 Organization of travel and Training: The project will support the logistics and costs and plan for continuous training and knowledge 
transfer of the project actors on topics of innovation and adaptation to climate change. 
 Training of Co- management on Argane Natural Forest : 
The purpose of this activity is to initiate a public debate on the integration of climate change and biosphere reserves in regi onal planning through 
the initiation of the process of developing a project charter / memorandum on RBA climate change in the light of the new strate gy 2016-2025 MAB 
(Lima 2016) 
- Activity 3.1.2 : Co-management of Natural Argan Forest 
Many sub-activities will be implemented to reinforce management  capacity and develop a mitigation approach to climate change, n amely 
 Capacity building: Meetings held with local officials and representatives of th e beneficiaries, to  share the need to address key gaps in 
knowledge transfer and sharing: 
‐ Reinforcement of technical knowledge of beneficiaries and fruit producers.  
‐ Skills with regards to collective management of  the perimeters and the operation of their OP 
 Reinforcement of capabilities and technical know ledge of beneficiaries and fruit producers  : The argan development model 
requires capacity building in the following areas:  
‐ the plantation and culture of selected argan varieties acco rding to a model of semi intensive orchard seedlings; 
‐ Agronomic Training  techniques, methods, and best practices ; 
‐  Intercropping of herbal and medicinal plants and sustainable farming training.  
 Capacity building for collective management pe rimeters and the functioning of their OP : Among the expected outfalls  of the new 
plantations of 10 000 ha of argan, as planned and part of this pr ogram is to develop the organizations developing the project ( generally 
an association, for each new websites / area) to create  sec ond tier professional organizations (cooperatives and GIEs) mobiliz ing farmers 
/ beneficiaries and grouping them around a plan of action as regard to the management of their perimeter. 
The second goal that DARED will reach is  develop a co-management of natural argan forest and contribute to it protection and r egeneration by 
implantation by :  
 Development of co -management agreements and sustainable use of natural forest and its regeneration  
 Implementation of co -management agreements between stakeholders and  actors 
After completing these critical steps in the project,, the integration of the OP will be strengthened throughout the different  levels in the argan   value 
chain. This intervention will also reinforce marketing and value adding practices. A comprehensive social diagnostic will be performed at the level of each identified perimeter to identify the existing organiza tion types and ensure 
their representativeness; ii) examine the functionality of the organi zations dedicated to the project; iii) to verify   the inf ormation received by farmers 
for perimeter management; iv) master the specific constraints and so cial aspects of each perimeter. The results of this survey will be used to better 
frame the activities of capacities building of farmer s and their OPA. This acti vity will contribute to  
o Development of training modules for  development  and collective management of cooperatives and GIEs;


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 63 
	
	C
o Organization of informational workshops for collective management; 
 Support for improving the governance of Arganiculture projec ts: i) preparation of action plans ii) development of 
performance management capacities of OP iii)  organization and performance monitoring  
o Development of co-management agreements of sustainable use of Argane natural forest  
o Implementation of co-management agreements between beneficiaries and actors on Argan Natural forest  
The same support will be engaged in component 2 but for the Afyach  harvesting cooperatives. It is imperative to coordinate thes e actions in terms 
of content and messages development to be conveyed in order to have real impact and results; 
RESULT  3.2:  ARGAN RESEARCH IS CONSOLIDATED AND ENCOURAGED  
Activity 3.2.1: Support for the implementation of the Argan National Center  (CNA) 
The establishment of the national center of excellence of the ar gan tree will channel the efforts of all scientific and profess ional actors. This center 
will also promote Argan's cultural herit age and support for research excellence.  Its strategic objectives will address:  
 Preserve and interpret natural and cultural  heritage of the RBA linked to the argane tree through the creation of the “Argane i nterpretive 
Center”  
 Design and implementation of a knowledge managem ent platform on the Arganeraie and argane tree  
 Support scientific research on RBA and argan tree by supporting t he implementation of joint programs and fund raising and fund 
management mechanisms;   
 Technological intelligence and expertise to support decision-make rs and professionals, and all the stakeholders towards sustain able 
development.  
The project will contribute to the launch of this center by supporting the development of its content and strengthening the cap acities of its key actors. 
The first support axis are: 
‐ Acquisition of specific equipment and staffing of the Argan Promoti onal center. The center is for the promotion of tangible and  intangible 
heritage related to the Argan tree and its valuation in support of the local populations directly creating   value in the Argan  supply chain..    
‐ Implementation of a knowledge management portal for the argan produc t and the argan tree. A tool that will be useful to facilit ate access 
to knowledge for fruit producers.   
‐ Creation of a knowledge sharing portal on the argane tree and its market   
Activity 3.2.2: Support for the concretization of  the Argan Research-Innovation Federator Program  
The project will support the realization of the "Joint Argane Research Program" mainly through: 
• Call for research proposals mainly about the development of arganiculture  • Support scholarships for young researchers to fund resear ch topics on the Argane / CC / RBA priority issues ; 
• Support for the National Argane Researchers Network (RENARGANE); 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Exe cuting Entity)  
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) and how i t will support the 
project/programme in terms of equity investm ent, management, operations, production and marketing. 
 
The National Agency for the Development of Oases and Argan tree Z ones (ANDZOA) is the executing Entity. It’s a public Agency an d part of   
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries created in 2010.  
ANDZOA’s missions are to develop, in c oordination with government authorities, el ected deputies and concerned stakeholders, glo bal development 
and preservation programs of Oases and Ar gan biospheres and to ensure their implementation, monitoring and evaluation.  
The oasis and Argan tree zones territory is vast and represents near ly 40% of the national territory. This territory has 5 admi nistrative regions and 
16 provinces and 388 communes. For areas of the argan tree, ANDZOA aims to: 
 Ensure the preservation of Argan tree forest, its protection and development including the implementation of socio-economic pro jects; 
 Conduct Argan forest extension operations in accordance with the national forestry laws and regulations  
 Conduct or supervise the implementation of Argan tree  product valuation projects , ma rketing, promotion and labeling, especial ly under 
contracts or agreements- program agreed to   with the Agency; 
 Structure Argan tree chains production and marketing  in partner ship with different stakeholders including the concerned popula tions;


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 63 
	
	C
 Encourage scientific research of the Argan tree, its pr otection, development and valuation of its products. 
Similar to ADA, the ANDZOA is subject to environmental, so cial and gender laws, policies and r egulatory procedures. ANDZOA has the same 
statutes as the ADA in terms of governance and financial and budgetary management. 
‐ Governance and management 
In terms of governance, including the management of the project, the ANDZOA is administered by a board of administration chaire d by the Head 
of Government with seats or all departments. 
In addition, the ANDZOA is oriented by a Strategic Steering Commi ttee chaired by the Minister of Agriculture and seat or sector ial Departments and 
Presidents of Regions within the zone of the invention of ANDZOA. 
‐ Audit, management and budgetary and financial control 
Concerning its overall management, budgetary and financial control, A NDZOA, like the ADA, is subject to the same procedure on e xpenditure 
controls. The ANDZOA conducts external audits and is subject to the audit of the General Inspectorate of Finance.   
‐ Management Project’s capabilities  
ANDZOA is managing many development Projects related to climat e change:  adaptation, mitigation, biodiversity, and preservation . The following 
table summarizes the most important structuring  projects implemented by  ANDZOA : 
Project Coût en million 
US$ Nature Partenaire financier 
Project of climat change adaptation in oases zones (PACCZO) 10  Grant Adaptation Fund 
Project of Economical Interest Group suppor t (PAGIE) 16.5  Grant Belgium Cooperation 
Développement et valorisation de la biodiversité du Lac Naturel d’Iriqui – Région 
de Tata et Zagora. 12.2 Grant German Cooperation 
In addition to that, ANDZOA manages, through its annual b udget, an average of 27 million USD (two last years). The partnership and 
contractualization are the guiding principles of the Development Strategy of 
ANDZOA.  
During the period 2012 -2016, 503 partnersh ip agreements were signed with local 
elected councils and NGOs for a global funding budget of  more than 846 million 
MAD,  with 302,5 million dirhams from ANDZOA's own budget (40% from the total 
budget request) (fig 5). 
 ANDZOA is currently implementing :  
‐ the Arganiculture orchards  in t he RASMOKA site. This project is 
conducting on 600 hectares and is implementing and managing by 
ANDZOA’s Staff in coordination with the stakeholders and Provincial 
Agricultural directorate,  
‐ the Adaptation project to climate change in oases area (PACCZO) and 
its implementation in line with the safeguards policies of the 
Adaptation fund and national law.   
In additional ANDZOA will  be: 
a. Accountable to ADA for project execution and for the effective and efficient use of resources. 
b. Responsible for project supervision to ensure c onsistency with GCF and ADA policies and procedures.   
Add to ANDZOA, ADA’s role is important and Many projects managed and supervised by ADA. The budget of projects funded by donors  and who 
are registered in the ADA's budget amounts to US $ 180.5 milli on for the period 2011- 2018 (13% grants and 87% loans). Is about  about $ 30 million 
annually managed by the ADA budget. Other budget not included in the ADA's budget amounts to 164.5 US $ Million for the period 2010-2018 
(81% grants and 19% in loans). 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 18.59	30.38	 30.02	46.47	
33.80	
	‐	5.00	10.00	15.00	20.00	25.00	30.00	35.00	40.00	45.00	50.00fig 5. Evolution de la c ontribution ANDZOA aux projets 
de développement dans la zone Arganier 2012-16  (en 
Mdhs)


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 63 
	
	C
Describe the market for the product(s) or serv ices including the historical data and forecasts. 
 
The Global argan oil market was 4,835.5 tons in 2014 and is expect ed to reach 19,622.5 tons by 2022, growing at a CAGR of 19.6%  from 2015 to 
2022. 8. The market overview is worldwide including Europe (Franc e, Germany, Italy and Switzerland), USA and Canada for the American 
countries and Japan, Russia and China. in 2010, the main global argan oil  market was Europe (especially France). 
According to statistics of the Autonomous Establishment of C ontrol and Coordination of Exports (EACCE), Argan oil exports conti nue to increase, 
reaching 1000 MT in 2014-2015. The first buyer is France with (78%), followed by Germany (7.6%) and Switzerland (7%). 
The potential market for Argan oil is estimated at MAD 11 b illion with exports going mainly for France, Germany and USA.  
Argane oil is mainly used for cosmetics is well known and the inte rnational market growth is well established. The estimated to tal oil production is 
around 4000 MT/year.  The amount oil export showed a significant increase since the early nineties to reach almost 1000 MT. 
In 2014 (fig2). The international cosmetics’ market is conti nuously growing.  The prices are almost stable and are beyond 200 D H/liter. The global 
argan oil application is Cosmetic, Food and Medical9 
  
        
 
 
Given this significant demand, Argan oil production faces barrier s for achieving the full export potential such as the deterior ation of the natural 
forest and the limiting effects of climate change. 
The following reasons show why the project will he lp to meet this growing and important  demand: 
‐ Production is ranging from 3 to 10 kg per tree, or 240 to 800 kg per hectare, 
‐ The area of productive forests is estimated at 664,000 hectare s with a density of 80 trees / ha (80% of the total area of  the argan tree, 
which represents 830,000 hectares) and a production of 320 000 MT / year. 
Due to climate variability (mainly rainfall) fruit production of natural argane forest is also variable which makes it difficul t to conduct proper 
marketing and sales planning. The impact of this variability is mainly felt at the end of the chain; in particular to ensure th e commitments and 
contracts with customers in the international market which requires work in the long term. 
Total fruit production in the argane forest can vary wildly fr om year to year because of rainfall fluctuations (fig 6). 
The argan boom seems to have improved educational outcomes, especia lly for girls. However, booming argan prices have not improv ed the 
forest and may have even induced degradation.  They also show t hat since the boom began, much of the northern argan forest appe ars to have 
thinned.  
 Real argan fruit prices in rural markets have roughly quadrupled since 
1999, whereas oil prices in these markets have tripled (1).   
 The boom has made households vigilant  guardians of fruit on their own 
trees, but has not incited investments in longer term tree and forest health10 
																																																													
8 http://www.grandviewresearch.co m/industry-analysis/argan-oil-market   
9 http://www.grandviewresearch.co m/industry-analysis/argan-oil-market  
10 Lybbert T. J., A. Aboudrare, D. Chaloud ; N. Magnan ; M. Nash. 2011. Booming markets for Moroccan argan oil appear to benefit s ome rural 
households while threatening the endemic argan forest. Proceeding of the National Academy of science of the United States of Am erica. vol. 108 
no. 34.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 63 
	
	C
 Unless locals’ short term obsession with fruit collection mature s into longer term productivity and sustainability concerns, ru ral poverty 
reduction may itself be a short term benefit of the argan boom11.   
 If the worse case scenario under climate changes occurs, the ar gan region may become too dry and too hot to continue hosting th e 
argan tree. Vast expanses of argan orchards  might then be seen better suited for the tree.  
Competitive Insights12 
Key companies involved in distribution services consist of Argan  Oils (distributor), The Moroccan Argan Oil Inc. (seller/market er), Argan Export 
Company (trader) and Simply Agadir (trader). There is availabilit y of wide range of end-users, and their count is expected to i ncrease owing to the 
product’s widening application base in medical and food industries.  Many manufacturing operating in the global argan oil market  (OLVEA, Zineglob, 
Biopur and Nadifi Argan, …) 
 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidie s available and government involvement (if any). 
Dried fruits (afayach) are usually purchas ed from users through intermediaries at a price of 1 to 1.50 DH / kg. The product is stored and sold upon 
demand by production cooperatives of the Argan oil at a price between 3 to 3.50 DH / kg. This price was 2,70DH / Kg in 2013 and  its increase is 
attributed to the decline in output and the pressure of domestic and external demand for oil, especially for cosmetic grade oil s.  
It should be noted that the purchase price of the raw material does 
not really reflect the intrinsic value of the product and the workdays 
spent by users for its gathering and storage. Indeed, middlemen, fix prices unilaterally by making advance payments to harvesting cooperatives once they receive deposits from buyers.  
Currently, the price of argan oil is at the following levels: 1) Edible 
oils: - Bulk: 150 to 200 DH / l - Bottle: 300 DH / l – 2) Cosmetic 
oils: - Bulk: 200 to 250 DH / l - In small packages: up to 800 DH / l  
Prices vary according to supply and demand. The state does not 
intervene in the pricing of sales of products of Argane. however,  the 
argan tree is a local product which is protected by the law 25-06 on 
Distinctive Signs of Origin and Quality (SDOQ) 13 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operat ing the project/programme, the issuing au thority, and the 
date of issue or expected date of issue. 
 
The implementation of the various project activities do not requi re any special permission. The project will form part of the i mplementation of NAMAs 
Arganiculture and as part of the implementation of the Green Moro cco Plan. The only requirements are those relating to environm ental protection 
and the requirements of implementation of activities in the Bios phere Reserve of the argan tree. The Environmental and Social I mpact Assessment 
summarizes the different laws that must be respected including  the 12-03 law on environmental acceptability granted by a nation al commission 
composed of various ministerial departments. 
The project will be implemented with groups of small producers who put together their land and organize themselves to this purp ose.  It is the model 
adopted for “Pllar II” projects related to “a griculture solidaire”. In general and according to the legislation that governs su ch partnership scheme a 
presentation, verification, approval and cont racting has already been implemented in the context of several other diversified a gricultural value-
chains such as olive tree projects, almond tree and milk producti on. This regulation provides that once a project is approved c ontracts are signed 
between the government institution to implement and organize t he beneficiaries to ensure project implementation and especially to insure its 
sustainability.  
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
																																																													
11 Lybbert T. J., A. Aboudrare,. 2011. Win-Lose The argan products valorization seems to benefit rural households while harming th e endemic 
argan forest. in Premier Congrès International sur l’Arganier : Acquis et perspectives de recherche scientifique. Agadir, Maroc , 15-17 
Décembre 2011 
12 http://www.grandviewresearch.com/i ndustry-analysis/argan-oil-market   
13 http://www.agriculture.gov.ma/sites/defau lt/files/siam15-produit_terroir-vang.pdf   050100150200250. Evolution du prix moyen huile d’Argane à l’export en 
DH/litre


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 63 
	
	C
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the organization stru cture, roles and responsibilities of the 
project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  A lso describe which of these 
structures are already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish  them. 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements.  
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction. If applicable, prov ide the credit analysis of key 
counterparties of key contractual ag reements and/or structur al mitigants to cover the counterparty risks. 
 
The institutional structure of piloting, monitoring and implem entation of the proposed project emanates from previous lessons l earned through other 
important projects. The analyses and discussions held during the preparation of this project resulted in the decision to set up  a team that will manage 
by objectives.The relevant arrangem ent envisages the following organization: 	 
 Steering Committee (COPI L) Ad hoc committee /  
The Steering Committee (COPIL), chaired by the 
Secretary General of the Ministry of Agriculture and Marine Fisheries or the ANDZOA General Director gathers all the stakeholders: MAPM central directorates 
(DIAEA, DSS, DF, DDFP , RFLD), ADA, ANDZOA, the 
HCEFLD, Water Department, Environment, Tourism, Handicraft and social and solidarity economy, FIMARGANE ...). 
The COPIL will meet at least twice per year and when 
necessary with as main missions: 
- Review the project functioning and  its activities 
progress 
- Supervise, validate projec t activities and reports 
- Identify strategic choices 
- Ensure risk control 
- Validate the annual programs (including the ESMP) and related budgets, 
- Validate the progress reports and the obtained results , 
- Validate the adjustments and changes in the project activities, 
- Ensure consistency of the project with the sector policies and government programs. 
The Steering Committee recommendations focus on the orientation and strategies to be implemented to achieve the project objecti ves in compliance 
with the Government and the ADA policies.. Regional Monitoring Committee (CORES) / Three regional CORES  
The project will implement a regional monitor ing committee (CORES), which will be implem ented in two regions (Marrakech-Safi an d Souss Massa) 
and which will have the following roles: 
- Ensure interactions between the regional and local levels, on the one hand, and the Steering Committee of the project, on the o ther hand; 
- Mobilize local institutional stakeholders  
- Encourage interaction between local communities and development partners; 
- Review and propose to COPIL the adjustments  and changes in project activities; 
- Ensure the project agreements implementation; and 
- Capitalize on the learned experiences and le ssons from the project interventions. 
The CORES meetings will be held every six m onths on a rotating basis in each province . The CORES will be composed of representa tives of the 
departments and institutions operating at the level of the concerned regions.  Provincial Local Committee (COLOP) : 
The project will also implement the Provincial Local Committee (COLOP)  in the various provinces of the tw o regions of the project. The COLOP 
will have the mission: 
- Examine the problems impeding implementation of the programs, 
- Follow the evaluation plan execution progress  and the follow-up of  the evaluation conclusions, 
- Ensure the communication strategy implementation (Identification  of the of dissemination means support, exchange of information ) 
- perform the actions in favor of equal opportunities between women and men, 
ANDZOA


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 63 
	
	C
- Examine any proposed amendment submitted by the Management Unit. 
 Project Management Unit 
With respect to the Project management, ANDZOA will host a Pr oject Management Unit (PMU) under supervision of Argane Developmen t Direction. 
This unit will coordinate the monitoring and implementation of th e project activities with the ADA and the other partners. The PMU will adopt an 
integrated and multi-sectoral approach and w ill focus on the beneficiary’s participation and active involvement at all levels o f decision-making. This 
unit will be responsible, inter alia, of the coordination of a ll the project activities, the regional monitoring Committee acti vities (CORES) and the 
provincial local Committee (COLOP) organizations, the project re sults valorization and the communication strategy implementatio n.  The PMU will 
be composed of the following staff: 
‐ National project  coordinator, 
‐ arboriculture/horticulture S pecialist (argan-culture); 
‐ Rural engineering specialist, 
‐ Environment, Social and Gender specialist, 
‐ Procurement and financial management specialist, 
‐ Monitoring and evaluation specialist. 
It should be noted that the contracts will be signed with the Argan tree orchard plantation contractors will be monitored by th e PMU. These companies 
are subject to the regulations in place in terms of how they conduct business. On the other hand, hundreds of companies have ac cumulated 
extensive experience in the works related to planting orchards plantations for three main reasons: - The implementation of the Green Morocco Plan 
has seen the rise of companies experienced in orchard plantati on work. - The implementation of the Millennium Challenge Corpora tion Program 
has reinforced and improved the quality of the contractors in the plantation of orchards; - The pilot project in Argan orchards  (RASMOKA) 
demonstrated the high performance of contractors and thei r ability to perform well in these type of works. 
Moreover, the experience of IVA researcher s at INRA and Agadir as well as that of ANDZOA staff will ensure qualified training i n both the conduct 
of works of Argan orchards but also to the beneficiaries. 
 Key governance actors – implantation arrangments   
 The Executing Entity  for this project is ANDZOA which is responsible for manag ing the project including the monitoring & evaluation and for the 
effective use of ADA resources. 
The Executing entity is required to implement the project in compliance with ADA rules and national policies and procedures for procurement. 
These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and other performance stand ards. In legal 
terms, this is ensured through agreement between ADA and ANDZOA to govern the use of the funds. 
The following parties will enter into agreements with ANDZOA to  assist in successfully deliver ing project outputs and are direc tly accountable to 
ANDZOA as outlined in the terms of their agreement : ABH SM, DRA SM and others stakeholders.  
The project will use ADA’s and ANDZOA’s  operational manuals for financial management
14 and procurement policies. ADA and ANDZOA, as a 
public agency, have the same operational manuals for FM and procur ement policies. To execute projects locally,  ANDZOA have an additional 
operational manual  for implementation with local partners. This  operational manual is in line with their operational manual an d in line with public 
expenditures code.  
ADA’s overall role as an Accredited Entity is to provide over sight and quality assurance. This role includes: (i) project prepa ration oversight; (ii) 
project implementation oversight and supervision, including fi nancial management; and (iii) project completion and evaluation o versight. It also 
includes oversight roles in relation to reporting and knowledge-management. 
The ‘project assurance’ function of ADA is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent project overs ight and monitoring 
functions. This role ensures that appropriate project managem ent milestones are managed and completed. Project assurance has to  be independent 
of the Project Manager; therefore, the Pr oject Board cannot delegate any of its assurance responsibilities to the Project Manag er. An ADA Program 
Officer, typically holds the Projec t Assurance role on behalf of ADA. 
ADA will ensure compliance with the GCF’s Fiduciary Principl es and Standards, including anti-corruption and AML/CFT requirement s.  
Annual financial audit will be done by an independent external auditor mandated by AE. This financial audit will be open also f or international bidding 
auditing.  Also, AE will use the financial reporting standards (e.g. IFRS) for the project. 
A specific agreement for the project will be signed between AD A and ANDZOA. It will be clearly specified that expenditures, not  included in the 
project activities, will not be counted in the project budget.  
																																																													
14 http://www.ada.gov.ma/web/typedocument/20


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 63 
	
	C
The project expenses, including evidence will be classified in to technical, administrative and financial monitoring reports .fo r that, ADA commit its 
own administrative and financial assistance for the project to ens ure conformity of expenditure for each activity and will cond uct a periodic audit 
during the implementation phase..  
The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by ADA financial rules and regulations (Procurement man ual of ADA)  and 
the National expenditure Code.  
 
Project will be audited following the ADA financial rules and applicable audit guidelines and polic ies along with any specific requirements agreed in 
the AMA with the GCF. In line with ADA guidelines and for financ ial reviews of project expenditures will be conducted to ensure  funds are used for 
the purpose intended in the approved proposal.  
 
ANDZOA is the Executing Entity and will be responsible for the overall implementation, technical supervision and execution of t he project. It will 
oversee and coordinate the implementation, monitoring; execute agr eements with the local contractor and ANDZOA’s partners, to e nsure effective 
implementation. ANDZOA, will lead in all project procurement ac tivities including management of the supply and service contract s of various 
suppliers, preparation of administrative, technical and financial reports to ADA.  
GCF resources will be provided to the implem enting partner. The funds will flow to ADA special account through GOM financial sy stems. Under 
ADA’s implementation modality, ADA advances cash funds on a Work Plan and Annual budget (WPAB- Plan de Travail et Budget Annuel - PTBA) 
basis to ANDZOA (executing entity) for the implementation of agreed and approved program activities. The funds will flow in acc ordance with ADA 
standard policies and the ADA's procurement manual. ANDZOA reports back expenditure vi a a financial report on annual basis to A DA. Any 
additional requirements will be as in accordanc e with the AMA as and when it is agreed; 
ANDZOA will engage expenditures for works and goods according planned ac tivities by International or/and National competitive b idding for 
activities (works, consultants, services , workshop, training) based on Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) for amount more than 40 000 USD. 
Payments terms will be specify into the Term of References for activities and services. For services which cost less than 40,00 0 USD, ANDZOA 
may hire direct consultation procedure based on based on Least Cost Selection (LCS). 
ANDZOA will act as delegated contracting authority for the activi ties of planting and rainwater harvesting. It will establish t wo agreements 
respectively with  Agency  for Hydrological Basin of Souss Mass a - ABH SM and Regional Directorate of Agriculture Souss Massa- DRA SM). The 
two agreements will specify the technical role of the ABH and DRA and their respective financial contributions (co-financing) i n the project. Co-
financing from ABH-SM and DRA-SM will be mobilized from t heir annual budget. Activities to be conducted under the two agreement s will be paid 
by ANDZOA for the Grant coming from GCF, co-financing part will  be paid thought ABH and DRA directly to their contractors. ANDZ OA will check 
the accordance of co-financing flow as developed in the Funding proposal.  
The project will apply international accounting fin ancial reporting standards for the project reporting. 
ADA will ensure compliance with the GCF’s Fiduciary Principl es and Standards, including anti-corruption and AML/CFT requirement s.  
Any project financed by international fund is automatically s ubmitted for annual audit by the General Finance Inspectorate. The  report of the General 
Finance Inspectorate is shared with the accredited entity and made available to donors.


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 63 
	
	C 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrati ve purposes. If the table format 
below is used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Sect ion H. In the case of outputs, please mark when all the requir ed activities will be 
completed. 
 
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Result 1.1
Activity 1.1.1 Arganiculture on 10,000 ha XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Result 1.2
Activity 1.2.1 Medicinal and aromatic plants Intercropped with argane on 2000 ha XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Result 1.3.
Activity 1.3.1. Water harvesting and water and soil conservation XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Result 1.4
Activity 1.4.1. Technical assistance and works supervision XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Result 2.1.
Activity 2.1.1. mobilization and supervision of the entitled persons and farmers and their professional organization (OP). XXXXXXXXXXXXX
Activity 2.1.2. Support GIE creation XXXXXXXXXXXX
Result 2.2.
Activity 2.2.1. Argan product collection units implementation XXXXXXXXXXXX
Activity 2.2.2. Installation of argane oil extraction unit XXXXXXXXXXXX
Result 3.1.
A c t i v i t y  3 . 1 . 1 . I n f o r m a t i o n  a n d  t r a i n i n g  o n  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  c h a l l e n g e s   a n d  C o - m a n a g m e n t  o f  A r g a n  F o r e s t XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Activity 3.1.2. Co- Managment of Natural Argan Forest XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Result 3.2.
Activity 3.2.1. Support for the implementation of the Argan National Center  (CNA) XXXXXXXX
Activity 3.2.2. Support for the concretization of the Argan Research-Innovation Federator Program. XXXXXXXXXXResult 3.1: Climate change management Capacities of institutional actor,  elected representatives and professional organization s are reinforced and developed (RBA Co-managment)
Result 3.2: Argan research is consolidated and encouragedResult 1.1: Arganiculture on 10,000 ha implemented
Result  1.3 : water harvesting strengthened
Result 1.4: technical support provided and skills and knowledge of beneficiaries strengthened and developedResult 1.2: Intercropped seedling promoted and practiced on 2.000 ha.TASK
Component 1: Implementation of the arganiculture on 10 000 ha
Component 2: Organization of the upstream components of the argane value-chain
Component 3 :  capacity building, knowledge management, Co-managment of Natural Argan Forest and scientific research promotionResult 2.1: Professional organizations on the upstream of Argan sector structured and GIE
Result 2.2: Argan's products are valuedYear 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 6 Year 5


---
*Page 32*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 63 
 
	
	
	D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consider ation of other alternatives. 
 
The project represents the first step in the implementation of t he NAMA Arganiculture which is part of Morocco's commitment to the mitigation 
component. Indeed, its commitment to reduce its greenhouse gases and will require access to climate finance.  
It should be noted that the Moroccan government has contributed to the mitigation aspect of climate change but still cannot mee t the needed levels 
for financing Arganiculture due to strong and competing demand for the mitigation component in other industries and sectors (in cluding industry 
energy).  On the other hand, since the signing of the Framework Conventi on for the domestication of the argan tree (argan contract progra m targeting 5,000 
hectares)  ANDZOA and its partners were able to start the planti ng of 600 hectares only due to lack of availability of financin g. Also, ANDZOA 
received funding requests for the realization of Argan Tree Orc hards for an area of 3,000 hectares since 2014. This demand has not been met 
either due to lack of funding. Furthermore, although this proj ect has been shown to be profitable, the traditional banking syst em has not adapted 
its funding mechanisms because of lack of successful and profitable  experiences in the past. This reinforces the need for fundi ng by the GCF in 
response to the strong local demand for arganiculture projects in the area.  
Without GCF funds, no resources will be available for the impl ementation of the proposed activities. This would have potentiall y negative 
consequences for : 
 The Carbon Stored area on Argan as described by the baseline scenario. 
 Protection against flooding and the mobilization of water resource 
  The pressure on the  argan natural forest   
 Populations socio-economic conditions mainly women. 
 Promoting arganiculture sector as Mitigat ion to Climate Change, with high added value and as an alternative to the pressure on 
the argan natural forest  and the water resources  
 The implementation of the NAMA-Arganiculture as concept and GOM commitment to mitigation of GHG 
The following considerations support this statement: 
 The rate of erosion in the Souss-Massa about 400t / km2 / year with a peak of 600 t / km2 / year in the watershed Abdelmoumen 
 Argan forest degradation; 
 300 cooperatives and 6,500 women working in the sector 
 A loss of a sequestration potential of 1, 7 million TEQ. CO2. 
 The living conditions of more than 26.000 of population. 
 Durability and preservation of the RBA and naturals resources 
 Capacity building of all stakeholders including the direct and i ndirect beneficiaries in management and of the climate change d imension 
in regional planning and implementation of development programs 
In addition the project area is part of the priority areas targeted by NAMA. Also, th is project targets the  Argan tree preserv ation  qualified as a 
species endemic of Morocco. 
The project will contribute to  :  
‐ the implementation of the first phase of NAMAs Arganiculture, about ¼ of the planned area, and stimulate recourse to other mean s of 
financing including access to bank credit. 
‐ to achieving the objectives of carbon sequestration as it was approved in the NAMAs but also ensure profitability for the benef iciaries 
while contributing to the preservation of natural Argan tree fo rest and help stabilize the selling price of argan products on t he 
international market. 
‐ to the empowerment of rural women while allowing them to earn a stable source of income and valuing their work.  
D.2. Exit Strategy


---
*Page 33*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 63 
 
	
	
	D
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensur ed in the long run, after the project/programme is impleme nted with support 
from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability demonstrated in E.6.3.  This should include a description 
of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets (if applicable). 
 
The formulation of the Project capitalized on the strengths and weaknesses of other similar programs / projects occurring in th e region of argan 
trees; particularly, in the areas of climate change adaptation,  sustainable management of natural resources, community developm ent and capacity 
building. 
Everybody agrees that the sustainable management of natural re sources must be founded on a strategy for the integrated manageme nt of lands, 
water and biological resources, among which the local populations (producers and users) are consi dered to be an essential compo nent of these 
ecosystems. 
Nowadays, we recognize more and more the fact that the capacity  of adaptation of the natural capital can be significantly incre ased when it is 
associated with the human, physical and social resources. Theref ore, a bigger empowerment of the local actors in planning and i mplementation 
adaptation actions, investment in capacity building must be consi dered as a crucial element of sustainability of actions. Simil arly, the project will 
be very attentive to social mobilization and to raising awarene ss of all categories of oases populations (including women and y oung people) on 
the key issues of their ecosystems. 
The project will adopt a strategy of effective exit to guarantee its sustainability on all the institutional plans that are tec hnical or environmental. 
In terms of institutional sustainability, the project will be based on the following aspects: 
 The recourse to existing institutions, at central and local le vel, in the implementation of the project, which guarantees the c ontinuity after 
the end of the project.  
 The contracting with the partners of execution concerning the implementation and the maintenance if necessary of the activities  that are 
relied to them.  
 The empowerment of all the local actors by means of a capacity building program, adapted to their specific needs.  
 The implementation of an effective system of management and sharing of knowledge to capitalize the experiences effectively, and  
integrate them into national policies. 
The environmental sustainability of project inputs will be made through interventions adapted to the climatic context of the ar ea. The project will 
support the domestication of this sector which will have a di rect impact on ecosystem pressure of the argan tree and which unde rgoes a strong 
threat and effects of CC.  
The project will focus on actions of super ficial hydric mobilization of resources to support on one hand the water supply and l imit the degradation 
of grounds on the other hand. This is insured by the actions of  rainwaters harnessing which will durably improve the hydraulic balance sheets. 
Regarding the component of supporting initiatives of conservati on and strengthening the resilience of ecosystems, the intervent ions of the project 
will be implemented according to call of projects procedures, wh ich should foster the implication of the local organizations an d improve durability 
and scattering of mitigation actions. 
 As for the technical durability of project actions, it is bas ed on the regional and national consolidation of technics and the  technologies related to 
argan tree, and the collection and the harnessing of rainwaters, pa ckaging of agricultural products; Moreover, the methods of i ntervention, the 
technologies and spread techniques will be improved and scaled up. T he project will also look for sustainability by completing the past investments 
in natural resources domains through community support and maintenance. 
To strengthen the economic and financial viability, the project will focus on disseminating practices, technologies and techniq ues that help to 
improve the productivity of the agricultural activities and strengthen households involved in these activities. Communication I nitiatives and division 
knowledge will be essential element of assuring sustainability of  the program. A close partnership will be established with sec torial programs 
for the dissemination of technology.  
The project represents the first phase of the implementation of NAMAs Arganiculture and sustainability of the project will be a ssured by the 
beneficiaries, partners and the Moroccan government through ADA and ANDZOA. 
‐ The implementation of the project: Beneficiaries will ensure irri gation of the plantations in the three years after planting (t he first two 
years will be provided by companies that have the orchard planti ng contracts). Beneficiaries will continue irrigation and fruit  tree pruning 
after project completion.  
‐ The interest groups will be trained to ensure both the maintenanc e of the plantations, harvesting of the fruit and adding value  to the 
product. These groups will ensure project sustainab ility after completion and its implementation.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 63 
 
	
	
	D
‐ These interest groups will have to invest more to raise furt her funding to ensure the sustainability of the project. The Intere st Group 
hybrid model developed by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance will adapt better to market conditions when c ompared 
to the pure private sector thus stimulati ng the growth and expansion of this sector. 
‐ The project implementation will follow the approach developed as part of Pillar 2 of  the Green Morocco Plan. This approach prom otes 
the aggregation of farmers and parcels into larger cooperatives, and interest groups that  will fulfill their role in the value chain by 
supporting the maintenance of orchards, development of products and better market access.  
‐ These interest groups will have the support of the Moroccan Gove rnment through ADA with the goal of developing quality local pr oducts 
through a dedicated local produce department. Th is department’s mission is to assist in  the promotion of local products ; 
‐ The ANDZOA will continue to ensure sustainabi lity of the project by the implementing regular monitoring of the activities after  the 
implementation phase  
Furthermore, Morocco's commitment to reduce its greenhouse gases will guarantee the project's sustainability after its implemen tation since it is 
part of the NAMA Arganiculture program supported by the joint e fforts of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and the Mini stry Environment 
(NDA) that have pledged to reduce CO2 emissions by up to 32%.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 63 
 
	
	E
In this section, the accredited ent ity is expected to provide a  brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme agains t each of the Fund’s six inves tment criteria. Activity- specific sub-criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, w hich can be found in the Fund’s  Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any reque st for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/progra mme to contribute to the achieve ment of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into  account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework .  
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock-in of long-lived, high emission or 
climate-vulnerable infrastructure. 
The Project will allow carbon sequestration of 2,091,201 T.eq.CO2 toward 2030, as compar ed to a 'without project’ scenario (345 ,009 T.eq.CO2), 
broken down as following: the methodology to estimate the Carbone sequestration is part of NAMAs methodology to estimate the Ca rbone 
sequestration15.  
Action NAMA- arganiculture 
Emission (+) / 
sequestration (-) in 
T.eq.CO 2 DARED 
Emission (+) / sequestration 
(-) in T.eq.CO 2 
43,000 ha  
toward 2030  DARED Project 
 
New argan orchards in association with crops  -2 282 586,00    -530 833,95  
Additional benefit related to the preservation of argan forest -    154 074,00    -154 074,00  
Burning of shells              170,00    170,00  
Diesel consumption for irrigation              280,00    280,00  
“Without action" scenario consisting of th e plantation of argan orchards in the 
framework of the strategy implemented by ANDZOA  -    345 009,00    -80 234,65  
Total balance -2 091 201,00    -604 223,30  
 
The carbon mitigation of the pr oject has been calculated on NAM As Arganiculture by using the Ex Ante Carbon-balance 
Tool (EX-ACT) program of FAO16 . EX-ACT consists o f a set of Microsoft E xcel spreadsheets, re lated to one another, in 
which are embedded the database on land use and planned managem ent practices. This tool allows calculating ex-ante 
carbon balance (difference between GHG emissions and sequestrat ion of CO2) of mitigation actions in agriculture or 
forestry. 
Parameter set for EX-ACT:  
‐ Climate: Temperate warm and dry  
‐ Soil: High Activity Cla y Soils (Batje, 2010) 
‐ Duration, :  
o  Implementation: 9 years 
o Capitalization: 11 years  
‐ Surface  
‐ Land Use Change   
o Initial vocation of land 
o final vocation of land: 
																																																													
15 Etude stratégique d’atténuation des émissions des gaz à effet de serre dans le cadre du PMV –Elaboration d’une liste de NAMAs potentielles- rapport de la 
mission II- page 14 à 28-  2014 
16 http://www.fao.org/tc/e xact/accueil- ex-act/fr/


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 63 
 
	
	E
‐ Carbon sequestration rates in soils: default (Level 1) 
o  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF core 
indicators Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) Annual -120 844,66    
Lifetime -604 223,30 
Direct Beneficairy : 26 000  
 Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) Total  
Percentage 
(%)  
Other 
relevant 
indicators Examples include: 
‐ Expected increase in the number of househo lds with access to low-emission energy 
‐ Expected increase in the number of small, m edium and large low-emission power suppliers, and 
installed effective capacity 
‐ Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision-making 
‐ Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks 
‐ Others  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
 
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values co mpare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator 
values for a similar project/programme in a comparable context). 
 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided  
 
The carbon mitigation of the project has been calculated using the Ex Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT) program of 
FAO (see http://www.fao.org/tc/exa ct/accueil-ex-act/fr/ ). EX-ACT consists of a set of Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, 
related to one another, in which  are embedded the database on l and use and planned management practices. This tool 
allows calculating ex-ante carbon balance (difference between G HG emissions and sequestration of CO2) of mitigation 
actions in agriculture or forestry. 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed acti vity can catalyze impact beyon d a one-off project/pro gramme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributi ons to global low-carbon and/or climate-resilient development pathways 
could be scaled-up and replicated including a descripti on of the steps necessary to accomplish it. 
 
The proposed project will reduce GHG emi ssions and will generate several beneficial impacts on environmental, agronomic, econom ic, 
technological in terms of agricultural development and wealth cr eation. These benefits will transform wild argan in a sustainab le development model 
for the argan industry. Additional effects can be expected, such  as improving access to raw (argan seeds, fodder) and processed  products (livestock


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 63 
 
	
	E
compound feed, argan oil) to the local and international marke t, strengthening links with research and agricultural development  supported by the 
national strategy for promoting the agricultural sector. 
The project represents the first implementation step of the NAMA Arganiculture. This will contribute to achieving the targets s et by NAMA 
arganiculture in reducing greenhouse gas emissi ons and carbon sequestration. The project w ill also reduce the pressure on the A rgan Biosphere 
reserve and contribute to a more sustainable development model for a more resilient environment.  
In the long term, the project will contribute to achieving th e objectives of NAMAs Arganiculture. The project will change the f amily business model 
practiced in the biosphere reserve by converting it into a prof itable business with a new stable farming activity and sector. I n other words, the 
domestication of the argan tree through orc hards represents a paradigm shift in the mode of exploiting the land and the natural  fo re s t i n a n  
environment threatened by the effects of climate change. 
At completion, the project will ensure the leverage of the im plementation of NAMAs arganiculture and remove current barriers hi ndering its 
development. The project will demonstrate the profitability of t he Arganiculture and  attract dive rse financial products from t he banking sector; The 
hybrid interest group model designed as part of the project, is an innovation that will reinforce the private sector’s involvem ent in this sector; This 
could be a source of inspiration and encouragem ent of private operators (large farmers in  the region) to convert to arganicultu re orchards while 
stimulating change in their current operating practices ( excess ive use of water) to a more profitable arganiculture model that  is sustainable in 
conserving resources and promoting mitigation of climate change.  
The project will promote the development of  interest groups able to access credit an d market funding sources and consequently r educe the recourse 
to grants. The project is a catalyst to a dynamic and sustainable development model for the Argan Biosphere Reserve. 
The implementation of the project will contribute to : 
 Vegetation of bare soils ; 
 Shift from sylvo-pastoral to agricultural system ; 
 New income-generating activities ( agriculture, animal feed processing) ; 
 Introduction of PAM crops ; 
 Creation of new professional organizations ; 
 Integration of local communities to national and international market ; 
 Alleviation of rural exodus ; 
 New economic dynamics  triggered ; 
 Sustainable approach in co-management of the Argan Natural Forest  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creat ion or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions. 
The project’s component 3 includes :  
‐ Activities related to capacity-building of all actors and benefic iaries aiming to strengthen their capacity to mitigate to clim ate change.  
‐ Activities related to knowledge management. In particular, the project will implement a comprehensive M&E system, document its activities, 
promote the sharing of experiences and disseminate its findings.  
‐ A research activity which is expected to  share experiences and disseminate results. 
‐ Improving Technical aspects, social aspects and economics aspects ;  
‐ Co-management of argan natural forest.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creat ion of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effectiv e and sustained participation of private an d public sector actors in low-carbon and/or 
resilient development 	that go beyond the program. 	
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, mark et development and transform ation. Examples include: 
‐ Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
‐ Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme  
The proposal  Project contributes to innovation and transformation through the following elements : 
 Promoting of arganiculture as an i nnovative response to climate change. 
 Domestication  of PAM in arid area;  
 Structuring of argan natural forest actors (cooperative and associ ation) in sustainable GIE able to penetrate international mar ket and


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 63 
 
	
	E
then bring more value to the territory and to local population particularly women. 
 Supporting structure dedicate to reso lve argan’s problematic in terms of Research & Development  
 Contribute to reduce pressure on argan natural forest by promotion of co-management and sustainable approach. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / loca l regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically drive inve stment in low-emission technologies or 
activities, promote development of additional low-emission polic ies, and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development . 
 
The project will develop a model of pres ervation of the RBA and co-management among t he various stakeholders. The starting cond itions of the 
plantation will stipulate the responsibilit y and involvement of beneficiaries in the preservation of natural forest and contrib ute to preserve it (limiting 
access for a predetermined time to collecting argan fruits of the natural forest thereby allowing natural regeneration);Through  the implication   of 
the different partners in preserving the RBA.  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and ec onomic co-benefits, includin g gender-sensitive development impact  
Profit for Sustainable Development: 
 Protection of Argan Biosphere and combating soil erosion. 
 Co-management of Argan Natural Forest as a sustainable approach.  
Benefit to society: 
 Increase revenue from professional farmers and organizations; 
 Promoting the role of women in value chain of the argan tree. 
 Fight against the rural exodus 
 Improving livelihood of local populations 
 Promoting gender employment 
Profit for adaptation to climate change: 
 Increased agricultural production in areas degraded by planting t he argan tree in degraded areas with low vegetation cover. Soi l protection 
against water and wind erosion. 
Economic profit 
 Contributing to promote argan nurseries 
 Increasing production of argan oil


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 63 
 
	
	E
OTHERS POTENTIAL IMPACT OF PROJECT  :  
‐ Argane area/household  
 
The average area exploited by beneficial holders and per household is estimated at 2.6 
hectares17.. It will be increased with the project after  completion to an average of 5 hectares 
/ household. 
‐ Argane production/ household (MT)  
The production of the argan fruit will be incr eased on average of 5 tons / household after 
five years for project’s implantation. It’ s mean an additional production of 50 000 tons 
instead of 1.9 tons / household (baseline). 
‐ Labor for kernel extraction (Hr) 
The project will have a significant impact on employment promotion and emancipation of 
rural women. Indeed, at 800 hours of work kernel a ton of fruit for an income 4.5 dollars 
per day per woman. The project will provide a double workday for women five years after 
project completion. Ten years after starting the project, the volume of hours for kernel will 
be increased by6000 hours. 
‐ Impacts on arganeraie biosphere reserve (RBA) 
The project aim to reduce the pressure on the argan biosphere reserve and increasing the 
resilience of the biosphere to fight against the effects of climate change and contribute to 
reduce the soil erosion in the RBA and improve best practices. In fact, the project will 
increase the average surface area per household to 5 hectares from the 2,5 hectares 
actually in the case of business as usual. Also , if the worst case scenario of climate 
changes is felt, the argan region may become too dry and too hot to continue hosting the 
argan tree. Vast expanses of argan orc hards might then be unsuited for the tree  18. 
‐ Impacts on biodiversity  
The project aims to improve the biodivers ity through planting Medicinal and Aromatic 
Plants on 2000 hectares and developing the  resilience of Argan tree in degraded 
environment. In fact, the first experience that was conducted in the region demonstrate 
how arganiculture orchards contribute to preserving the biodiversity (photo bellow 
demonstrate the impact of arganiculture in the degraded area).  
‐ Capacity Building, social and cultural impact : 
o Capacity building in agriculture and sustainable collective management of 
planted areas for partners and stakeholders 
o Installing a school in the field dedicated to arganiculture 
o Capacity building for research actors  
o Strengthening links between regions w here the project is carried out 
(exchanges, meetings at fairs, ...); 
o Awareness about environmental protection and risks related to climate change; 
Capacity building through training on topics such as health, hygiene and safety 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country an d population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of countr y and beneficiary groups (Adaptat ion only)  
																																																													
17 Etude relative à l’étude ‘Etude de mise en place des Groupements d’intérêt économique des ayants droits au niveau de l’arganera ire, 
ANDZOA, 2014 
18 Lybbert T. J., A. Aboudrare,. 2011. Win-Lose ? The argan products valorization seems to benefit rural households while harming the endemic 
argan forest. in Premier Congrès International sur l’Arganier : Acquis et perspectives de recherche scientifique. Agadir, Maroc , 15-17 Décembre 
2011.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 63 
 
	
	E
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climat e vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or polici es) and the 
outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline scenario. 
 
Climate vulnerability 
Most of the argan tree in the natural fo rest grows on shallow, rocky and poor soils.  The vegetative cover in the argan forest decreases is favoured 
by wind and water erosion, particularly in watersheds. Somme st udies estimate the rate of erosion in the Souss-Massa about 400t /km2/year with 
a peak of 600t/km2/year in the Abdelmoumen watersheds.  The seve re climate prevailing conditions, coupled to sloppy topography,  are causes 
of significant erosion. This situation is aggravated by the low rate of soil recovery due to the use of inappropriate farming m ethods and overgrazing. 
The climatic conditions of southwest of Morocco are highly arid . Annual rainfall displays signi ficant fluctuations descending i n some years below 
100 mm. The alternation of long dry periods and short rainy periods is one of the charac teristics of the climate of the region with prolonged drought 
periods contributing to degradation of the prevailing vulnerable ecosystems..  
Regarding biodiversity, many endemic plant species are associated with the argania woodlands. They have many different uses ran ging from 
food, aromatic, medicinal, nutritional...etc.  
challenges and/or policies 
The actual natural argan forest ruled by a specific forestry  law. It is managed under complex tenure system in which the trees are state property 
but usufruct rights including nuts harvesting are granted to resident  communities and regulated by costmary rules that vary fro m private ownership 
to open access. However, the local population is abandoning these traditional usage rights as a result of the argan oil boom an d socio-economic 
mutations. Recent studies show that the argan forest under goes slow density and area decrease due to climate change and unsusta inable use. 
Local communities have developed important knowledge and skills re lated to forest use and conservation.  This knowledge coupled  with scientific 
research results will be of great use to support managing arganicu lture platform. To ensure that individual knowledge is develo ped and shared, 
the project includes several actions for managing and sharing knowledge. 
It is primordial to highlight that the Arganiculture is a main  component of the Moroccan agricultural strategy, called Green Mo rocco Plan (GMP) 
which aims to support government efforts in order to relieve the pressure on argan forest zones, improve the living conditions of populations by 
increasing their incomes, and increase the resilience through dive rsification of activities which are less reliant on argan are a and water.  
 
Overview of areas and beneficiaries of the proposed Arganiculture project: 
 
The perimeters of the proposed Ar ganiculture project are predominantly (79%)  less than 200 ha in area with more than 51%  less  than 100 ha in 
area and land ownership being completely private. 
The existing plant cover in these sites formed majority of the argan tree (68%), followed by PAM and cereals. In terms of avail ability of water, 88% 
of the sites have potential water sources. In terms of benef iciaries, the analysis shows an average of 167 beneficiaries per si te with a total number 
beneficiaries out of the 44 sites being 7348 persons. 
The demographic data of the local villages ( village  ) within the Arganiculture sites  reveals that the small villages  contain on average a population 
of less than 1,000 inhabitants (95%)  with a number of households below 400 (97%). The average number of inhabitants per v is 7 60 people. The 
number of indirect beneficiaries of the projects in these villages  is estimated at 26,000.  
The socio-environmental development indicators of the villages show that: 
• The majority of these village  (60%) have a rate of access to  drinking water above 50%; 
• 90% of village  have  100% access to  electricity; 
• 61% of village  have rudimentary road access 
• No village  have collective sewage systems, the use of septic tanks is predominant. 
• 20% of village  have basic health services. 
The analysis of socio-economic data of local towns hosting thes e Arganiculture perimeters shows that primary school enrollment rate is on average 
close to 95%, middle school is around 83% and for high school is 62%. The illiteracy rate is on average close to 63%. The main economic activity 
in these municipalities is farming followed by livestock and fi nally tourism. The average unemployment rate of these municipali ties is 32%. The


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 63 
 
	
	E
poverty rate, which represents the percentage of people whose st andard of living is below the relative poverty line of1745 DH/ month for rural 
communities (index 2004), varies for village s of project beneficiaries from 6 to 17% with a rate of 16% or more in 50% of recipients (map).  
This project will contribute to improve soil conservation and fertility and to increase carbon storage in soil and biomass. It will directly improve the 
livelihood of local population, and especially women. This will support the decrease of anthropic pressure on the natural fores t while improving 
argan fruit production and then help combating desertification.  So me of the argan orchards will  be implemented on converted pr ivate land from 
conventional agriculture. This program will also adopt water effi cient technologies coupled with solar pumping system. The dire ct beneficiary 
population is estimated at 26,000 inhabitants. 
Argan oil extraction is a labour intensive activity traditionally carried out by wo men.  Argan domestication and cultivation in  orchards (arganiculture), 
in association with forage crops, would im prove argan oil production, while contributing to secure animal feed. This will suppo rt a sustainable 
sylvo-pastoral system and promote a new agro-forestry system, based on a semi intensive operation of argan orchards. Thus, It h as been 
scientifically proven that argan oil have medicinal properties as it  is rich in vitamin E and can lower the cholesterol levels,  stimulates circulation of 
the blood, facilitates digestion and str engthens the body’s natural defenses...etc. 
Most of the argan tree in the natural forest grows on shallow, rocky and poor soils.  The vegetative cover in the argan forest decreases is favored 
by wind and water erosion, particularly in watersheds. Somme st udies estimate the rate of erosion in the Souss-Massa about 400t /km2/year with 
a peak of 600t/km2/year in the Abdelmoumen watersheds.  The seve re climate prevailing conditions, coupled to sloppy topography,  are causes 
of significant erosion. This situation is aggravated by the low rate of soil recovery due to the use of inappropriate farming m ethods and overgrazing. 
The climatic conditions of southwestern Morocco are highly ar id. Annual rainfall displays significant fluctuations descending i n some years below 
100 mm. The alternation of long dry periods and short rainy periods is one of the charac teristics of the climate of the region with prolonged drought 
periods contributing to degradation of the domi nant but increasingly vulnerable ecosystems.  
Local communities have developed important knowledge and skills re lated to forest use and conservation.  This knowledge coupled  with scientific 
research results will be of great use to support managing an argani culture portal or learning application. To ensure that indiv idual knowledge is 
developed and shared, the project includes severa l actions for managing and sharing knowledge. 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
 Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
 Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or bal ance of payment gap that prevents from addressing the needs of t he 
country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
 Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
The project will target a vulnerable group among the 26 000 dire ct beneficiaries. The communities will be responsible for manag ing the natural 
resources in their perimeters or in argan nat urel forest. The project will also supp ort viable wealth creation initiatives (ICR ) especially for women 
and improve their incomes. 
Investment in arganiculture is higher compared to the financia l capacity of beneficiaries. The use of conventional financing (b ank loans) is difficult 
due to the high interest rates that make the project unprofitable. 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ie s) ownership of, and capacity to impleme nt, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national c limate strategy and coherence w ith existing plans and polic ies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to co untry’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is  supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional 
framework, or includes poli cy or institutional changes. 
 
The project will contribute to the achievements of the national development strategy for the agricultural sector toward 2020 an d beyond. The 
project is in line with the National Charter for Environment and Sustainable Development, which aims at strengthening a 'green economic growth'.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 63 
 
	
	E
In particular, it is in accordance with the national strategy  for the agricultural sector called “Green Morocco Plan”, which pr omotes food security 
through a sustainable improvement of producti vity while saving natural resources. 
Additionally, the project is the first phase of Appropriate Mitigation Measures at th e National Level (NAMA) arganiculture whic h aims to develop 
arganiculture ( modern argan tree orchards), through domestication of the argan tree (Argania spinosa (L) Skeels) in associatio n with crops on 
43,000 Ha. This action will increase the carbon storage in biom ass and soils. It will indirectly bring down the industrial and anthropogenic pressure 
on natural argan forests.  
NAMA arganiculture proposes evolving the si lvopastoral existing operating model to an agricultural model based on a cultivating  model of the 
argan tree for plant production as a new sector under Pillar II of the Morocco Green Plan.  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entit ies and executing entities t o deliver  
Please describe experience and track record of the accred ited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to und ertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 ADA and ANDZOA CAPACITY  Refer to C.4  
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civ il society organizations and ot her relevant stakeholders  
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with NDAs on the fun ding proposal 
and the no-objection letter. 
Please see annex I :   Support letters of the different actors concerne d by the project DARED 
Please also specify the multi-stakeholder engagement plan and the c onsultations that were conducted when this proposal was deve loped.  
 
MULTI-STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  
The MGP implemented  the new strategy that helped restructure the agr iculture sector in Morocco.  As it is project based, it al lowed the involvement 
of more synergy and inclusiveness of professional actors.  This  will impact positively the implementation of this program.  In fact different 
agreements have been signed between all stakeholders involv ed in the development of the argane sector.   
the MAMF will support the development of the value chain and the im plementation of the arganiculture program.  The HCEFLCD is i n charge of 
the restoration of the natural forest. The regional water basin agencies will be involved to implement water harvesting infrast ructure part of the 
project.  Finally the producers organized in the FIMARGANE will be in charge of the implementation at the community level for b etter performance 
of the value chain (production to market).   FIMARGANE will al so insure through consultation at community level the participati on of all groups 
mainly women and small scale producers.  ANDZOA is in charge of promoting sustainable development of the oasis and argane terri tories to 
ensure the synergy between both areas and stakeholders,.   
Principal stakeholders identified and their ro les and responsibilities are mentioned follow : 
Stakeholders  Roles and responsibilities  
The High Commission for Water 
and Forests and the Fight against 
Desertification (HCEFLCD) The High Commission is responsible for the development and implementation of government policies 
regarding the conservation and sustainable use of fore st resources, hunting, inland fishing natural 
parks and reserves and the fight against desertification. 
National Agency for the Development of the Oases and Argan Zones (ANDZOA) Within the oasis and Argan ecosystem, the agency is responsible, in coordination with other 
government authorities, for developing a comp rehensive development program and ensuring its 
implementation monitoring and evaluation. 
Water Basin Agency for the SMD 
 Main functions include: (i) the development of an integrated water resources plan and ensuring its 
implementation; (ii) issuing permits and licenses for t he use of public water resources, (iii) establishing 
flood prevention infrastructure and fighting against floods. 
Regional Directorate of Agriculture  Responsible for the dev elopment and enactment of regional agricultural development plans b ased on 
national sectoral policies.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 63 
 
	
	E
NGOs and Network of 
Associations of the Argan Biosphere Reserve (RARBA) 
 Key functions include:  
Associations at the local level (municipalities or Douars) working to support local development 
(i) supporting community action for the preservation and proper management of natural resources, (ii) 
maintaining and enhancing cultural heritage, (iii)  enabling and operationalizing the Argane Biosphere 
Reserve (ABR), (iv) technical and institutional support to member associations. 
The Moroccan Association of Geographical Indication of Oil 
(AMIGHA)  As the holder of the PGI label for Argane oil the mission of the association is to coordinate and 
structure the work on the Argane value chain and identify with the professionals involved different 
strategies to promote the product and the PGI label. 
Moroccan Inter-professional Federation of the Argan value chain (FIMARGANE)  Coordination and consultation between the various par tners in the sector and acting as an interface 
between operators in the sector with government administrations and ANDZOA. 
Moroccan Federation of Associations of Argan users  The Federation represents Argan user and defends their rights at local, regional and national levels  
National Association of Argan 
Cooperatives (ANCA) Professional organization providing technical suppor t and promoting the partnership and mobilizxation 
of Argan cooperatives.  
Cooperatives and their UNION  Promote the production and market ing of local agro-biodiversity products and support income 
generation of their members.   
National institutions responsible for research, development and training  National institutions responsible for research, development and training in agriculture, forestry, 
environment and related disciplines: the National Institute for Agronomic Research (INRA); the Institute of Agronomy and Veterinary science (Hassan II) ; the National Forestry Institute (ENFI);  the 
National School of Agriculture (ENA) Mek nès; the University of Agadir, etc. 
Regional Chambers of Agriculture  Represent the interests of its members (farmers) vis-à-vis public authorities, government and  other 
stakeholders. It also has an advisory role to the administration and is asked to participate in 
development activities through training and information targeting farmers 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry for Agadir Represents its member’s vis-à-vis public authoritie s and provides government with information and 
advice on matters that contribute to the dev elopment of trade, industry and services.  
  
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fi nancial soundness of the  proje ct/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in or der to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addres sing existing 
bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private and other public investment.  
The financial structure for project implementation is presented in  table below, which shows the allocation of resources among a ll four project 
component.  
 For the first component: The large items are planting arganicultur e orchard, intercropped seedling of Medicinal and aromatic pl ants and 
water harvesting.  
 For the second component: the large item is the installation of argane oil extraction unit in the region. Its role is to make t he link with 
stakeholders and market argan oil.  
 For the third component: three activities will be implemented by developing the co-management of Argan Natural Forest as a sust ainable 
model of doing business in the RBA. Also, the activity of  research by implantation of the Argan National Center. 
Table : Allocation of project resources


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 63 
 
	
	E
Component/activities   Description  Unit Cost (1000 $)   Budget 
(1000 $ US)  GCF Co-
financing 
Component 1 Component 1: Implementation of the arganiculture on 10 000 ha   35 280,00 77% 25% 
Result 1.1 Result 1.1: Arganiculture on 10,000 ha implemented                    2,60              
26 000,00    77% 23% 
Activitie 1.1.1 Arganiculture on 10,000 ha                    2,60              
26 000,00    77%  23% 
Sub-Activitie 1.1.1.1. Purchasing seedling                   0,70              
7 000,00    80%  20% 
Sub-Activitie 1.1.1.2. Planting works                   1,80              
18 000,00    80% 20% 
Sub-Activitie 1.1.1.3. Maintenance                    0,10              
1 000,00    0%  100%  
Result 1.2 Result 1.2: Intercropped seedling promoted and practiced on 
2.000 ha.                    1,12              
2 240,00    99% 1% 
Activitie 1.2.1 Medicinal and aromatic plants Interc ropped with argane on 2000 ha                    1,12              
2 240,00    99%  1% 
Sub-Activitie 1.2.1.1. Purchasing seedling                   0,02              
40,00    50% 50% 
Sub-Activitie 1.2.1.2. Planting Works                   1,10              
2 200,00    100%  0% 
Sub-Activitie 1.1.1.3. Maintenance                        -                
-      0%  100%  
Result 1.3. Result  1.3 : Rainwater harvesting strengthened                  65,50              
5 240,00    57% 43% 
Activitie 1.3.1. Water harvesting and water and soil conservation 65,5             
5 240,00    57%  43% 
Sub-Activitie 1.3.1.1. Works implementation 62             
4 960,00    60%  40% 
Sub-Activitie 1.3.1.2. Technica l studies and works supervision 3,5             
280,00    0%  100%  
Result 1.4 Result 1.4: tec hnical support provided and skills and 
knowledge of beneficiaries strengthened and developed 0,180             
1 800,00    100%  0% 
Activitie 1.4.1. Technical a ssistance and works supervision  0,180             
1 800,00    100%  0% 
Sub-Activitie 1.4.1.1. works supervision 0,180             
1 800  100%  0% 
Component 2 Component 2: Organization of the upstream  components of the  
argane value-chain 0 8 610,00 90% 10% 
Result 2.1. Result 2.1: Professional organizations on the upstream of 
Argan sector structured and GIE   942,00 93%  7% 
Activitie 2.1.1. mobilization and supervision of t he entitled persons and farmers and 
their professional organization (OP). 348,0 348,00 80%  20% 
Activitie 2.1.2. Support GIE creation 54,0 594,00 100%  0% 
Result 2.2. Result 2.2: Argan's products are valued   7 668,00 90%  10% 
Activitie 2.2.1. Argan product co llection units implementation 588,0 6 468,00 90%  10% 
Activitie 2.2.2. Installation of argane oil extraction unit 1200,0 1 200,00 90%  10% 
Component 3. capacity building, knowledge management, Co-management of 
Natural Argan Forest and scientific research promotion -    5 298,00  85% 15% 
Result 3.1. Result 3.1: Climate change management Capacities of 
institutional actor,  elected representatives and professional organizations are reinforced and developed (RBA Co-management)             3 400,00                       
 
3 400,00  80% 20% 
Activity 3.1.1. Information and training on climate change challenges  and Co-
management of Argan Forest             1 200,00                        
1 200,00  80% 20% 
Sub Activity 3.1.1.1. Information of institutional actors on climate change challenges and  
training on co-management of Natural argan forest                200,00                        
200,00  80% 20%


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 63 
 
	
	E
Sub Activity 3.1.1.2. Information of the entitled persons and  beneficiaries and their OP as  
regard to innovative adaptation measures and co-management of 
Argan Natural forest                760,00                        
760,00  80% 20% 
sub Activity 3.1.1.3. Elaboration and implement ation of a training  program dedicated to  
RBA actors and co-management procedures                240,00                        
240,00  80% 20% 
Activity 3.1.2. Co- Management of Argan Natural Forest             2 200,00                        
2 200,00  80% 20% 
sub Activity 3.1.2.1 Development of co -management agreements and sustainable use of  
natural forest and contri buting to its regeneration                600,00                        
600,00  80% 20% 
sub Activity 3.1.2.2. Implementation of  co-management agreements with stakeholders  
and actors             1 600,00                        
1 600,00  80% 20% 
Result 3.2. Result 3.2: Argan research is consolidated and encouraged             1 898,00                        
1 898,00  95% 5% 
Activity 3.2.1. Support for the implementat ion of the Argan National Center  (CNA)                948,00                        
948,00  100%  0% 
Activity 3.2.2. Support for the concretization of  the Argan Research -Innovation  
Federator Program.                950,00                        
950,00  90% 10% 
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into  account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achi eve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveragi ng and mobilized lo ng-term investm ents (mitigation only)  
Please provide the co-financing ratio (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to cataly ze indirect/long-term low emission investment. 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expect ed volume of finance to be leveraged) . 
 
COMPONENT  GCF ( USD) ANDZOA (USD) ANDZOA's Partners (USD) 
Component 1  26 996 000,00 2 484 000,00 5 800 000,00 
Component 2 7 773 600,00 836 400,00 0,00 
Component 3 4 523 000,00 775 000,00 0,00 
Total budget of Project  39 292 600,00 4 095 400,00 5 800 000,00 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the analysis co nducted in F.1. 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. 
 The analysis of the project econom ic efficiency revealed that t he investments will be remuner ated at a rate of 10,8%.  
 
                                  SUM 
Désignations  Costs & additional advantages  per year (1000 $ US)         update  
    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 à 30 to 6 % 
1. Advantages                                   
a- with project                    
1.a.1 V.A.N. with project 1 4 733 3 964 3 462 3 081 3 201 4 799 6 627 8 684 10 926 12 424 13 688 14 500 14 915 15 132 15 132 138 115 
b- without project                    
1.b.1 V.A.N. sans projet 2 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 60 565 
Net Value Added  3=(1-2) 333 -436 -938 -1 319 -1 199 399 2 227 4 284 6 526 8 024 9 288 10 100 10 515 10 732 10 732 77 550 
2. Costs                    
2.1 investment  4 1 820 11 883 14 622 15 040 10 743 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 36 375 
2.2 Maintenance cost 5   1 14 40 67 93 106 106 106 106 106 106 106 106 106 1 166


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 63 
 
	
	E
2.3 Operational Cost 6   167 286 202 202 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 1 098 
 total project cost 7=(4+5+6) 1 820 12 051 14 921 15 282 11 012 128 141 141 141 141 141 141 141 141 141 46 645 
3.Additional Net Value                    
(Cash-flow) 8=(3-7) -1 487 -12 486 -15 860 -16 602 -7 527 450 2 355 4 143 6 384 7 883 9 146 9 959 10 374 10 590 10 590 34 709 
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
Not applicable  
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator fo r the expected volume of finance to be leveraged). 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. 
 
ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF PRODUCTION 
As highlighted in the feasibility study (section 2.3.) developing the assumptions, the economic benefits of DARED are show belo w.  
Economic benefits of Arganiculture production 
 
	Economic benefits of PAM  production  
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e .g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
Not applicable  TOPICS Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Y7 Y8 Y9 Y10 Y11 Y12 Y13 Y14 Y15 Y16 Y17 Y18 Y19 Y20
Production of argan fruits (T) 0 0 0 0 2250 13838 27113 42075 56273 61875 66600 69638 71190 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000
Quantity of fruit after drying (0,5 de  
la récolte) (T)0 0 0 0 1125 6919 13556 21038 28136 30938 33300 34819 35595 36000 36000 36000 36000 36000 36000 36000
Nuts produced after pulping (0,6 
de récolte séchée) (T)0 0 0 0 675 4151 8134 12623 16882 18563 19980 20891 21357 21600 21600 21600 21600 21600 21600 21600
residual pulp (0,4 de récolte séchée 0 0 0 0 450 2768 5423 8415 11255 12375 13320 13928 14238 14400 14400 14400 14400 14400 14400 14400
Amondons produced (0,1 de Noix p r0 0 0 0 67,5 415 813 1262 1688 1856 1998 2089 2136 2160 2160 2160 2160 2160 2160 2160
residuel fruit coque (0,9 de Noix pr o0 0 0 0 608 3736 7320 11360 15194 16706 17982 18802 19221 19440 19440 19440 19440 19440 19440 19440
Argan oil (40%, 1000 Litres) 0 0 0 0 27 166 325 505 675 743 799 836 854 864 864 864 864 864 864 864
Tourteau (60% d'amandons) (T) 0 0 0 0 40,5 249 488 757 1013 1114 1199 1253 1281 1296 1296 1296 1296 1296 1296 1296
Turnover (K$) 0 0 0 0 714 4393 8607 13356 17863 19642 21142 22106 22599 22856 22856 22856 22856 22856 22856 22856
viarables expenses  (K$) 0 0 0 0 501 3025 5633 8326 10591 10872 11108 11260 11337 11378 11378 11378 11378 11378 11378 11378
TOPICS Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Y7 Y8 Y9 Y10 Y11 Y12 Y13 Y14 Y15 Y16 Y17 Y18 Y19 Y20
Production of PAM dried  (T) 100 525 1150 1875 2625 2875 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000 3000
Production dried to be conditio n68 357 782 1274 1784 1954 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039 2039
Production to be distilled and c o32 168 368 601 841 921 961 961 961 961 961 961 961 961 961 961 961 961 961 961
Turnover (K$) 258 1353 2965 4834 6767 7412 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734 7734
Variables Expenses  (K$) 169 811 1703 2731 3779 3980 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081 4081
Gross Margin 2578 2707 2965 3223 3384 4941 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156 5156


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 63 
 
	
	E
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practi ces are considered and applied.  If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
    
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF core 
indicators Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investmen t cost / expected lifetime emiss ion reductions 
(mitigation only)  
 
(a) Total project fi nancing US$___49,2____   
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$____39,2___   
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  _______ tCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c) US$___66,25____  / tCO 2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq removed (e = b / c) US$__66,25_____  / tCO 2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calc ulating the indicators (d) and (e) above. 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed proj ect/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by  public and private sources ( mitigation only) 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. e stimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of t he project/programme)


---
*Page 48*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 63 
 
	
	F
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed ec onomic and financial analysis (including the financial model, tak ing into 
consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financi al justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for the co ncessionality that 
GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2. 
FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF THE PROJECT  
The financial and economic analysis is complementary, the first to the individual contributions (individual earnings) and the s econd relates to 
the community as a whole. Three differences between the two analyzes: 
In financial analysis, taxes are treated as costs and subsidies as compensation, while in economic analysis taxes and subsidies  are classified 
as transfers; 
- In financial analysis, market prices are us ed, these prices include taxes, subsid ies, and distortions. In economic analysis, 
prices must be modified to reflect the social and ec onomic values (reference pric e or hypothetical price); 
- In financial analysis: interest is a cost and it is deducted. Whereas in economic analysis, intere st is a share of the profitab ility 
of capital. 
Economic analysis helps to identify projects that can contribute most to the increase in national income. 
PROJECT DURATION : 
The duration of the project retained as  part of this study is 30 years. 
DISCOUNT RATE  
Today given a value greater than the same value tomorrow and qui ck recipe is better than a distant recipe. Discounting is essen tially a technique 
to "reduce" costs of the flow and the flow of future benefits to their "present value." We can then study the difference betwee n the present values 
(NPV)) and determine the discount rate that will apply to the net  present value is zero (measuring IRR of the project). 
The interest rate varies from one period to another, it varies with expected inflation and the risk that the borrowed money is not repaid on time or 
not be repaid at all. 
In the financial analysis, the rate or rates of return limit is usually the marginal cost of money for the operation, the compa ny or the state. This is 
often the rate at which the investor can borrow money. If the additional capital to get is a mixture of equity and debt capital , the discount rate will 
be weighted to reflect the profitability necessary to attract both equity than debt capital. Probably the best discount rate is  the "opportunity cost 
of capital." 
In analyzing the projects of the World Bank, costs and benefits are updated from the beginning of the first year. It is conveni ent to start updating 
from year to coincide with the years of t he project period’ discount -that is to say that the year 1 of the project is updated by using the factor for 
the first period, etc ... Second, the costs are in practice  paid for each year, not just the first of January. 
In this study the discount rate is of the order of 6%. 
CONVERSION FACTORS ECONOMIC PRICES IN FINANCIAL PRICES : 
Once the financial analysis of costs and benefits is made, the anal yst must estimate the economic value of the project. Financi al prices are the 
starting point of the economic analysis. They should be adjusted to reflect their value to the whole society. 
The market price of a good or service should be changed to reflect its opportunity cost, ie its value to its best alternative u se. The opportunity 
cost is also called accounting price (Shadow price) and is an es timate of the economic value of a good or service. Market price s do not always 
reflect the relative scarcity of goods or services.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 63 
 
	
	F
We can say that financial analysis, the unit of account and "cash"  that is commonly used as standard is the change in real inco me of the entity 
that is the subject of analysis, evaluated using internal mark et prices and generally expressed in national currency. But econo mic analysis, given 
that market prices do not reflect scarcity  values, our unit of accounting is the change in real net national income measured as  opportunity cost. 
All aspects of the adjustment method will be applicable to all agr icultural projects, just as not all aspects are equally impor tant in the projects to 
which they apply. The complexity of certain calculations reminds  us of the need  for an economic analysis of the project, to  i mprove the investment 
decision. The analyst must focus their attention on adjustments of  financial accounts that may alter the decision to invest in the project under 
study. They must settle for approximate results and ignore unimpor tant adjustments that do not affect the decision to invest. 
The financial cost of tangible property must be added to the economic values in three successive stages: 
 Step 1: Adjustment for direct financial- transfers 
 Step 2: Adjustment to reflect price distortions in the ca se of goods which are the subject of international trade, and 
 Step 3: Adjustment for price distortions in the ca se of assets that are not traded internationally. 
When adjusted financial prices will better refl ect the economic values, in most cases, using the opportunity cost as a criteria  of the good or service 
in question. 
Net additional value (NPV) 
The following table summarizes the results of the present values for the only scenario considered: 
- Baseline Scenario (SC0): With integration of t he economic benefits of intercropping seedlings actions; 
 
 
F.2.  Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspectiv e. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most approp riate for this project/programme. 
Section C.2 provides information on the logical relation betwee n the proposed activities and the identified threats. 
In particular the following subsections are highlighted: 
 Responding to identified threats; 
 Mitigation logical framework; 
 Adaptation component logical framework; and 
 Proposed strategy. Désignations Costs & additional advantages  per year (1000 $ US) SUM 
updated  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 à 30 to 6 % 
1. Advantages                                  
a- with project                     
1.a.1 V.A.N. with project 1 4 733 3 964 3 462 3 081 3 201 4 799 6 627 8 684 10 926 12 424 13 688 14 500 14 915 15 132 15 132 138 115 
b- without project                     
1.b.1 V.A.N. sans projet 2 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 4 400 60 565 
Net Value Added  3=(1-2) 333 -436 -938 -1 319 -1 199 399 2 227 4 284 6 526 8 024 9 288 10 100 10 515 10 732 10 732 77 550 
2. Costs                    
2.1 Investissement 4 1 820 11 883 14 622 15 040 10 743 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 36 375 
2.2 Maintenance cost 5   1 14 40 67 93 106 106 106 106 106 106 106 106 106 1 166 
2.3 Operational Cost 6   167 286 202 202 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 1 098 
 total project cost 7=(4+5+6) 1 820 12 051 14 921 15 282 11 012 128 141 141 141 141 141 141 141 141 141 46 645 
3.Additional Net Value                        
(Cash-flow) 8=(3-7) -1 487 -12 486 -15 860 -16 602 -7 527 450 2 355 4 143 6 384 7 883 9 146 9 959 10 374 10 590 10 590 34 709 
Economic Rate of Rerurn  : 10,80%


---
*Page 50*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 63 
 
	
	F
 
GRIEVANCE  SYSTEM   
The management grievance system aims at establishing an on going dialogue between the beneficiaries (men and women) and the vari ous 
participants in the execution of the project. It tries to str engthen the participation, the satisfaction of the beneficiaries a nd empower gender equality. 
 The MGS objectives are to: 
o Provide beneficiaries a system to handle complaints with respect of confidentiality of sensitive operational opinions at the 
local level. 
o Establish at the project level effective administration / management   mechanisms for complaint handeling and  an early 
warning tool allowing the management of some risks that  can appear during the implementation phase (management of 
conflicts, reluctance, etc..). 
Grievance Procedures 
During project inception workshops and the component launch works hops, stakeholders will be informed that any concerns relating  
to the design or management of the project, including social and environmental risks, that should be raised with the subcontrac tors, 
partners. Where these are not adequately addres sed, these may be escalated to the project PMU and if necessary the ANDZOA 
and ADA. 
The grievance mechanism 
The ANDZOA will establish a grievance management system  characterized by a grievance reception desk: 
 Accessible to all (beneficiaries , neighboring population, others ...); 
 Anyone can file a claim or a complaint; 
 The treatment will be done in full transparency and the complainant will be informed. 
To do this, a reception desk for complaints and grievances wi ll be opened in the PMU that will be responsible for monitoring th e project. Also, 
the desk's branches will be opened in areas accessible to the public. 
The desk will be distinct and recognizable in order to facilitate its identification by the public or anyone who wants to file a claim. 
The functioning of desk: 
- A register for grievance recording. Each request is received, re corded in the register with a number. An acknowledgment of rece ipt is 
given to the person filing the complaint; 
- The claim is then sent to the PMU, which will meet periodicall y to decide on claims. The answer is given to the complainant wit hin a 
time limit not exceeding 15 days; 
- In addition, the Web sites of the ADA and ANDZOA will be accessible to people who wish to file a complaint. This request is sen t to the 
PMU for processing. 
The project managers will conduct briefing and p ublic awareness sessions. During these sessions, responses to complaints will b e 
communicated. The data contained in this system will be compil ed in order to produce a per iodic (semi-annual) management report s and 
annual reports dealing with the status of all received complaints. This report includes: 
‐ the number of received complaints; 
‐ information about the beneficiary complainant (gender, age); 
‐ the origin of grievances (pro vince, area, perimeters, OPA); 
‐ the type of complaint (written, oral); 
‐ the number of complaints resolved. 
‐ the nature of the complaint (company’s activities, training, te chnical assistance, environmental and social impact, OPA, etc.);  
‐ the average time to resolve the complaint; 
‐ an appreciation and analysis of grievances and their management system. 
All these tools ensure a strong population involvement of and therefore project sustainability.  
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Consideratio ns


---
*Page 51*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 63 
 
	
	F
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social Management Plan , and 
how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impac ts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and operation ), in accordance 
with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standard. Also  describe how the gender aspec t is considered in accorda nce with the 
Fund’s Gender Policy and Action Plan.  
The DARED project is under the framework of NAMA and the dec lination of the Green Morocco Plan through the development of argan iculture 
sector in the region of Souss-Massa, Ess aouira and Guelmim. This project will contri bute to the reduction of pressure on the ar gan and the 
improvement of income sources for beneficiaries. Particularly, the project will contribute to carbon sequestration and comes as  a response to 
climate change issues in the region by contributing to the mitigat ion of the impacts of floods that characterize the region. 
The assessment of the environmental and social impact and the establishment of the ESMP have been conducted through a screening  of positive 
impacts and risks of negative impacts, as well as mitigation meas ures,  in accordance with the safeguard policies of the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF). Note that no major impact has been identified and that the component 3 of the project will rather benefit capacity build ing components 
that contribute to environmental protection and to achieving the objectives of the GCF. 
The risks and environmental and social negative impacts (minor ri sks) that have been identified are limited and will occur temp orarily during the 
project implementation phase. 
Environmental and 
Social Safeguard 
Principles  Element of compliance evaluation  Potential risks to manage 
before, during project 
implementation  Corrective and preventive actions  
PS1:  Assessment  
and management of 
environmental and 
social risks and 
impacts  The project’s social and environmental 
classification is “B”. The project will not 
generate adverse environmental and social 
impacts and risks. Instead, institutional 
strengthening of government and 
community institutions, coupled with 
management plans for the sustainable use 
of natural resources for income-generating, 
will contribute to providing proper care for 
the natural resources base and to improving 
livelihoods in the province. 
Negative environmental and social impacts 
and risks are minor and  can be prevented 
and/or mitigated. 
The project includes an ESIA identifying 
environmental and social risks and impacts. ‐ Difficulty in procurement 
of argan plants 
‐ Adherence of the 
population 
‐ Pollution 
‐ Lack or insufficient 
irrigation of argan 
seedlings Follow the environmental and social monitoring 
plan for the project 
Project Risk management gives priority to 
anticipation and avoidance first, before seeking to minimize or compensate for the effects of unavoidable risks 
The project adopts an environmental and 
social management plan that identifies risks 
and provides for actions to be implemented 
to avoid, minimize or compensate for their 
effects. 
Environmental and social monitoring mechanism Complaints handling mechanism to implement Identified risks associated 
with environmental and social aspects (ESIA);  Social risks for the project components  Follow the environmental and social monitoring 
plan, globally or by project component 
PS2: Labour and  
working conditions The project will be in confrmity with the 
Labour Code /Morocco (code travail Maroc : 
bulletin officiel numéro 5210 du jeudi 6 mai 
2004. Dahir n° 1-03-194 du 14 rejeb 1424 
(11 septembre 2003) portant promulgation 
de la loi n° 65-99 relative au code du travail. 
2004.) 
Morocco has ratified ILO core labour 
standards.  The probable risk of non-
equity is the difference in 
salary between men and 
women workers and 
workers in the low access 
of women to jobs at 
companies employed by 
the project.  
  
It is necessary to include clauses related to the 
compliance with ILO labour rights and national 
standards.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 63 
 
	
	F
All activities planned in the framework of the 
project are in accordance with national and 
international laws Limited institutional 
capacity for implementation 
of the ESMP 
(Environmental and Social Management Plan) Development of a capacity building plan 
(information, training, etc.) to reinforce the 
capacities of institutions responsible for the 
implementation of the ESMP 
None of the proposed actions will generate 
negative issues on these population groups. 
All project activities help strengthen the 
resilience of the population and improving 
their socio-economic conditions During the implementation 
of the actions the 
vulnerable groups 
susceptible to be impacted 
during construction or 
operating  phases are not 
identified yet. 
 ANDZOA shall engage a survey investigation to 
identify vulnerable and/or marginalized groups that 
may be impacted  during construction or operating  
phases 
 
This measure will be included in the ESMP.   
The organizations and contractors responsible for the implementation of the project are subject to the law which requires a minimum of social protection for workers Exposure to pollution, risk 
of workplace accidents Implement the measures of the ESMP
 
Organizations and enterprises in charge of 
implementing the project are subject to the 
law that prohibits child labor No risk  Raising awareness and integrating binding clauses 
in the contract documents 
PS3: Resource  
efficiency and 
pollution prevention Due to the small scale of the project and its 
small footprint, very low amounts of waste are produced.  Also, the energy and other raw materials are low.  Deterioration of water 
quality of the Oueds (Rivers) along the segments affected by the 
construction of 
infrastructure.  Conventional mitigation measures reported in the 
ESMP will be implemented. 
The project includes a component for the 
mobilization of rainwater for a better 
management of the resource "water". 
Energy requirements for the project are low. No identified risk  Sensitivity for better irrigation techniques  
The Project reinforces resilience to climate 
change, and will not result in an increase in 
greenhouse gas emissions.   A temporary residual 
negative impact, with low 
intensity lies in low emissions of greenhouse gases during the construction of the structures.  Engage a climate check for the construction of the 
structures  
PS4: Community  
health, safety and 
security 
 Apart from the risk of accidents that are 
controllable during the work phase, no 
project activity is generating negative impact 
on health.   risk of the spread of HIV 
spread in the community of 
workers during the 
construction phase and The 
risk of personal injury.  i) make  workers aware of  the disease  
ii) it is also necessary to take the measures 
recommended in the ESMP  to avoid accidents. 
These measures must be integrated ias clauses 
(health, security, HIV aids awareness) in specific 
technical specifications contracted with the 
companies responsible for the work. 
No action planned in this project, disagrees 
with the principles of human right.   The project will be in line with the these human rights stipulated by the Moroccan new constitution that enshrines human rights 
as universally recognized and stipulates the 
protection of these rights, taking into account their universality and indivisibility. The Moroccan constitution adopted all rights provided for in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights enshrined the primacy of international conventions ratified by Morocco The implementation of 
some activities can induce a deviation of rights such as deterioration of the living or non-securing the work site during the construction 
phase. It is necessary to include environmental and social 
clauses (health, security, social issues, HIV aids awareness) in specific technical specifications contracted with the companies responsible for the work.  
This practice was initiated and implemented in the 
mega-project implemented under the compact millennium challenge account (MCC-USAID) and the Ministry of agriculture and fisheries in morocco. This model is well documented and can serve as an example. it has also been used for similar projects in the oasis of Tafilalet MCC project.


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 63 
 
	
	F
on national legislation and affirmed 
Morocco's commitment to harmonize these 
legislation with the provisions of these 
conventions. 
PS5: Land  
acquisition and 
involuntary 
resettlement 
 No population in the zone will be subject to 
resettlement due to the project activities. For physical actions, and 
after the final selection of 
the sites by localization, the 
risk of expropriation - 
Involuntary resettlement of 
the population may occur. Possible measures to manage this risk are: i) 
search for an alternative site without involuntary 
resettlement, ii) stopping the activity 
The nature of the project involves an increase in local living standards through the expansion of the income sources of the 
beneficiaries No identified risk
 Avoid any alternative involving expropriation or 
population displacement 
PS6: Biodiversity  
conservation and sustainable management of living natural resources 
 Some planned actions aim a better water 
resources management that will improve the conservation of biological diversity in oasis zones. For physical actions, and 
after the final selection of the sites, the risk of deterioration of biodiversity (specially relicts or/and endemic species)  It is necessary to initiate a study to inventory and 
characterization of plant and animal biodiversity (fauna and flora) in the area of influence of the activity. In cases where the impact proves to be significant, the activity site should be moved to another location or to cancelling the activity 
The flood protection and water collection 
structures will enable the maintenance of 
benefits drawn from ecosystem. Non-applying of good 
practice of irrigation and 
drainage can cause soil 
degradation by salinization. 
Another risk of non-
conservation of water in the 
soil resulted from 
inadequate conservation 
practices.   Adoption (and training on) of practices of soil and 
water conservation: 
‐ Leaching requirement to avoid salts 
accumulation in root zone 
‐ Superficial minimum tillage, 
‐ Mulching,  
‐ Soil organic amendment 
‐ etc. 
PS7: Indigenous  
peoples 
 Principle not applicable to the project  - - 
PS8: Cultural  
heritage 
 Project activities do not generate negative 
impacts on the natural and cultural heritage 
(NCP). Indeed, in addition to the choice of 
the site which should prevent any site or 
heritage building, the NCP is protected by 
legal texts (Loi- 22-80 relative à la 
conservation des monuments historiques et 
des sites, des inscriptions, des objets d’art et 
d’antiquités, etc. ) NO RISKS  _ 
Gender 
Women and men will benefit from the same employment opportunities offered during the implementation phase. The ANDZOA and the e ntity responsible for 
the implementation of the activity specifies that the chances for gender equality will be considered in the proposed opportunit ies.  
Component Positive impact  Risks or negative impacts  Mitigation measure  
Component 1 : Conduct argan growing 
(arganiculture) on 10 000 ha Positive impact through 
improving income for men and 
women ‐ No risks 
  
The construction work will 
impact the employment of both men and women Risk of hiring men rather than 
women due to the nature of the work to be done ; Specify the nature of the work, the 
skills required while highlighting equal chances for job opportunities


---
*Page 54*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 63 
 
	
	F
Risk relating to work opportunity 
during the construction phase 
Component 2 : Structuration of upstream 
and downstream argan value chain  Both genders will take 
advantage of the work. This 
component will contribute to the 
employment of women and thus 
mitigate the risk of exclusion of 
women from the project  
This component will also 
support wealth creation 
initiatives (ICR) to the benefit of 
young women. Impact on other activities of women 
because of their occupation for the 
valuing of the argan products. During the implementation phase, 
establish an assessment of 
women's activities in order to take 
them into account in the planning of 
the project and its activities 
Component 3  : Capacity building, 
knowledge management, Co-managment of Natural Argan Forest and scientific research promotion positive impact on the capacity 
building of all stakeholders (men and women) ‐ No risks  
 
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, disbursement methods and  auditing. 
ANDZOA has expertise in working with donor funds and has a good record of accomplishment in implementing or co-implementing man y 
programme and projects using sound financial management practices. T he major project currently impl ementing by ANDZOA is PACCZO  which 
is financed by the Adaptation Fund.  
ANDZOA has a Director of Administration and Finance and adheres to  policies and procedures that meet donor agencies’ requiremen ts.   
For this project, it will be responsible fo r fiduciary aspects and will be accountable for all financial and investment activit ies.  
With regard to accounting policies and proc edures, the principal regulat ory framework for the project’s financial management wi ll comprise: (a) 
Morocco laws governing budget and financial management ANDZOA; and (b) the operating manuals and norms of ANDZOA, which include  
acceptable accounting policies and procedures. 
 Financial statements are prepared using the accrual basis of accounting and the standard chart of accounts accepted. 
A specific bank account, in Moroccan currency (MAD), is set up for the project and resources are changed to the local currency according the 
project’s requirements.  
ANDZOA have an internal service reporting to the Director of Administration and Finance. This service is in charge of : 
‐ Checking all payment support documents and ensuring complianc e with the donor’s hiring and procurement conditions  
‐ Checking compliance with terms of contracts for the procurement s of goods services, in regard to deliverables, deadlines, servi ce 
conformity, amounts and characteristics or delivered goods or eq uipment, work assessments, and work progress reports; and  
‐ ensuring payment vouchers comply with tax regulations.  
Furthermore, ANDZOA has an internal audit committee designated by  its Board of Directors that follows and controls an external auditing process. 
In addition, the administrative staff of ANDZOA has establis hed periodic and spot-check reviews (in situ) of programmes’ and pr ojects’ accounting 
and financing procedures. The purpose of these reviews is to ve rify the accuracy of the documents and to ensure that agreed act ivities have 
been implemented using internal regulations.  
In addition, no financial management and procurement risk assessment was identified by AE.  Also, ANDZOA is subject to well-def ined 
expenditure commitment procedures in the rules which comes from the Law on Morocco public expenditure.  ANDZOA is conducting the project which’s financing by Adapt ation fund and monitoring by ADA as Accredited Entity. .  
ADA and ANDZOA are two national agency under the Ministry of Agri cultural and Fisheries and they are controlled by the same pro curement 
guides and rules and for auditing.    GCF resources will be provided to the implementing partner. The funds will flow through GOM financ ial systems. Under ADA’s impl ementation 
modality, ADA advances cash funds on an annual basis to ANDZOA  (executing entity) for the implementation of agreed and approved  program 
activities, in accordance with ADA standard policies and the ADA' s procurement manual. ANDZOA reports back expenditure via a fi nancial report 
on annual basis to ADA. Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA as and when it is agreed;


---
*Page 55*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 63 
 
	
	F
ADA will verified the following documents before it makes payme nts to ANDZOA : State expenditures as administrative and financi al monitoring 
reports and according to the evidence provided by A NDZOA accordance with the expenditure forecasts.. 
ANDZOA will engage expenditures for works and goods according planned activities by :  
- International and National competitive bidding for activities ac tivity which amount is overall than 40 000 USD based on Quality  and Cost 
Based Selection (QCBS). Payments terms will be specify into the Term of References for each activities and services.. 
- For services which cost less than 40,000 USD, ANDZOA may hire direct consultation procedure based on based on Least Cost 
Selection (LCS)  
Procurement 	Plan  
ADA has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlin ed. The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelin es across 
each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in ADA. 
In line with ADA procurement procedures, AD A will ascertain capacities of the ANDZOA  as the Executing Entity by undertaking an evaluation of 
its capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers. 
In line with ADA's procurement procedures and cash transfer mo dalities, procurement under the project will be undertaken by AND ZOA as the 
Executing Entity. 
Wherever procurement is carried out by A NDZOA and ANDZOA's partners, it will be fully aligned with Government regulations and p rocedures 
and will also have to be compatible with ADA’s financial and procurement standards. 
The procurement plan will cover the implementation period. T he implementing entity update the procurement plan throughout the d uration of the 
project annually by including contracts prev iously awarded. All procurement plans, t heir updates or modifications will be publi shed on the website 
of the ANDZOA.  
For international, national requirements apply to the various proc urement and consultant recruitment methods used for the proje ct by national 
and international competitive bidding, an annex to the FP a detailed multi-y ear budget by natural classification : -) Recruitment of Consulting 
Firms, Individual Consultants or contract or (national or international)  goods is based on Quality and Cost Based Selection (QC BS) for each 
activity which amount is overall than 40 000 USD. -) Recruitment of contractor (national or international)  for works  is based  on Least Cost 
Selection (LCS) for each activity which amount is overall than 40 000 USD. -) For the activity which amount is less than 40 000  dollars, is based 
on Least Cost Selection (LCS).


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 63 
 
	G
 
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed descr iption of risk factors and mitigation measures can be elaborated i n G.2.  
 
The following risks have been identified:  
 Financial risks: No relevant risk has been identified in this category. ANDZ OA has over 5 years of experience in managing, channeling, 
supporting and supervising project execution, with considerable success in carrying out its fiduciary responsibilities. Delay i n securing co-
financing, other than the endowment fund of ANDZOA, does not affect  the proposed core activities. Given that partners is co-fin ancing a no risk 
is associated with such a grant, planned to become effective before to start project activities.   For technical, social and environmental risks are s howed below and developed in the ESIA report attached.  
 
Risks 
Risk of harming the biosphere of the argan tree in case of poor management and performance of the work in areas close to the 
biosphere reserve.  
Deterioration of biodiversity due to the work and the presence of equipment and the construction site. 
Risk of altering archaeological sites 
Change of the flow of water, this could negatively im pact the population living downstream of the work site 
Deterioration of water quality of the Oueds (Rivers) along the segments affected by the project implementation 
Risk of soil contamination by site waste 
Risk of gender inequality 
Impact on air quality caused by the emission of greenhouse gases, dust and noise 
Risk of accidents, health and safety 
Impact on the health and safety of the population 
Involuntary resettlement and adherence of the population  
Risk of discrimination for participation in events and fairs 
Pressure on water resources: need to irrigate plants during the firs t 3 years at a rate of 2500 m3 / ha / year, ie a total of 2 5 million m3 / 
year for the entire area of 10 000 ha 
 
More details are developed on ESIA and ESMP attached.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 63 
 
	G
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and en vironmental and other risks that might prevent the project/p rogramme 
objectives from being achieved. Also descr ibe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Risk of harming the biosphere of the argan tree in case of poor 
management and performance of the work in areas close to the biosphere reserve.  Deterioration of biodiversity due to the work and the presence of 
equipment and the construction site.
	Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
‐ Conduct an awareness campaign among the different actors on the protection of RBA; 
‐ Good organization of work and tailings management 
‐ Avoid clearing plantations and ensure saving wildlife that thrives in the neighborhood of the site. 
‐ Rehabilitate the areas affected by the construction site 
‐ Add to the requirements specification for contract ors, clauses relating to the protection of RBA 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Deterioration of water quality of the Oueds (Rivers) along the 
segments affected by the project implementation 
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
‐ Avoid spillage of waste and products in oueds or alluvium; 
‐ Train site staff on food safety measures to comply with; 
‐ Include environmental and social monitoring in the role of the technical assistant 
‐ Ensure a good management of products used for the work 
‐ Ensure a good management of tailings and waste produced by the workers  
‐ Ensuring a good management of plants waste  
‐ Check the condition of vehicles and machinery to prevent  leaks and spills of petrol eum products and hydrocarbons 
‐ Implement a Hazardous Materials Management Plan and an action plan for spills 
‐ Ensure proper management of pollutants  
‐ Avoid materials releases into the oued or in the natural environment. 
‐ Prevent leaks and spills of pet roleum products and hydrocarbons.
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of soil contamination by site waste 
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 58*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 63 
 
	G
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
‐ Collect waste water and site waste  
‐ Minimize waste accumulation  
‐ Disposing of waste in landfills authorized by the government 
‐ Providing a wastewater collection system 
‐ Always clean work areas, as well as the floor in case of dirt or deposits 
‐ Build barricades around in polluting products storage tanks and pr epare areas for the storage or handling of these products 
‐ Plan on one (or more if necessary) cleanup kit (eme rgency bag containing several absorbent sheets) 
‐ Restoring the work area 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of accidents, health and safety 
Impact on the health and safety of the population 
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
‐ Taking the necessary measures to prevent employment of children; 
‐ Take the necessary measures to ensure that site staff is insured, is trained on accident and has acquired good practices and to ols 
for safe work; 
‐ Establishing a health check for onsite employees beforehand 
‐ The company must designate a local clinic in case of accident, with an insurance covering all staff risks ; 
‐ Establishing markup and temporary constr uction signage before starting the work  
‐ Checking the speed of construction v ehicles, especially nearby houses. 
‐ Provide personal protective equipm ent for workers and site personnel. 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Pressure on water resources: need to irrigate plants during the first 
3 years at a rate of 2500 m3 / ha / year, ie a total of 25 million m3 / year for the entire area of 10 000 ha Social and 
environmental
 Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated  or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring ? If so, to what level?  
‐ Water resources are already experiencing ov erexploitation, due to a significant demand for irrigation water. To compensate for this 
additional demand, the project includes rainwater catchment acti ons and, possibly, water points to construct upon authorization  of 
ABH. 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description Risk category Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Involuntary resettlement and adherence of the population Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed.  Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk occurring? If so, 
to what level?  
‐ Avoid any site that may cause population displacement or any dispute in the accurate identification process


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 63 
 
	G
‐ Reaffirming the commitment of the population before the project starts (to be done by ONCA and ANDZOA).  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., issue s that have not yet 
raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring) .  This could include issues related to external stakeholde rs such as project 
beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors. 
no others risks have been identified   
* Please expand this sub-section when needed to ad dress all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 63 
 
	
	H
H.1.  Logic Framework.    
Please specify the logic framewor k in accordance with the GCF’s  Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level19 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-emission 
sustainable development 
pathways The project will preserve the only biosphere reserve of  argan in the world by mitigation to climate change and 
help carbon sequestration. The project will create enabli ng conditions for stakeholders to develop arganiculture 
orchards in line with the NAMAs. The project is a first step to help unlock  the whole potential of carbone 
sequestration in the RBA. 
Expected Result Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target 
Assumptions Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund-level impacts  
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land 
use, reforestation, 
reduced deforestation, 
and through sustainable 
forest management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks M4.1. Tonnes of Carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2 
eq) reduced or avoided  
as a result of GCF-funded 
projects/programmes–forest and land-use 
subindicator  
 Average 
hectares planting for 
arganiculture 
tree	
 0 T CO2 eq 
 
 -200 000 t 
Co2 eq  -604 
223,30  
T CO2 
eq - 10 000 hectares on 
arganiculture orchards are planting ; 
2- best practices and 
knowledge  is  adopted 
by stakeholders and partners  
Co-financing is 
mobilized  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions A1.2 Number of males and 
females benefiting from 
the adoption of diversified, 
climate-resilient livelihood options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.)  
 Data collected from families 
participating in 
DARED project  collected from 
internal reports 
biannually and annually  
 0 beneficiair
es
   13 000 
beneficiairi
es  26 00
0 
benefi
ciaires  10 000 hectares on 
arganiculture orchards 
are planting ; 
2- best practices and 
knowledge  is  adopted by stakeholders and 
partners  
Co-financing is 
mobilized  
       
      
  
																																																													
19 Information on the Fund’s expect ed results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link ( Please note that some indicato rs are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/ 00_customer/documents/Operation s/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 63 
 
	
	H
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Prog ramme level 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)   Final  
Project/programme 
Outcomes Outcomes that c ontribute to Fund-level impacts 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions M9.1. Hectares of Land or 
Forests under improved 
and effective management 
that contributes to CO2 
emission reductions  Surface of  
planted on  
Arganicultur e 
Programme 
of 
HCEFLCD 
Morocco 
Green Plan  
 0 5000 10000 through the 
ANDZOA implanting 
project collects 
detailed data 
planting and also 
through the 
HCEFLD collecting 
data on 
deforestation . 
Project will provide 
better estimates of 
carbon avoided 
Specify other expected 
results       
Specify other expected 
results       
Project/programme 
outputs Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Component 1: Implementation of t he arganiculture on 10 000 ha 
1.1.1.Arganiculture on 10,000 ha  
Number of hectares  Supervision 
report/annual report 
- 5000 10000 Implementing 2000 ha per 
year 
1.1.2.Intercropped seedling on 2000 ha  
Number of hectares  Supervision 
report/annual report 
- 1000 2000 Implementing 400 ha per 
year 
1.3.1.Implementation of Water harvesting and water and soil conservation Number structures created Supervision 
report/annual report 
- 40 40 Implementing 18 structures 
per year 
1.4.1.Technical assistance and works supervision Number of supervised 
hectares  Supervision 
report/annual report 
- 5000 10000 According to work progress 
Component 2: Structuration of argan value chain 
2.1.1.mobilization and 
supervision of the fruit 
producers  and farmers and their professional organization (OP). % Number of farmers and 
right holders supervised in 
15 targeted production perimeters
 annual report - 80% of 7 
perimeters  80% of 8 
perimeters The aim is to mobilize 
80% of the number of 
beneficiaries in the 15  
production perimeters  
2.1.2.Support GIE creation Number of GIEs created 
and accompanied 
 annual report - 5 7 11 GIE creation with  
at least 3 
cooperatives per GIE


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 63 
 
	
	H
2.2.1.Argan product collection 
units implementation Number of argan product 
collection units implemented
 annual report - 5 7 Each GIE will be 
equipped with a 
collection unit 
2.2.2.Installation of argane oil 
extraction unit Number of argan oil 
extraction units implemented
 annual report -  1 1 pilot units will be 
installed in the region 
Component 3 : capacity building, knowle dge management and research promotion 
3.1.1.Information and training 
on climate change challenges  and  RBA Number of training 
workshops/modules  annual report - 2 2 Inform / train institutional 
actors in  sectors most 
affected by CC 
3.1.2.Reinforcement of 
technical and management of 
beneficiaries Number of beneficiaries 
supported  annual report - 30% of 
direct 
beneficiarie
s 80% 
Direct 
beneficia
ries The goal is to reach 80% 
of direct beneficiaries 
3.2.1.Support for the 
implementation of the Argan National Center  (CNA) 
  
number of studies 
 annual report - 1 2 Provide to CNA some 
working tools 
3.2.2.Support for the 
concretization of the Argan 
Research-Innovation 
Federator Program. Number of initiatives and 
projects supported  annual report - 10 10 Implementing the 
research program by 
supporting 20 initiatives 
 
       
Activities Description Inputs Description 
Component 1: Implementation of the arganiculture on 10 000 ha 
1.1.1.Arganiculture on 10,000 
ha Planting 10,000 ha of arganiculture 
Planting 10000 ha beneficiaries, finalize the sites and 
select  
1.1.2.Intercropped seedling on 
2000 ha WFP cultivate PAM intercropped seedling  
with arganiculture Planting 2000 ha educate beneficiaries, finalize the 
sites and choose  
1.3.1.Implementation of Water harvesting and water and soil 
conservation Build 80 rainwater harvesting and water 
conservation and soil structures Constructing 80 
structures  educate beneficiaries, finalize the 
sites and choose contractors 
1.4.1.Technical assistance and works supervision Work supervision of activity 1.1.1 and 1.1.2. 
Supporting work 
supervision Select TA Office 
Component 2: Structuration of argan value chain  
2.1.1.mobilization and 
supervision of the fruit producers  and farmers and their professional organization (OP). mobilization of the fruit producers  and 
farmers and their professional organization (OP). 
 beneficiaries and create 
cooperatives Finalize  the list of beneficiaries and 
choose the specialized engineering 
consultant 
2.1.2.Support GIE creation Creation of 11 GIE   Educate cooperatives  
and create GIE Choose specialized engineering 
consultant 
2.2.1.Argan product collection 
units implementation Implementing 11 collection units of “afyach” Improve the  argan  
products collection  Select  site; choose companies that 
will build and equip the units


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 63 
 
	
	H
 
 2.2.2.Installation of argane oil 
extraction unit Installation of 1 argan oil extraction units 
Value argan oil Select the sites; choose companies 
that will build and equip the units 
Component 3 : capacity building, knowledg e co management and research promotion 
 
3.1.1.Information and training 
on climate change challenges  
and  RBA  
sensitization of stakeholders Information and training Choose  specialized engineering 
office 
3.1.2.Reinforcement of 
technical and management of beneficiaries Training of beneficiaries 
Technical and collective 
management training   Choose  specialized engineering 
office 
3.2.1.Support for the 
implementation of the Argan National Center  (CNA)  Support CNA establishment  
CNA functional Equipment of  CNA and studies 
elaboration 
3.2.2.Support for the 
concretization of the Argan 
Research-Innovation 
Federator Program. Support the concretization of the content of 
argan innovative research  Federator 
Program sought  implementing the 
Research Program Call for  a manifestation of interest 
and  select initiatives


---
*Page 64*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 63 
 
	
	I
	
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi-annual performance reports) laid  out in AMA, please provide project/programme specific 
institutional setting and implementation arrangements for moni toring and reporting and evaluation. Please indicate how the 
interim/mid-term and final evaluations w ill be organized, including the timing. 
 
The monitoring plan will be aligned with the logical framewor k and will be targeted for each component, outcome and activities 
levels. 
 
The project PMU will have a dedicated professional who w ill manage the M&E programme and develop all the reporting 
mechanisms, using up-to-date informati on produced by the project.. The M&E system  will be designed to provide detailed data 
and analyses that can be used by the PMU to oversee and manage t he execution of activities, assess stakeholders’ response 
to these activities, and formulate project modifica tions to address any problems that may arise.  
Over the life cycle of the project, the PMU will report on the implementation of the project’s workplan, on indicator data and on 
proposed changes in activities/design. T he project reporting frequency and project level evaluations will be semi-annual, align ed 
with the requirements set by ANDZOA, ADA and GCF. The latte r will be based on analyses of reasons for differences between 
expected and actual levels of project activities, counterpart behaviours, and indicator values. The reports will include a ‘les sons 
learned’ component that provides input for developing proposed changes  in project activities and insights for future activities  
during the life span of the project. PMU will explicitly link t he monitoring plan with lessons learned during the project’s act ivities. 
This information will be uploaded in the project-created knowledge management system, which will develop a unified 
mechanism for identifying lessons from evidence.  
 During the project post-implementation period, ANDZOA and ADA  will ensure that monitoring and reporting to the GCF will 
continue for five more years. This is possible as due to it s long-term commitment in the intervention area and the stakholders.  
A proposed M&E plan for post-project implementation is developed in the ESIA and ESMP od the DARED.  
 
Methods, tools and techniques  
Dynamic implementation–monitoring of project activities  
Monitoring of project activities will be achieved through management actions, including monthly briefings with the GCF, weekly 
staff meetings, and review of staff and adviser inputs to quarterly reports. A system will be established to channel counterpar t 
responses through activity feedback forms, and the findings wi ll be incorporated in recommendations for changes as needed.  
 
Specific issues addressed in these feedback forms will include t he quality of technical assistance provided by the project, the  
quality and timeliness of the implementation data provided by the project, and the recipients’ response to project assistance.  
 
Dynamic implementation–monitoring results  
Performance monitoring involves two related tasks: (a) analysing realized indicator values; and (b) evaluating the overall resu lts 
and impacts of the project. Realized (actual) indicator values will be analysed, focusing primarily—but not exclusively—on thos e 
indicators whose values differ significantly from proposed le vels. The question, “Why the difference?” will be answered, and 
findings will be incorporated in recommendations for changes in indicator values, specific tasks or expected results.  
 
Specific issues to be addressed include th e quality of reported data, such as timing and data classification, operation of the 
data collection and reporting system, how related tasks were implemented, how recipients responded to assistance as contrasted with expectations, and how closely indica tor values are a function of identified tasks.  
 
Progress reporting


---
*Page 65*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 63 
 
	
	I
	
	The M&E system will provide information regarding project execution; progress towa rds achieving key targets; and, probability 
to meet impacts and outcomes. The Project Coordinator will pr epare reports for each regular meeting of the ANDZOA and ADA. 
An outside independent third party will conduct the mid-term revi ew and the end-of-project evaluation. The mid-term review and 
the end-of-project evaluation will be presented by the consult ants to the ANDZOA  and analyzed in detailed with the PMU. 
Lessons learned will be documented and communicated to the GCF,  the GOP and the community of development practitioners. 
The GCF will be briefed on a regular basis and as needed.  
 
Monitoring of capacity-building  
The project will provide support for capacit y-building to increase the sustainability of  project investments. During implementa tion, 
the project will create various indicators (e.g. number of peopl e trained, number of government offices supported) representati ve 
of the progress of building government capabilities, and of comm unities’ and associations’ capacity to develop plans to manage 
natural resources and implement activities for the creation of su stainable livelihoods in order to promote trade, investment an d 
private-sector development.  
Proposed indicators  
The proposed indicators are linked to pr oject objectives and outputs. Indicators were selected based on the scope of each 
result and the specifics of the activities involved. Each i ndicator in table H.1 is related to the corresponding desired output . 
These indicators will be continually rea ssessed throughout project implementation, 
Data collection and reports  
Many of the required outputs and results wi ll be available as a result of our dire ct engagement with counterparts on specific 
activities such as training events, facilitation workshops and development of consulting services. Accordingly, the project 
team will be made aware of those indicators relevant to thei r specific areas and will be tasked with collecting the information  
to be inputted in the M&E database as events take place. For other indicators, we will work with counterparts to obtain 
reports, administrative records or other  files available on a timely basis.   
.


---
*Page 66*
---

ANNEXE
S 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 63 I
* Please n ote that a funding proposal will be considered com plete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents. I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ Feasibility Study 
☐ Integrated Financial Model that p rovides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing c ommitment (If applicable) 
☐ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budg et breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
etc.) –  see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact A ssessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
(If applicable) 
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project ( If applicable) 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☐ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 67*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Rabat 15 July 2016  
 
Ms. Hela Cheikhrouhou                                      
Executive Director of the Green Climate Fund  
Sondgo Business District  
175 Art Center daero Yeonsu -gu Incheon  
22004  
Republic of Korea  
 
        
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Agence pour le Développement  Agricole 
(“ADA ”) regarding the Development of Arganiculture orchards in Degraded 
Environment  Project  
 
Dear Ms. Cheikhrouhou,  
We refer to the Development of Arganiculture orchards in Degraded Environment 
(“the project ”) in Morocco as included in the funding proposal submitted by the  
Agence pour le Dé veloppement Agricole  (“ADA ”) to us on 1st of July 2016.   
 
The undersigned is the du ly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment 
of the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco, the focal point of Morocco.  
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have 
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no -objec tion to the project as included in the 
funding proposal.  
 
By communicating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) The government of the Kingdom of Morocco has no -objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal;  
(b) The project as included in the fu nding proposal is in conformity with 
Morocco’s national priorities, strategies and plans;  
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project 
as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national 
laws and reg ulations.


---
*Page 68*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.  
 
We also confirm that our no -objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the programme.  
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.  
 
Sincerely , 
 
Her Excellency Ms. Hakima El Haité  
Minister delegate in charge of Environment


---
*Page 69*
---

	
GCF/B.14/07/Add.05 	
	
	
	
	Environmental 	and	social	report(s) 	disclosure 	
Basic	project/programme 	information 	
Project/programme 	title	Development	of	argan	orchards	in 	degraded	environment	(DARED)	
Accredited 	entity	 ADA	Morocco	
Environmental 	and	social	
safeguards 	(ESS)	category 	Category	B	
	
Environmental 	and	Social	Impact	Assessment 	(ESIA)	(if	applicable) 		
Date	of	disclosure	on	
accredited	entity’s	website	2016‐09‐01	
Language(s)	of	disclosure	 English,	French	
Link	to	disclosure	 http://www.ada.gov.ma/web/etude/ 	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
Environmental 	and	Social	Impact	Assessment 	(ESMP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	disclosure	on	
accredited	entity’s	website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	of	disclosure	 	
Link	to	disclosure	 http://	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
Resettlement 	Action	Plan	(RAP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	disclosure	on	
accredited	entity’s	website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	of	disclosure	 	
Link	to	disclosure	 http://	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
Any	other	relevant 	ESS	reports	and/or	disclosures 	(if	applicable) 	
Description	of	
report/disclosure		
Date	of	disclosure	on	
accredited	entity’s	website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	of	disclosure	 	
Link	to	disclosure	 http://	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
	
________