=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: 
/CreationDate: D:20160921135732+09'00'
/Creator: PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2
/ModDate: D:20160927141129+09'00'
/Producer: Acrobat Distiller 11.0 (Windows)
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration	of	funding	
proposals	–	Addendum	IV 	
Funding	proposal	 package	for	FP021GCF/B.14/07/Add.04 
27	September	 2016	Meeting	of	the	Board	
12	–	14	October	2016	
Songdo,	Incheon,	Republic	of	Korea	
Provisional	agenda	item	11(f) 	
Summary		
This	addendum	contains	the	following	three	parts:	
a)A	funding	proposal	 titled	“Senegal Integrated Urban Flood Management Project ”
submitted	by Agence Française de Développement (AFD);
b)A	no‐objection	letter	issued	by	the	national	designated	authori ty	or	focal	point;	and
c)Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure.
The	documents	are	presented	as	submitted	by	the	accredited	enti ty,	and	national	designated	
authority	or	focal	point,	respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.04 	
Page	b	
Table	of	Contents 	
Funding	proposal	submitted	 by	the	acc redited	entity	
No‐objection	letter	issued	by	th e	national	designated	authorit y	or	focal	point	
Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure


---
*Page 4*
---

	
							
	
Contents 
 
 
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAIN ST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AN D MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
 Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accre dited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, a ccredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information . Accredited entities can either  directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary info rmation in the proposal with c ross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name c onvention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[ Date]-[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 47 
 
	
	A
A.1.  Brief Project Information 
A.1.1. Project title Senegal Integrated Urban F lood Management Project 
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country(ies) / region                     Republic of Senegal 
A.1.4. National designated authority(ies) Ministry of Environment a nd Sustainable Development 
A.1.5. Accredited entity Agence Française de Développement 
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☐  Direct ☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary Project Sponsor: Republic of Senegal 
 
Executing Entity: MRUHCV; APIX; ONAS; ANACIM; DGPRE 
(see section C.4. for more details). 
A.1.7. Project size catego ry (Total investment, million 
USD) ☐  Micro (≤10) 
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☐  Mitigation ☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission GCF board of October 2016  
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, position Laurent Raspaud, Task Team Leader 
Organization Agence Française de Développement 
Email address raspaudl@afd.fr  
Telephone number +33 (0)1 53 44 34 86 
Mailing address 5 rue Roland Barthes – 75598 Paris Cedex 12 
   
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-ef ficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, et c.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and ma nagement, agroforestry, agricul tural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate ch ange – diversification of supply sources and supply chain manag ement, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, e fficient irrigation systems, et c.) 
☒ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) ☐ 
A.2.  Project Executive Summary


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 47 
 
	
	A
In the past few decades, demographic growth and rural exodus ha ve been the cause of a maj or development of urban 
population in Senegal. Among other development challenges linke d to fast-growing cities in Africa, damages caused by 
heavy rainfalls and coastal erosion are of increasing importanc e. Floods have been a major concern for the Government 
of Senegal since 2005, when rainfa ll began to cause serious flo od problems in major cities. Pro jections on the effects of 
climate change lead to believe that, in spite of a global decre ase in precipitation, events of  intense rainfalls will be more 
frequent and might cause heavy damages to most vulnerable areas  and population. 
Confronted with these challenge s, the Government of Senegal has  set up flood management as one of its top priorities, 
initiating a major shift in policy-making. The INDC submitted i n September 2015 sets flood management as one of its top 
priorities, with an estimated investment budget around 2 billio n dollars. As the first stage of emergency response to the 
growing flood concern has been completed in 2015, Senegal now f aces the medium- to long-term perspective for effective 
flood management. 
The Senegal Integrated Urban Flood Management  project will aim at supporting Senegalese policy on flood risk  
management through a disaster risk reduction perspective. It wi ll participate in the drainage infrastructure investment that 
is necessary in one of the most vulnerable areas of the capital  city (Pikine Irrégulier Sud) , but will also contribute to 
establishing a national-scale integrated policy for disaster ri sk management in order to optimize investment at national 
scale and most importantly deal  with the risk that will never b e cost-efficiently cover ed by infrastructure. 
The proposed project will be instrumental in making the shift i n policy-making regarding flood management that has been 
initiated by the Government of Senegal a reality. Through an in tegrated approach, not limited to hard-engineered 
infrastructure investment but aiming at (i) building knowledge of flood risk at national and local-scale, (ii) reducing 
vulnerability in existing and fu ture urban centers, (iii) reinf orcing prevention, especially for drainage infrastructure 
management and (iv) tackling the difficult challenge of trans-s ectorial governance, Senegal has the opportunity to be at 
the cutting edge of flood-managem ent policy in W est Africa. 
	
A.3.  Project Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board 01/10/2015 
Expected financial close 02/12/2015  
Estimated implementation start and end date Start: January 2017 
End:  December 2021 
Project lifespan Five (5) years


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 47 
	
	B
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project 
Based on the feasibility studie s of the Project, the estimated budget breakdown is as follows.  
Component Sub-component Amount
 Currency of 
disbursementAmount 
 Local 
currency Funding 
Component 1 
Knowing the risk Sub-component 1.1 
Flood risk mapping 5.15 million euro 
(€) 3.4 billion XOF GCF 
Sub-component 1.2 
Flood risk awareness 0.55 million euro 
(€) 0.4 billion XOF GCF 
Component 2 
Reducing the risk Sub-component 2.1 
Structural and non-structural 
measures for flood risk reduction 3.2 million euro 
(€) 2.1 billion XOF GCF 
Sub-component 2.2 
Tools for adequate investment in 
flood management infrastructure 0.65 million euro 
(€) 0.4 billion XOF GCF 
Sub-component 2.3 
Drainage and sanitation 
infrastructure in Pikine Irrégulier Sud  50 million euro 
(€) 32.8 billion XOF AFD 
6 million euro 
(€) 3.9 billion XOF Government 
of Senegal 
Component 3 
Preventing the risk Sub-component 3.1 
Real-time hazard monitoring in 
Greater Dakar 2.1 million euro 
(€) 1.4 billion XOF GCF 
Sub-component 3.2 
Protocols for infrastructure 
management under extreme rain 
events 1.2 million euro 
(€) 0.8 billion XOF GCF 
Component 4 
Governance Sub-component 4.1 
Support to integrated flood risk 
management policy-making 0.4 million euro 
(€) 0.3 billion XOF GCF 
Sub-component 4.2 
Institutional st rengthening and 
capacity building 0.25 million euro 
(€) 0.2 billion XOF GCF 
Sub-component 4.3 
Project Management Assistance 1.5 million euro 
(€) 1.0 billion XOF GCF 
Total 71  46.6   
 
AFD will bring 50M€ of concessional loan financing in order to propose soft financing conditions (35% grant-element 
equivalent) for the non-commercial public service drainage infr astructure to be built in the framework of Sub-component 
2.3. The Government of Senegal (GoS) will provide the 6M€ neede d for the Resettlement Action Plan linked to the 
establishment of the drainage infrastructure in Pikine Irréguli er Sud. GCF 15 M€ grant req uested contribution will be 
focused on the soft activities, which aim at supporting a shift  in policy making and crisis management regarding floods. 
The grant element is critical to set up the institutional, tech nical and political framework needed to improve flood 
management from basic hard-engineere d solutions towards integra ted management and crisis reduction. 
 
The budget breakdown by expenditure type for sub-components fin anced by GCF is as follows.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 47 
	
	B
 
Component Sub-component Expenditure 
type Amount Currency of disbursement 
Component 1 
Knowing the risk Sub-component 1.1 
Flood risk mapping Services 
5.15 million euro (€) 
Sub-component 1.2 
Flood risk awareness Services 
0.55 million euro (€) 
Component 2 
Reducing the risk Sub-component 2.1 
Structural and non-st ructural measures 
for flood risk reduction Services 
3.2 million euro (€) 
Sub-component 2.2 
Tools for adequate investment in flood 
management infrastructure Services 
0.65 million euro (€) 
Component 3 
Preventing the risk Sub-component 3.1 
Real-time hazard m onitoring in Greater 
Dakar Supply 1.5 million euro (€) 
Services 0.6 million euro (€) 
Sub-component 3.2 
Protocols for infrastructure management 
under extreme rain events Services 
1.2 million euro (€) 
Component 4 
Governance Sub-component 4.1 
Support to integrated flood risk 
management policy-making Project 
consultants 0.4 million euro (€) 
Sub-component 4.2 
Institutional str engthening and capacity 
building Project 
consultants 0.25 million euro (€) 
Sub-component 4.3 
Project Management Assistance Project 
consultants 1.5 million euro (€) 
Total  15  
 
 
          The tentative disbur sement schedule of GCF funds is as follows.


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 47 
	
	B
Year 1 – 4.0 M€ 
Year 2 – 4.0 M€ 
Year 3 – 4.0 M€ Year 4 – 2.5 M€ Year 5 – 0.5 M€ 
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  71 million euro (€)  
(b) 
Requested 
GCF amount  
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
15  
  
 
  
million euro (€)  
 
 
  
 
 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  15 million euro (€)  
(c) Co-
financing 
 Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of 
Institution Tenor Pricing Seniority 
Senior Loans 
Equity 50 
6 million euro (€) 
million euro (€) AFD 
Repu 
blic of Senegal20 years 
 1-1.5% 
 senior 
 
Lead financing institution: Agenc e Française de Développement 
B.3. Fee Arrangement  
Fee arrangement for the proposed project is aligned with the GC F Board’s decision number B11/10 about the interim 
policy on fees for accredited entities.  
B.4. Financial Market Overview  
 Not applicable.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 47 
	
	C
C.1. Strategic Context 
Surging flood risk worldwide.  Of all natural disasters, flood is the most frequent and recur ring, and the 
number of flood events has been st eadily increasing over the pa st 50 years. Recent history has 
demonstrated the dramatic increase in loss of human lives and e conomic damages caused by urban floods, 
especially in the most vulnerable developing countries. In 2010 , it is estimated that 178 million people were 
affected by floods worldwide, and associated economic losses am ount to more than 40 billion USD.  
This phenomenon can be explained by two combined factors: (i) t he increasing vulnerability of urban zones, 
caused by uncontrolled demographi c growth and unplanned land us e and (ii) the surging hazard linked to 
expected climate change, including extreme meteorological event s and sea-level rise. In Senegal, those 
two factors apply with major intensity.  
Flood risk in Senegal.  In 2014, urban population was estimated to be 43% of the total  population and is 
growing at an annual rate of 3.9%1. Greater Dakar region is the main  urban center with almost 25%  of the 
country’s population concentrated in an area representing less that 1% of the territory. Also, up to 80% of 
the country’s economic activity i s located in Dakar. Rapid urba n-coastal migration as well as natural 
population growth induces strong land pressure and often unplan ned urban fabric in the suburbs of the 
main cities.  
Climate change in Senegal is predicted to manifest as a decreas e in the amount of rainfall, however with 
increased intensity, increased temperatures, and sea-level rise . Drought and saline intrusion threaten water 
supplies, while sea-level rise along with coastal erosion threa ten cities and infrastructure. Different climate 
models in the ensemble project a wide range of changes in the m ean annual rainfall averaged over the 
country, from -41 to +48% by the 2090s—but more models show dec reases. It is difficult to draw robust 
conclusions of changes in precipitation; however, it is likely that a greater proporti on of precipitation will 
occur in heavy rainfall events. 
Growing vulnerability and seemingl y increasing hazard pave the way for more frequent disasters. Indeed, 
major flood events have been witnessed in 2005, 2009 and 2012, in the capital city Dakar, the latter 
affecting around 500 000 people and caused more than 100 millio n USD worth of damages. Subsequently, 
floods have been a continuous concern for Senegalese authority,  as flood events now occur almost each 
year during the rainy season (June to October), leading to some  casualties and affecting first and foremost 
the most vulnerable people. Dakar is the most heavily touched p art of the country but c ities like Kaolack, 
Saint-Louis, Diourbel or Bakel also suffer from floods. 
Flood management strategic framework in Senegal.  Taking action on this observation, the Senegalese 
Government progressively set Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) as p art of its national development strategy 
in accordance first with the Sendai Framework, ultimately throu gh the national development plan (called 
Plan Sénégal Émergent ). The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction for the 201 5-2030, which 
was adopted by 187 Member States of the United Nations (includi ng Senegal), identifies f our priorities: (i) 
understanding disaster risk, (ii) strengthening disaster risk g overnance to manage disaster risk, (iii) 
investing in disaster risk redu ction for resilience and (iv) en hancing disaster preparedness for effective 
response and to “build back bette r” in recovery, rehabilitation  and reconstruction.  
Operationally, this led to the elaboration of a 10-year Flood M anagement Program for the 2012-2022-
period ( Programme Décennal de Gestion des Inondations – PDGI) . This PDGI accounts for structural 
measures including mainly hard-engineered drainage infrastructu re to reduce the vulnerability to flood risks 
but also non-structural measures . In September 2015, Senegal su bmitted its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC),  which estimates at USD 2.136 b illion for the period 2016 to 2035 the 
amount of investment required to  build resilience to floods. 
On-going projects on flood management. Since the occurrence of disastr ous floods in Dakar and other 
major cities, many projects have been launched by the Senegales e government to incre ase resilience and 
leverage public investment in infrastructure. Among other proje cts, the most important  ones are the Jaxaay 
																																																													
1 Source: World Bank Development Indicators, 2015


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 47 
	
	C
Plan, that aims at resettle people living in low-lying, flood-p rone areas, launched in 2006 and the 
emergency phase of the PDGI tha t also included 100 million USD worth of investment in infrastructure.  
In 2010 was also launched the storm water management and climat e change project ( Projet de Gestion 
des Eaux Pluviales – PROGEP ), financed mainly by the World Bank, that includes investment in drainage 
infrastructure in priority areas of the suburbs of Dakar but al so institutional strengthening for storm water 
management. 
Project strategic consistency. Given the human and economic challenges posed by floods in Sene gal, 
and given the funds needed to address this problem through infr astructure-only solutions, it appears 
necessary to support Senegal's transition to an integrated urba n flood management policy to ensure 
maximum cost-effectiveness of the Government’s investment in th is sector. 
The present project aims at sup porting the Senegalese governmen t by taking a step back on its risk 
mitigation strategy and support a transformation of the nationa l policy framework towards an integrated 
urban flood risk management. It will address each and every str ategic objective of the Sendai Framework 
for Action to establish a long-term strategy on flood managemen t. 
The project will act as the neces sary link between local invest ments made in storm water drainage 
infrastructure and operations (for instance through PROGEP) and  future regional hydrological and 
meteorological data production (f or instance through an up-comi ng regional Hydromet Program). 
Overview of the projects mentioned in the Funding Proposal . This present document makes reference 
to various projects related to flood management in Senegal. To ensure clarity and good understanding of 
these operations, an overview of each important project mention ed in this Funding Proposal is provided in 
the box below. 
Box 1. Overview of relevant projects 
 1. Urban Restructuring of Pikin e Irrégulier Sud– GoS, AFD, WB –  41M€ 
This project has been designed as a component of the large Daka r-Diamniadio Highway Project co-
financed by the Government of Senegal (7M€), AFD (14M€) and Wor ld Bank (20M€). The highway 
construction has been seen as an opportunity to contribute to t he urban redevelopment of Pikine 
Irrégulier Sud, located on the alignment of the highway, which is an informal area gathering around 
200.000 persons. This project is articulated around three major  components including rehabilitation of 
primary and secondary roads, construction of social equipments and drainage infrastructure in frequently 
flooded areas. The part financed by the government was dedicate d to the payment of compensations 
for persons to be resettled. The project, started in 2010, is p romoted by APIX and is currently under 
implementation with an end date in September 2018. 
 2. Drainage and Wastewater Manag ement in Pikine Irrégulier Sud – GoS, AFD - 56 M€ 
The design of this project is strongly linked with the componen t dedicated to drainage infrastructure in 
the above-mentioned project. Taki ng into account the important needs in terms of rainwater and 
wastewater in the Greater Dakar, this project aims at improving  drainage, wastewater and flood 
management in Pikine Irrégulier Sud. Financed by the Government  of Senegal (6M€ on compensations) 
and AFD (50M€), the implementation involves two promoters: APIX  is in charge of the drainage 
component while ONAS is responsible for the wastewater componen t. Started in 2015, this project has 
a lifespan of 5 years. 
The ESIA produced in 2013 for the drainage infrastructure inclu ded in Project 1 covered in its scope of 
action the drainage infrastructure planned in Project 2. For th is reason, the feasibility study is referring 
to Project 1 when presenting details of Project 2, which is the  subject of the sub-component 2.3 in this 
Funding Proposal. 
 3. Hann Bay Depollution  – AFD, EIB – 52,5 M€ 
The depollution project of Hann Bay was launched in 2009 and is  co-financed by AFD (32,5M€) and EIB 
(20M€). The Hann Bay is known to host approximately 60% of the national manufacturing industry with 
limited treatment facilities causin g important pollution of the  environment due to a direct discharge of


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 47 
	
	C
domestic and industrial effluents into the Bay. The objective o f the project is to restore the water quality 
of the bay by financing the infrastructure to collect (with a 1 5km long collection channel), treat (via a 
wastewater treatment plant) and discharge using a 3km long subm arine pipeline. The project is under 
implementation with ONAS as a promoter and is estimated for com pletion in April 2019. 
After commissioning of the facilit ies, it is expected that the domestic effluents from households located 
in Pikine Irrégulier Sud will be treated by the treatment plant  located in Hann Bay. 
 
C.2. Project Objective against Baseline 
Impacts of flood in Senegal.  Between 1980 and 2009, floods have affected around 900 000 peo ple in 
Senegal, and killed 45 persons. The evaluation of damages to ec onomic assets amounts to 142 million 
USD2. Given the impact of floods in the past 30 years and the impac t of the last major events, the trend 
has clearly been accelerating: 
 In 2009, major flood events have affected between 485 000 and 507 000 people in Senegal. 
Throughout the national territory, the economic evaluation of d amages amounts to 104 million 
USD, mainly on the following asse ts: private housing (49%), hea lth (14%), agriculture (11%), 
education (10%) and transport (10%). Greater Dakar area has suf fered the most from those events, 
with almost 360 000 people affected and 82 million USD worth of  damages (33 million USD on 
habitat). 
 In 2012, floods caused the death of 26 people. Approximately 2 64 000 people were affected; more 
than 7 700 houses were damaged a nd more than 5 000 families had  to be resettled.  
The Senegalese coastal area is particularly prone to flood risk . The capital city Dakar is installed in a 
geographical area characterized by the « Niayes » landscape – f resh water bodies situated in depressions 
between dunes that spread on a 180 km coastline from the Cap-Ve rt peninsula to the estuary of the 
Senegal River. Most of Senegal’s population lives in coastal ar eas and almost one quarter of the overall 
population lives in the Cap-Vert peninsula. 
The return period of the rain events that caused the 2009 and 2 012 floods are quite short – 1.5 years for 
the 2009 event. Those events and their impact have been subject  to extensive studies for the Greater 
Dakar Region. However, knowledge of the actual risk flood risk on the national territo ry still shows some 
gaps and there is no evaluation of the potential impact of extr eme events, like 100-years return period 
rains. 
Impacts of floods in Greater Dakar.  Unplanned urban growth and soil sealing have had a major impac t 
on the natural hydrographic netwo rk and had provoked the disapp earance of natural talweg and evacuation 
of rainwater to the sea. Duri ng exceptional droughts in the 70i es, houses were built i n the dry Niayes low-
lying grounds that should not have been occupied. Groundwater i s heavily polluted by infiltrations from pit 
latrines and cannot be used for drinking water purposes. As a c onsequence, the piezometrical level of the 
groundwater table is very high, causing the apparition of lasti ng water bodies polluted by pathogenic 
bacteria of fecal origin, even in  case of low-intensity precipi tation. 
Pikine Irrégulier Sud is one of Greater Dakar’s main informal s ettlement zones, with around 300 000 people 
today. The population of Pikine Irrégulier Sud falls in the low -income category and has little access to public 
services. Moreover, the neighbo rhood is regularly and heavily a ffected by floods. Polluted and stagnant 
water surfaces may persist week s or months, causing health prob lems (it is estimated that half of the 
population is affected by waterborne diseases), damage to exist ing assets and decrease in economic 
activity. Those problems drive people already living in poverty  to leave their unhealthy habitat. 
																																																													
2 Source : Rapport d’évaluation des besoins post-cata strophe – Inondations urbaines à Dakar 2009, Government of Senegal and 
GFDRR, 2010,


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 47 
	
	C
Figure	1	–	Evaluation 	of	flood	risk	in	2009	in	Greater	Dakar	region3 
Projected impacts of climate change. Major uncertainties remain as to the effect of climate change i n 
Senegal in general and in particular on the amount and frequenc y of rain events. However, models tend to 
show that there will be a general decrease in rainfall but an i ncrease in heavy rain events. This is actually 
the worst-case scenario for fl ood risk, as overall dry weather might continue to cause urban migration, 
mislead on the evaluation of haz ard in low points otherwise pro ne to floods. Subsequent heavy rain events 
would cause massive damages. 
While a majority of Senegal has a tropical climate, the country ’s northern regions - located in the Sahel - 
are arid. The country experiences one long rainy season, which varies along a latitudinal gradient (north-
south), from June/July to Septem ber/October, and is driven by t he movement of the Inter-Tropical 
Convergence Zone (ITCZ). While the arid zones receive a rainfal l under 300 mm per year, the forested 
south receives an average of 1200 mm per year. The average annu al temperature for Senegal was 27.8°C 
for the period 1960-1990, with mont hly averages in the hottest seasons of up to 35°C. 
Rainfall in Sahel is characteri zed by high variability on inter ‐annual and inter ‐decadal timescales, which 
can make long ‐term trends difficult to identify. A period of particularly hig h rainfall occurred in the early 
1960ies, whilst the period between 1970 and the end of the 1990 ies was very dry. Observers tend to agree 
on a significant return of high rainfalls since the beginning o f 2000, but this does not c onstitute a consistent 
scientific trend. 
																																																													
3 Source: Préparation à la gestion des périls naturels et des ri sques liés aux changements c limatiques à Dakar, Sénégal , IAGU, 
2009


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 47 
	
	C
 
Figure	2	–	Variation 	index	on	mean	annual	rainfall	in	Senegal, 	1896‐2008	
As far as global climate change is concerned, General Circulati on Models project a wide range of changes 
in precipitation for Senegal, but tend towards overall decrease s, particularly in the wet season. However, 
despite the projected decreases in total rainfall, the proporti on of total annual rainfall that falls in heavy rain 
events tends towards increases in the ensemble projections.  
The document “Vulnerability, Ri sk Reduction and Adaptation to C limate Change – Country Profile of 
Senegal” of 2011 financed by World  Bank, GFDRR and Climate Chan ge team describes Senegal current 
and future climate profile. 
The past climate variability is c haracterized by the following patterns:  
 Mean annual temperature has increased by 0.9°C since 1960, an average rate of 0.20°C per 
decade. 
 Available data indicates that the average number of ‘hot’ nigh ts per year increased by 27 (an 
additional 7.3% of nights) between 1960 and 2003. 
 A period of particularly high rainfall occurred in the early 1 960s, while the early 1980s were 
particularly dry. Statistically significant decreases of around  10 to 15 mm per decade have, 
however, been observed between 1960 and 2006 in the southern re gions of Senegal (during the 
wet season of June through September). 
 Some unusually high rainfalls have occurred in the dry season in recent years (2000 ‐2006), but 
this has not been part o f a consistent trend. 
 Senegal has experienced a statisti cally significant decrease i n wet season rainfall between 1960 
and 2006, with the 500 mm isohyet s regressing about 100 km to t he south. 
The current models that describe  the future of Senegalese clima te project the following trends: 
 Mean annual temperatures are projected to increase by 1.1 to 3 .1°C by the 2060s, and 1.7 to 4.9°C 
by the 2090s, with projected rate s of warming faster in the int erior than in areas closer to the coast.
 All projections indicate substantial increases in the frequenc y of days and nights that 
are considered ‘hot’ in current c limate, with such increases oc curring more rapidly in the south and 
east of the country. 
 All projections indicate decreases in the frequency of days an d nights considered ‘cold’ in current 
climate. 
Different models in the ensemble project a wide range of change s in the mean annual rainfall averaged 
over the country, from ‐41 to +48% by the 2090s – but mor e models show decreases. It is  difficult to draw 
robust conclusions on changes in precipitation; however, it is likely that a greater proportion of precipitation 
will occur in heavy rainfall events.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 47 
	
	C
Description of baseline scenario.  If the present trend persists, it is expected that in years to  c o m e  
vulnerability will continue to increase. Indeed, urban populati on will continue to grow at a fast rate. Today, 
urban growth is estimated to 3.9% per year, which represents ov er 35 years 16.7 million new urban 
dwellers, and over 2. 3 million new houses. 
If urban planning still fails to integrate – by lack of knowled ge or adequate tools – flood management 
concepts, the number of people exposed to flood risk will conti nue to increase faster than population 
growth. In this case, it is likely that public investment in dr ainage infrastructure will be lagging behind urban 
expansion leaving most vulnerable  people in a situation of extr eme vulnerability and dramatic sanitary living 
conditions. 
Project objectives against baseline.  Against this baseline scenario of increasing urban vulnerabili ty in 
Senegal and potential risk elevat ion due to climate change, the  general objective of the project will be to 
initiate the shift from an infrastructure-oriented policy to an  integrated and transversal national policy of 
flood risk management, with expected benefits tackling the prob lem from a two-fold perspective: (i) optimize 
investment for resilience in already urbanized areas and (ii) t ake preventive action to include flood-risk in 
urban planning.  
Derived from the priorities set by the Sendai Framework for Act ion, the specific objectives of the project 
are (i) to improve knowledge on floods and flood-prone zones, ( ii) to optimize investment in risk mitigation 
measures, (iii) to upgrade monitoring and response for better r isk prevention and (iv) to strengthen flood 
risk governance.  
C.3. Project Description  
Following the priorities set out in the Sendai Framework for Ac tion, the project is structured in four 
components: (i) knowi ng the risk, (ii) reducing the risk, (iii)  preventing the risk and  (iv) governance. Each 
component is described in the present section. 
COMPONENT 1 – KNOWING THE RISK 
This component of the project will aim at enhancing and making available knowledge about flood risk in 
Senegal. The objective is to make a map of flood risk in Senega l, at national scale and at local scale in six 
priority urban areas – those most affected by the floods. The k nowledge thus produced can then be 
disseminated, both towards institutions involved in flood manag ement policy-making as well as towards 
affected populations in order to create a real risk culture. 
Sub-component 1.1 – Flood risk mapping . A comprehensive Geographic Information System (GIS) on 
flood risk will be developed to gather information for adequate  policy-making, land planning and 
infrastructure design. The GIS will present information at the national scale and – to much finer details – at 
the local scale, for six pilo t urban areas to be determined. 
First, based on the compilation of the existing information and  on-going studies, a digital terrain model 
(DTM) with a 50 meters mesh covering the national territory wil l be developed. This basic topographical 
data will be processed to establis h a precise knowledge of wate rsheds and their dynamics. This DTM will 
be the background map of the flood-risk GIS, which would be com posed of two main layers: 
• Hazard layer. This layer will pinpoint flood-prone areas for ten-year floods (standard design floods 
protection infrastructure in Senegal) and hundred-year floods ( extreme hazard). This layer will also 
represent data on watershed limits, aquifers, large linear infr astructure that may alter the response 
of hydraulic flows, the maximum flow for natural and artificial  outlets. 
• Vulnerability layer. This laye r will represent the urban fabr ic, highlighting sensitive areas and 
buildings (hospitals, schools, public places such as bus statio ns or mosques), the population 
density, business and industrial zones, and an estimation of th e risk to human lives and economic 
assets.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 47 
	
	C
The combination of those two layers within the GIS will allow f or precise knowledge and localization of 
flood-risk on the Senegalese territory. This nationwide mapping  will be the base for the identification of six 
pilot urban areas where a similar but more detailed risk mappin g (scale of 1:5000) could be achieved. 
These urban areas would be selected according to their exposure  to flood risk and representativeness with 
respect to different types of floods affecting Senegal. Those p ilot areas will be chosen from the 25 urban 
localities pre-identified by the Government of Senegal in the f ramework of the National Program for 
Development and Restructuring of Flood Zones ( Programme National d’Aménagement et de 
Restructuration des Zones Inondables – PNARZI ). Given the stakes in the Dakar region, there is no doubt 
that it would be among the six pilot areas. 
The information gathered in the GIS will need to be regularly u pdated to take into account the ever-
changing situation of flood risk, particularly rapid evolution of vulnerability in the context of rapid 
urbanization and changing hazard due to climate change. The adm inistration, maintenance and update of 
the GIS will be implemented by the Ministry of Urban Renewal, H ousing and Living Environment ( Ministère 
du Renouveau Urbain, de l’Habitat et du Cadre de Vie – MRUHCV ). It will also ensure it s availability to all 
stakeholders (ministries, local governments, public institution s, firefighter brigades, consulting firms, 
universities, associations, etc.). The equipment and training f or administrators will be provided under the 
project. 
In localities where hydrological  and meteorological historical data is insufficient for the assessment of flood 
hazard, the project could include the supply and installation o f basic measuring equipment (rain gauges, 
staff gauges or piezometers). The new equipment will be used to  gather the minimal historical data 
necessary for the pr oper understan ding of the flood hazard. 
Outputs: Flood risk GIS 
Sub-component 1.2 – Flood risk awareness.  Taking advantage of the data made available through the 
flood risk GIS developed in Sub-component 1.1, communication ac tivities – both institutional and towards 
the general public – will be funded under the project. A commun ication plan for both aspects would be 
developed, validated and implemented. 
As for corporate communications, the objective will be to defin e relevant indicators to serve as a decision-
making tool in the development of public policies to fight agai nst floods. These indicators could, among 
other things, include: the ratio of total population subject to  decadal and centennial floods ratio of total 
economic activities subject to decadal and centennial floods. 
Awareness- campaigns for the gen eral public will also be arrang ed for the most vulnerable populations in 
order to create a genuine risk culture in the most flood-prone areas. Indeed, appropriate behavior on the 
part of the people concerned is the guarantee of a better prepa ration and a significant reduction of negative 
impacts of flooding. Besides the intrinsic hazard of water, ign orance of the risk may have a negative impact 
on the protection capacity – including inadequacy of buildings – or a more active vulnerability resulting in 
risk behaviors, conscious or unconscious. 
Outputs: Awareness-raising campaign 
COMPONENT 2 – REDUCING THE RISK  
This component aims at reducing the vulnerability of the territ ory by (i) making recommendations to improve 
the resilience of urban areas, ( ii) optimizing the design of dr ainage infrastructure and (iii) developing “no 
regrets” infrastructure in a particularly vulnerable area of th e outskirts of Dakar ( Pikine Irrégulier Sud ). 
Sub-component 2.1 – Structural and non-stru ctural measures for flood risk reduction. Based on the 
information compiled in the GIS and additional field surveys, t he activities under this sub-component will 
aim at providing the Senegalese authorities with a collection o f measures, other than large drainage 
infrastructure, that can be impl emented by public or private st akeholders to mitigate flood risk in most 
vulnerable urban areas.


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 47 
	
	C
First, a thorough analysis of urban planning practices in force  in Senegal would make recommendations to 
improve the consideration of fl ood risk in the future urban fab ric. Particular attention would be paid to the 
protection against the installation of habitat in areas identif ied as flood-prone, in particular through the 
installation of public facilitie s that are not affected by floo ds (for instance parks, sports fields or ponds). 
At the plot level, and for each of the major types of risk area s, a diagnostic will be led and recommendations 
will be issued as to structural and non-structural measures tha t can be implemented locally by residents, 
businesses or public instituti ons to reduce vulnerability. Thes e would include both measures for the existing 
urban fabric (for instance threshold increase, cofferdams or sm all pumping stations) as well as for future 
urban developments (for instanc e regulations for new buildings materials and techniques). 
These recommendations in terms o f urban planning as well as str uctural and non-struct ural measures will 
be accompanied by a regulatory and economic analysis to identif y any existing barriers to their 
implementation and steps required for their effective implement ation: changes in legal framework, 
economic incentives…   
Outputs: Regulatory recommendations – Guidebooks – Proposition of incentives 
Sub-component 2.2 – Tools for adequate investment in flood management infrastructure . 
Topographical, hydrological and meteorological data collected i n the framework of component 1 will be 
processed to develop the information needed to enhance effectiv eness of public expenditure in drainage 
infrastructure. This information will be made broadly available  to policy makers, project sponsors and 
engineers to ensure maximum app ropriation and diffusion of good  practices.  
For each watershed, the appropriate tools will be developed for  large scale risk-mitigation infrastructure 
design. Studies under this co mponent will thus determine adapte d design storm patterns, rainfall-flow and 
rainfall-runoff models. Those tools need to be updated on a reg ular basis to take into account new hydro-
meteorological data and topographical data on urban areas, whic h tend to change rapidly. Protocols and 
trainings will be set up to ensur e that responsible entity will  be capacitated for this task. 
Information collected in the GIS will be used for setting adequ ate priority, for each watershed, to investment 
in large-scale drainage infrastructure. This information will b e used to set up a strategic planning for 
investment at national scale, and will be used on a smaller sca le by entities responsible for the elaboration 
of local drainage master plans. 
Outputs; Investment plans – Models – Protocol s – Training programs – Communication program 
Sub-component 2.3 – Drainage and sanitation infrastructure in Pikine Irrégulier Sud . This sub-
component will include investment  in infrastructure aiming at b uilding resilience to flood risk of Pikine 
Irrégulier Sud, one of the most v ulnerable areas of the suburbs  of Dakar, through a “no-regret” approach 
to adaptation to climate change. 
In terms of storm water drainage infrastructure, and in accorda nce with the principles identified in the 
Drainage Master Plan for Pikine and Guediawaye (elaborated in t he framework of t he PROGEP, financed 
by the World Bank), the wo rks planned  consist of: 
‐ The transformation of depressions and existing ponds in storm basins that will regulate the flow 
during rain events, thus significantly reducing the required si zing of spillways. In total, the project 
involves the construction of 18 pools of rainwater retention ba sins covering a surface of nearly 30 
hectares. In accordance with the orientations of the Drainage M aster Plan, these ponds should be 
able to integrate into the urban space, while addressing with f ences the concerns of the people 
about the risk of drowning due to t he size and dept h of these w orks;


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 47 
	
	C
‐ The installation of gravity collectors to let the rainwater fl ow to the outlets in the sea and the 
adjacent forest area. These collectors, installed on a draining  bed and equipped with weep holes 
at regular intervals in the ra ft, are also designed to reduce t he water table’s piezometrical level. In 
total, 20 km underground collectors will be built. 
This infrastructure is designed for a 10-year return period, wh ich corresponds to standards for drainage 
infrastructure. In the local c ontext of extreme vulnerability, this infrastructure will bring adequate protection 
against storm events. The drainage system was also designed to be resilient to climate change as the 
outlet was placed to take into account sea level rise. This sub -component will also tackle the problem of 
wastewater intrusion in drainage infrastructure through install ation of sewer pipes along the drainage linear 
infrastructure that will be conne cted to the Hann bay wastewate r treatment plant. 
This sub-component will also include Information, Education and  Communication (IEC) services aimed at 
Pikine Irrégulier Sud populations , that will aim at (i) ensurin g acceptance and proper usage of the 
infrastructure by the population and (ii) adapting retention po nds to enhance their integration in the urban 
structure. 
Finally, this sub-component will include the displacement and r esettlement of the people installed in flood-
prone area that cannot be protected by the drainage infrastruct ure. Although the drainage infrastructure 
has been designed to minimize impacts on people, the Resettleme nt Action Plan (RAP) will structure the 
urban fabric to drastically redu ce vulnerability. The number of  People Affected by the Project is estimated 
to be 700 during the elaboration of the RAP, however as the urb an fabric is rapidly changing in Pikine 
Irrégulier Sud, this number migh t be slightly revised during ac tual resettlement. 
Outputs; Drainage infrastructure – Sanitation infrastructure – Training programs – IEC campaign 
COMPONENT 3 – PREVENTING THE RISK  
This component aims at enhancing risk detection and prevention with a focus on drainage infrastructure 
management, with the objective to  maximize its efficiency. 
Sub-component 3.1 – Real-time hazard monitoring in Greater Dakar.  Rain events in Dakar and its 
suburbs are characterized by a s trong spatial and temporal vari ability. Moreover, flood risk in this area is 
strongly linked to the piezometri cal level of the water table w hich has a direct impact on the runoff 
coefficient. This subcomponent of the project will include supp ly and installation in Greater Dakar of precise 
meteorological and hydrological monitoring tools to ensure real -time knowledge of local climatic 
phenomena and quick response capacity.  
A polarization diversity X-band radar antenna (frequency range 8.0 to 12.0 GHz), less expensive and bulky 
than standard equipment will be in stalled. This meteorological radar will measure precisely located 
accumulated rainfall on an 80 kilometers range, covering most o f the Cap Vert peninsula. Coupled through 
an operating software with a network of rain gauges – new or ex isting –this new equipment will give precise 
and real-time knowledge of rain events, and predict heavy rainf alls with two or three hours anticipation. 
According to existing and operational piezometers in Greater Da kar, some equipment will be rehabilitated, 
replaced or extended to extend knowledge of the water table. Wa ter quality will also be tackled to address 
the health issues caused by stagnant flood water. 
This Sub-component will also provide inclusive support to the N ational Agency for Civil Aviation and 
Meteorology ( Agence Nationale de l’Aviation Civile et de la Météorologie – ANACIM ) and Directorate for 
Water Resource Planning and Management ( Direction de la Gestion et la Planification des Ressources en 
Eau – DGPRE ) to enhance their capacities to forecast flood risk and ensure  sustainable use of the new 
equipment. 
Outputs: Monitoring equipment and software – Forecasting models – Training programs


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 47 
	
	C
Sub-component 3.2 – Protocols for infrastructure management under extreme rain events.  The 
activities financed under this sub-component will aim at increa se preparedness of the drainage 
infrastructure national operator – the Senegal National Office for Sanitation ( Office National de 
l’Assainissement du Sénégal, ONAS ) through curative and preventive action. 
Based on a precise database of existing drainage infrastructure  which is currently being developed in the 
framework of the PROGEP, and their hydraulic behavior in variou s rain events, the first activity under this 
sub-component will be to identify bottlenecks and weak points o f the systems. Derived from this 
identification, preventive acti ons to be implemented by the ope rator in the lead-time in case of predicted 
heavy rainfall will be determined. For instance, protocols for drainage infrastructure management or flood 
prevention might include: empty r etention basins, reinforce pum ping stations and close down roads and 
streets.  
Capacity building to help the ONAS to acquire the skills necess ary to take the central role in the rainwater 
drainage infrastructure will also  be financed under this sub-co mponent. 
Outputs; Protocols – Training programs 
COMPONENT 4 – GOVERNANCE  
Transversal governance is a disti nctive characteristic of integ rated flood management. This component 
aims at helping the Government of Senegal maintain an in-depth communication between all stakeholders 
of flood management policy-maki ng and its implementation. 
Sub-component 4.1 – Support to integrated flood risk management policy-making.  The project will 
bring support to MRUHCV in its role as lead institution in floo d management policy-making and coordination 
of all the institutions involved in flood management. More prec isely, this support to policy making and 
coordination will include (i) di alogue and cooperation between all institutions involved in the project 
implementation scheme to ensure maximum efficiency, coordinatio n and consistency, (ii) a high level policy 
panel that could be led by the Prime Minister’s office and (iii ) general communication and participative fora 
with general public, academia and civil society 
Outputs; Decisions of the Technical Committee – Decisions of the CNGI – Communication strategy 
Sub-component 4.2 – Institutional consolidation and capacity building. The project will include a 
participative detailed diagnosti c of the Senegalese institution al framework for integrated urban flood 
management. This diagnostic will conclude in recommendation in terms of responsibilities of different 
institutions, coordination betwee n various institutions and cap acity reinforcement that might be needed.  
Based on the previously mentioned diagnostic, a specific capaci ty building program will be implemented in 
relation to integrated flood management policy-making. The prop osed strategy aims at increasing 
Senegal’s resilience to flood disa ster risk by combining hard-e ngineered solutions to reduce vulnerability 
and non-structural policies and measures to better monitor and respond to flood events.  
Outputs: Institutional diagnostic – Training program 
Sub-component 4.3 – Project Management Assistance.  A project management assistance team will be 
hired to support implementation of the project by MRUHCV and ot her institutions (see section C.7 for 
details on implementation arrang ement). It will bring support f or precise definition of needs, procurement, 
follow-up of consultant works and validation. 
Outputs: Tender documents – Evaluati on reports – Validation of products 
C.4. Background Information on Project Sponsor


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 47 
	
	C
The Project Sponsor will be the Government of Senegal. The Gove rnment of Senegal will support the 
project through partial financi ng of Sub-component 1.3, with a contribution of 6 M€ from the State budget. 
As a consequence, the Ministry o f Finance will be involved for channeling the funds. 
The Project Sponsor will distri bute an delegate the implementat ion of the project to five executing entities, 
while overall coordination will also be ensured (cf.infra) : 
‐ MRUHCV: The Ministry of Urban Renewal, Housing and Living Envir onment ( Ministère du 
Renouveau Urbain, de l’Habitat et du Cadre de Vie – MRUHCV ) is responsible for the coordination 
of all stakeholders involved i n flood management, and has been leader in the advocacy for a shift 
in policy towards an integrated approach.  
‐ ONAS: The Senegal National Office for Sanitation ( Office National de l’Assainissement du Sénégal 
– ONAS ) is the national public institution in charge of urban wastewa ter and storm water collection 
and treatment. In late 2013, ONAS  has been appointed as the lead entity in charge of drainage 
infrastructure, from constructi on works to operation and mainte nance.  
‐ ANACIM: The National Agency for Civil Aviation and Meteorology (Agence Nationale de l’Aviation 
Civile et de la Météorologie – ANACIM ) is the public agency in charge of producing and processing 
meteorological data as well as i ts publication. It is also in c harge of civil aviation.  
‐ DGPRE: The Directorate for Wate r Resource Planning and Manageme nt (Direction de la Gestion 
et la Planification des Ressources en Eau – DGPRE ) is part of the Ministry of Water and Sanitation 
(Ministère de l’Hydraulique et de l’Assainissement – MHA) . It is in charge of the National 
Hydrological System and monitors  groundwater resources as well as rivers.  
‐ APIX: The Investment Promotion and Large Projects Agency ( Agence de Promotion de 
l’Investissement et des Grands Travaux – APIX ) is a public company that is in charge of 
implementing, in the name of the Government of Senegal, major i nvestment project, especially in 
the framework of public-private partnerships. The involvement o f APIX in the project is the 
consequence of the project’s hist ory, as the restructuration of  Pikine Irrégulier S ud was originally 
a mitigation measure from the Dakar-Diamniadio Highway project.  At that date, and in response to 
flood crisis, numerous projects were launched to deal with the emergency investment plan in the 
suburbs of Dakar, not necessarily though ONAS.  
C.5. Market Overview 
Not applicable. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  
Permits will be obtained, if necessary, by the project sponsors  as public entities according to Senegalese 
regulation. AFD-financed projects are not subject to taxes in S enegal. Foreign exchange induces no risk 
as exchange rate between euros and CFA franc is fixed. Insuranc e policies are not standard practice in 
Senegal for drainage infrastructure. 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
Executing entities. Each executing entity will be in c harge of the implementation o f part of the project 
according to its prerogatives. The table below illustrates the implication of each executing agency on the 
sub-components of the project. 
Executing Entity Sub-components Funding (M€) Indicative total amount 
(M€) GCF AFD GoS 
MRUHCV 1.1 - 1.2 - 2.1 - 2.2 
4.1 - 4.2 - 4.3 11,7 - - 11,7 
ONAS 2.3 - 3.2 1,2 11 - 12,2


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 47 
	
	C
ANACIM 3.1 1,1 - - 1,1 
DGPRE 3.1 1 - - 1 
APIX 2.3 - 39 6 45 
A strong coordination between thes e five executing entities wil l be required to ensure an effective project 
implementation. Each entity will have a leading role on the imp lementation of activities as per the 
component breakdown presented above while the overall coordinat ion will be ensured through four 
mechanisms to maximize interactio ns between the entities as muc h as possible: 
-  Project Management Assistance (PMA - operational level): a d edicated team will be recruited to assist 
the MRUHCV, Lead Coordinating Institution, in the management of  the project and appropriate 
coordination with the executing entities and other stakeholders . This team will bring a day-to-day support 
to the five entities, facilitat e communication and anticipate p otential issues.  
- Project Coordinator (oversight):  the Project Coordinator, des ignated within MRUHC V, will act as focal 
point and work with the Project Management Assistance team to e nsure consistency of actions.  
- Project Technical Committee (technical level): the Project Te chnical Committee (PTC), a quarterly 
meeting gathering the five executing entities headed by a MRUHC V’s representant, will  represent an 
opportunity to discuss transvers al technical issues and enable a dialogue between the entities involved in 
the project implementation. 
- Steering Committee (strategic level): the Steering Committee will be in charge of the strategic supervision 
of the project to ensure a global  coordination between the proj ect implementation by the executing entities 
and the guidelines and priorities of the government in terms of  integrated flood management.   
Further details on both commi ttees are provided below.   
Project Technical Committee. The PTC will be composed by the reunion of all executing agenci es. It will 
gather on a quarterly basis to monitor progress of the project and ensure coordination between all executing 
agencies. MRUHCV, as the Lead Coor dinating Institution, will ap point a focal point to represent the Project 
Technical Committee. The focal point, with the support of the P roject Management Assistance, will 
coordinate the Project Technical Committee and participate in t he Steering Committee. 
Steering Committee. In the perspective of ensuring national ownership of the projec t, no specific steering 
committee shall be set up. Instead, the existing National Commi ttee for Flood Management ( Comité 
National de Gestion des Inondations – CNGI ) will act as steering committ ee for the project. The CNGI 
gathers all institutions involved directly or indirectly to flo od management and impacts mitigation. Presently, 
the CNGI has a focus on crisis m anagement. The project will bri ng more integrated flood management 
aspect to its consideration 
Link with regional and local level. The CNGI is also linked with Regional Committees for Flood 
Management ( Comités Régionaux de Gestion des Inondations – CRGI ) and Departmental Committees for 
Flood Management ( Comités Départementaux de Gestion des Inondations – CDGI ). This connection will 
ensure that the results of the project will trickle down to the  local level on the whole national territory. 
Contractual framework. A loan agreement has been signed on December 2nd 2015 by AFD and the 
Government of Senegal and part of the amount will be on-granted  to ONAS for the activities under its 
responsibility. APIX already has a mandate to lead the drainage  works component and resettlement 
through a decree from the Prime Minister of Senegal. 
The financial agreement regarding the GCF grant will also be si gned by AFD and the Government of 
Senegal and on-granted. 
Procurement plan. Except for the resettlement pl an that will be implemented direc tly by the Senegalese 
authorities, the project will be implemented through works, sup ply and services contracts procured by the


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 47 
	
	C
executing agencies. The procurement plan is designed to minimiz e the number of contracts that have to 
be procured. The following table provides an overview of the pr oject procurement plan. 
Output Type of Contracts # of 
contracts 
Output 1. The knowledge o f flood risk in Senegal has been 
enhanced, mapped, and made publicly available Services 1 
Output 2. Risk has been reduc ed in Pikine Irrégulier Sud 
and tools are available to reduce  the risk at national scale in  
a cost-effective and efficient manner Works  
Services 
Direct implementation 2 
2 
N/A 
Output 3. Hazard monitoring and response have been 
developed to enhance existing drainage infrastructure 
operations Supply  
Services 2 
1 
Output 4. Stakeholders of flood management policy-making 
work together in an efficien t and coordinated manner Project consultants 1 
Organogram.  The organogram hereafter descri bes the implementation arrangem ent as described in this 
section.  
The financial management of the project will rely on a special project account that will be held by the 
Ministry of Finance. The anticipated disbursement method will b e via renewable advances, which is a 
classic approach for capital m anagement on AFD-financed project  with established procedures and 
mecanisms for both disbursement of advances and payment of invo ices.  
Disbursement process. MRUHCV, a s the lead coordinating institut ion, will prepare in coordination with the 
other executing entities a deta iled procurement plan that will provide a tentative disbursement schedule 
with an approximate accuracy at the quarter level. Based on thi s document, the MRUHCV will be able to 
transfer a request for funds to the Ministry of Finances when a  disbursement is required. After analysis and 
validation by the Ministry of Finances, this request is transfe rred to AFD for control and final approval. As 
a last step, an official letter from AFD is sent to the Ministr y of Finances to inform that the disbursement 
has been processed. The Ministry  of Finance will be in charge o f the special project account and represent 
the key entity, in coordination with AFD, to manage the effecti ve disbursement of funds from the GCF grant. 
A couple of management measures are usually set up to ensure th e accuracy of this process: a monthly 
bank statement should be provided  to the MRUHCV by the Ministry  of Finances to inform on the available 
balance on the project account; and the detailed procurement pl an will be regularly reviewed and updated 
by the MRUHCV with the assistance of the PMA to take into accou nt any change on the project schedule.
Payment process. Two payment methods can be considered for paym ent of invoices: (i) refinancing of 
expenses paid by the beneficiary and (ii) payment via renewable  advances. In the first scenario, the Ministry 
of Finance will refinance an expens e directly paid by an execut ing entity after reception of the payment 
certificate and supporting doc uments. All supporting documents will also be sent to AFD to ensure an 
appropriate supervision of funds f low. This payment scheme coul d be used for specific provisions planned 
in the early stage of the projec t to ensure implementation read iness. 
Under the second scenario: when an invoice is to be paid, the e xecuting entity concerned will transfer this 
invoice to the Ministry of Finances for treatment and payment, with a copy sent to AFD for supervision. 
Annual financial audits will be carried out by independent audi ting firms and the AFD approval on the 
auditing reports will be a conditi on precedent to the next disb ursement. 
The financial management of the project, including disbursement  methods (number of occurrences per 
year and maximum amount to be requested) and auditing will be d etailed in the financing agreement.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING  PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 47 
	
	C


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 47 
	
	C 
C.8.  Timetable of Project Implementation  
 
  2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
Task Q01 Q02 Q03 Q04 Q05 Q06 Q07 Q08 Q09 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q2 0 
Output 1. The knowledge of fl ood risk in Senegal has been enhan ced, mapped, and made publicly 
available                                         
Activity 1.1. X X X X X X X X X X                     
Mapping flood risk at national and local levels 
Activity 1.2.       X X X X   X   X   X   X   X   X   
Population and institutio ns awareness raising 
Output 2. Risk has been reduced in Pikine Irrégulier Sud and to ols are available to reduce the risk at 
national scale in a cost-eff ective and efficient manner                                         
Activity 2.1.               X X X X X X X X           
Recommendations for structural and non-structural measures 
Activity 2.2.               X X X X X X X X           
Processing flood risk information for infrastructure planning and design 
Activity 2.3. X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X       
Construction of drainage and sanitation in frastructure in Pikine Irrégulier Sud 
Output 3. Hazard monitoring and response have been developed to  enhance existing drainage 
infrastructure operations                                         
Activity 3.1.   X X X X X X X X X X                   
Setting-up real time hazard monitoring in Greater Dakar 
Activity 3.2.   X X X X X X X X X X                   
Elaboration of operational protocols and guidelines for preventive action on drainage infrastructure 
Output 4. Stakeholders of flood  management policy-making work t ogether in an efficient and 
coordinated manner                                         
Activity 4.1.   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Support to coordination and policy-making 
Activity 4.2.       X X X X X X X X X X X             
Institutional consolidation and capacity building 
Activity 4.3. 
  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Supporting executing entities for project implementation


---
*Page 25*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 47 
 
	
	
	D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
The GCF contribution is critical for the project in order to fi nance the operationalization and strengthening of an integrated  
flood management policy at nati onal scale. If hard-engineered v ulnerability reduction is som etimes easier to implement 
from a political point of view and social infrastructure invest ment usually justifies State indebtedness, paradigm shift in 
policy making is more difficult to achieve.  
The grant will provide a strong incentive to go beyond current policy of reduction of vulnerability to flood risk. The GCF 
grant is expected to drastically  speed-up the process and the s et-up a comprehensive framework for integrated flood 
management. The implementation of the GCF grant by MRUHCV will also be instrumental in increasing the institution’s 
legitimacy and comfort its posit ion as the main policy maker on  flood management at the national scale. 
Though Senegal’s indebtedness is deemed sustainable by the IMF since debt relief plans of mid-2000, investment linked 
to climate change adaptation is evaluated in Senegal’s INDC at 14 558 million USD, which includes 12 725 million USD 
from external indebtedness. The concessionality of GCF funding,  in the form of a grant, will permit better efficiency of 
future investment in flood risk mitigation. 
D.2. Exit Strategy  
Project outcome’s sustainability will be sought through three l ines of work: (i) appropriation of integrated flood 
management principles, (ii) sustainable financial resources and  (iii) capacity building. 
Country ownership. The project is fully owned by the Government of Senegal and der ives from needs that have been 
assessed by actors of  the sector. The project document has been  shared with all executing entities, and more broadly 
with all stakeholders involved in flood management in Senegal. During the implementation of the project, those 
discussions will continue in the framework of sessions of the C NGI that will serve as steering committee of the project. 
The sessions of the CNGI will ben efit from inputs from sub-comp onent 4.2 of the project. 
All those actions aim at ensuring mainstreaming of the concepts  of integrated flood management in the policy-making 
process in Senegal, to ensure sustainable outcomes of the proje ct. Valorization of the project outcomes is also of utmost 
importance as higher service quality and effective protection a gainst flood disasters will be a strong motivation for the 
Government of Senegal to provide sufficient funding for the inv estment and operation in these fields. 
Sustainable financial resources.  Drainage infrastructures and hydro-meteorological services fal l under government’s 
responsibility. Public agencies are usually in charge of servic e provision. As these services are non-commercial public 
services, subsidies are (and will remain) the main financing so urces, both for investment and operation. The main issue 
is to clearly identify the recurring financial resources needs to comply with standard in service delivery and ensure that 
related resources are secured ov er the years for the service op erator.  
The first disbursement of the AFD loan will be conditioned to t he signing of a performance contract between the Republic 
of Senegal and ONAS allowing adequate financial resource for ma intenance of drainage infrastructure on the 2015-
2018-period. Both financial agreements for AFD loan and GCF gra nt will include a commitment by the Government of 
Senegal to allocate annually sufficient funds in the State budg et to provide for the needs of (i) maintenance of the 
drainage infrastructure and (ii) the integrated flood managemen t system. 
Capacity building.  Capacity building is a key aspect to address the issue of sust ainability for integrated urban flood 
management. Most executing agencies of the project will benefit  from capacity building ac tions that will ensure that 
those entities internalize the pr ocesses initiated by the proje ct. 
‐ MRUHCV: MRUHCV will be the main b eneficiary of c apacity buildi ng under the project, as the central entity in 
charge of policy making for flood management. Sub-components 4. 1 and 4.2 will include trainings for MRUHCV 
personnel to enhance the institut ion’s capability to implement the policy-making process and reinforce the 
leadership of the ministry in terms of flood risk management. S ub-component 1.1 will ensure that MRUHCV 
personnel are trained in adminis tration and update of the flood -risk GIS as well as its publicity.


---
*Page 26*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 47 
 
	
	
	D
‐ ONAS: ONAS, as the central operator for drainage infrastructur e, will also benefit from capacity building actions. 
Especially, under sub-component 2.3 financed by AFD, ONAS perso nnel will be trained in all tasks relative to 
drainage infrastructure construction and operations: technical training sessions for maintenance of drainage 
infrastructure, asset management and hydraulic modeling. Suppor t for the first maintena nce contract will also 
be provided. Sub-component 3.2, financed by GCF, will specifica lly include training for the application of new 
protocols in terms of drainage infrastructure operations in pre vention of major rain events. The capacity building 
activities financed by GCF and AFD will strengthen ONAS’ role a nd skills in drainage management and 
operations not only in regular mai ntenance but also in the cont ext of flood management and prevention.   
‐ ANACIM and DGPRE: Both institut ions, respectively in charge of  meteorological and hydrological data 
acquisition and monitoring, will benefit from technical capacit y building to ensure operation and maintenance of 
all new equipment to be set-up in the framework of the project.  Specifically, ANACIM will benefit from (i) 
enhancement of the meteorological model used for forecasting, g oing to finer detail at local scale, (ii) 
modernization of measuring and data collection capacities. DGPR E personnel will be trained in terms of 
hydrological monitoring of the main rivers of Senegal but also potentiometric level measurement in aquifer 
systems where this element is critical for vulnerability assess ment and tidal gauges operation for coastal zones.
‐ APIX: APIX is the only executing entity that will not benefit from specific capacity buildi ng, as its role is confined 
to the drainage infrastructure construction, and that its impli cation in the sector is not structural. However, 
specific support will be brough t in terms of social and environ mental impact management.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 47 
 
	
	E
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project to cont ribute to the achievement of th e Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
The project will deliver signifi cant impacts regarding climate change adaptation, reducing vulnerability to floods caused 
by expected increase in heavy ra infall events and elevation of sea-level.  
Infrastructure for reduced vulnerability in existing cities.  Activities in Pikine Irrégulie r Sud will ultimately affect the  
vulnerability of almost 300 000 people living in poor neighborh oods of the suburbs of Dakar, protecting most of them 
from the effects of heavy rainfalls and resettling others in a safe and equipped site. The project will also have a high 
impact on infrastructure planning for the rest of urban centers  in Senegal. Data production, infrastructure design criteria, 
weather monitoring and will also be instrumental in sizing and operating future drainage infrastructure, or other climate-
sensitive infrastructure. 
Flood-resilient urban planning in new developments.  Flood risk assessment for the whole territory and specific 
urban centers will be achieved and translated into the urban de velopment plans, making sure that most vulnerable 
sites are declared no-build areas, and are dedicated flood-resi lient land use. For areas that are exposed to moderate 
flood risk, the project will also ensure that recommendations a nd incentives are available to make housing more 
resilient. The ultimate impact of these measures is to stop the  present surge in vulnerability of Senegalese urban 
territory. 
Flood risk awareness-raising. Developing a culture of risk management within public instituti ons and vulnerable 
population has a potentially significant impact on vulnerabilit y, reducing casualties, health impacts, decreasing recovery 
time after flood events. 
Climate change adaptation of infrastructure.  The effects of climate change in the design of the drainage 
infrastructure financed under sub-component 2.3 depends on the level of certainty of these effects: 
‐ On the one hand, the effects of climate change on the sea-leve l rise – based on global data – are rather certain 
and were taken into account in the design of the infrastructure . Indeed, the outlet was placed to take into account 
a 50 cm sea-level rise, while t he hydraulic design ensures grav itational flow of collected storm water; 
‐ On the other hand, the effects on  climate change on rain inten sity and frequency – based  on local data – is poorly 
documented. The results of General  Circulation Models, describe d in section C.2., bring little information useful for 
infrastructure design. One of the outputs of the project will b e to build knowledge, especially in Greater Dakar, on 
the historical evolution of rai nfall and so will bring more inp ut for climate models. As a re sult, the standard 10-year 
flood design has been chosen. 
However, the principles of int egrated flood management are base d on the assumption that inf rastructural response to 
floods is necessary but not sufficient. From this perspective, the 10-years return period design seems adequate for two 
reasons: 
‐ It will build resilience in a te rritory of extremely vulnerabi lity, where tremendous damages are caused by frequent 
rainfall - 1.5-year return period; 
‐ Whatever the design storm of the drainage infrastructure – and  i t s  c o s t  –  a  m a j o r  r e s i d u a l  r i s k  i s  s t i l l  t o  b e  
considered. The integrated flood management principles consider  the risk as a whole and, based on the increased 
knowledge of flood risk that will be produced, recommendations to deal with rain events that are not covered by the 
drainage infrastructure will be issued: structural and non-stru ctural measures for flood risk reduction, real-time 
hazard monitoring and response at the infrastructure management  level.	
	
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator


---
*Page 28*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 47 
 
	
	E
GCF 
core 
indicators Expected tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) Annual Not applicable. 
Lifetime Not applicable. 
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population (adaptation only) Total 2 200 000 people at national scale, of 
which 700 000 people live in Greater 
Dakar. 
Percentage 
(%) 16% of the country population, 37% of 
the Dakar Region population.  
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Expected strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems  for climate-responsive planning 
and development (PMF-A 5.0 and related indicator(s))  
 Expected increase in  generation and use of climate information  in decision-making (PMF-A 6.0 
and related indicator(s)) 
 Expected strengthening of adaptiv e capacity and reduced exposu re to climate risks (PMF-A 7.0 
and related indicator(s)) 
 Expected strengthening of awarene ss of climate threats and ris k-reduction processes (PMF-A 
8.0 and related indicator(s)) 
Methodology.  The analysis of the project is made for a 35-years horizon. Si nce the project focuses on the floods in 
cities, the geographical perimeter of the economic analysis inc lude twenty-five cities that were pre-identified by the 
Senegalese Government as the most  flood-prone. To integrate the  changes over the years, four different periods of 
nine years each were considered (years 0 to 8, 9 to 17, 18 to 2 6, 27 to 36). The consequences of the urban population 
growth were included from year 9. The consequences of climate c hange were included from year 18. 		
Potential damages were estimated  for four different return peri ods: 1.5 year (the estimated return period of the 2009 
flood), 10 years, 100 years and an infinite return period (for which it was assumed that the project would not avoid any 
damage).  
Flooded surface was derived from available data in Dakar (after  the floods in 2005 and 2009) and in Saint Louis – 
mainly digitalized maps. For other cities, the "flooded surface /urban surface" ratio calculated for Saint-Louis was used. 
The urban population growth rate was considered equal to 3.9% a nd constant over time. 
The indicators presented above correspond to an estimate of dir ect beneficiary of the flood risk management policy for 
a rain event with a return perio d of 100 years (extreme event).  
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed acti vity can catalyze impact beyon d a one-off project investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale)  
The local-scale knowledge base on flood risk that will be devel oped for six pilot urban areas in sub-component 1.1 
could be scaled-up at least to cov er the 25 urban centers that were identifies by the Government of Senegal as flood-
prone in the National Program for Development and Restructuring  of Flood Zones ( Programme National 
d’Aménagement et de Restructuration des Zones Inondables – PNARZI ). 
In addition, the project is highly replicable at the regional l evel. Setting up an integrated urban flood management in 
Senegal will be a milestone in the disaster risk management at the regional level and could be replicated in other 
countries, especially at the regional scale.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 29*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 47 
 
	
	E
Presently, the knowledge base on risks and vulnerability of the  Senegalese territory is insufficient and does not allow 
a rational risk management and investment planning. It is cruci al to build a real database going down to the local scale 
and based on homogeneous measurement and projection protocols t o promote an integrated flood management 
policy.  
Better knowledge of the effects of climate change, as well as t he vulnerability of the population to these effects, is a 
fundamental part of adaptation. One of the objectives of the pr esent project is to produce additional data and 
assessments at national and local scale. This knowledge will be  used for operational decision-making in the framework 
of the project but will also a llow better under standing of the flood risks dynamics linked to  climate change in the short, 
medium and long-term. GCF contribution to the project is thus a ll the more relevant as the production of climate 
information is greatly needed at national, but also regional (S enegal River Basin) and global level (IPCC) in order to 
increase climate change knowledge and climate-sensitive infrast ructure planning. 
The tools developed in the framework of the project will act as  the link between meteorological and hydrological data 
production – which can be used for other purposes – and flood r isk mitigation measures at local scale. For instance, 
the project will greatly benefit  from the implementation of the  Hydromet Program designed by the World Bank to support 
knowledge acquisition on meteor ological and hydrological phenom ena at national and regional level.  
Moreover,  an impact evaluation of the project after its completion would certainly be instrumental in diffusing lesson-
learnt from the implementation of an integrated flood managemen t policy in West Africa, in the perspective of large 
scale replication. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creat ion of an enabling environment  
The whole project is directed to the creation of an enabling en vironment for cost-efficient public expenditure in drainage 
infrastructure and flood risk management. For existing urban ce nters, the increase in knowledge about flood-risk, its 
precise location and potential impact, will have a positive eff ect on the benefits of investment in the sector as well as 
management of drainage infrastruc ture and eventually on protect ion of human life and economic assets on the territory. 
However, the main positive imp act will be linked to the limitat ion of increased vulnerabilit y when adequate integration 
of flood risk in urban planning will limit public and private i nvestment on risk-prone areas.  
By setting up clear priorities at the national scale, taking in to account projected urban development as well as impacts 
of climate change, the project will create an enabling environm ent for more efficient public investment in drainage 
infrastructure, which constitute s a major expense for the State  budget in the coming years. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
In terms of drainage infrastructu re, the project will help in c larifying the institutional fra mework and give to ONAS the 
means and resources to complete the missions it has newly been assigned as the lead institution in this sector. 
Whereas multiple actors were inv olved in the construction of dr ainage infrastructure, the road-map endorsed in 2013 
by the Government of Senegal appoints ONAS as the sole institut ion responsible for drainage works and maintenance. 
The project will seek complete im plication of ONAS in sub-compo nent 2.3 and will bring tec hnical support to ONAS to 
reinforce the institution’s ca pacity. In addition, the sectoria l dialogue initiated by AFD under the instruction of this proje ct 
will strengthen the overall framew ork for action in the field o f storm water management, which still requires 
consolidation. The condition precedents and commitments of the Government of Senegal linked to the AFD financial 
agreement will aim to ensure the financial resources dedicated to these activities. 
In terms of integrated flood management, the project will also support MRUHCV’s position as lead entity in the sector. 
The political dialogue that will be initiated in the framework of the project, in the Project Technical Committee or the 
Steering Committee (CNGI) will help to mainstream integrated fl ood management policy-making. 
Last but not least, in terms of urban planning, the project wil l also see to the provision of tools for climate-sensitive 
urban planning, most notably a t the local level, through integr ation ex-ante of flood risk as well as tools to enforce no-
build areas and reinforcement of r esilience in housing in areas  exposed to moderate risk.


---
*Page 30*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 47 
 
	
	E
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and ec onomic co-benefits, includin g gender-sensitive development impact  
Floods have direct impact on human life, health, economic asset s and activity, land value and social well-being4. 
Human life and health. Two-thirds of human life losses related to floods are caused by  drowning whereas other 
causes (trauma, electrocution, fire, poisoning) account for one  third casualties. Water-borne diseases tend to thrive 
during flood events, especially where sanitation and solid wast e management services are not efficiently provided to 
the population. Death caused by these diseases can occur after the event, thus are not recor ded as directly related to 
the disaster. Poor people are especially vulnerable to these ef fects of flood as they do not benefit from proper civil 
protection, health services and sanitation. For instance, flood s over the past few years have contributed to cholera 
resurgence in Senegal. Between 2005 and 2008, more than 35 000 people have been affected by the disease at 
national scale and almost 500 people died.  
Economic assets. Floods can have a devastating effect on housing and households,  as well as industrial assets and 
public infrastructure. Economic assets vulnerability might be d ifficult to measure and monitor, especially when the 
urban fabric is not stabilized. I n the Greater Dakar Metropolit an Area alone, exposure and vulnerability of economic 
assets is estimated to reach 44 billion USD5. The 2009 flood has generated the immobilization of 43% of the  public 
transportation vehicle fleet in Dakar. Approximately 50 bus con nections have been canceled for large periods of time 
due to heavy rain events. These public transport interruptions have caused an estimated loss of income of 2 billion 
FCFA. The project, through its vulnerability assessment will ev aluate the potential economic damages caused by floods 
in Senegalese cities. 	In addition to the reduction of damages, the project will also generate local jobs creation: for 
instance, GIS engineers are neede d for creating and updating th e GIS layers planned in Component 1.1. Component 
1.2 may also result in job creat ion to lead awareness campaign.  
Economic activity. In addition to damages to economic assets, floods tend to freez e economic activity by causing 
interruption in the supply chain due to transportation problems . Damages to stock and reduced customer visits and 
sales are also common effects.  
Land value.  Another positive economic impac t of flood vulnerability reduct ion is land value increase. Special attention 
needs to be paid to the beneficiary of this gain, in particular  in poor neighborhoods where land property might not be 
registered. APIX is currently w orking on those issues in the fr amework of the projects it is leading on urban 
restructuration. 
Social well-being.  Social benefits are significant, with improved health, safety and living conditions, especially for 
population in poor settlements, thus contribution to reduction of social inequalities.  In particular, women are the first to 
be affected by social damages cau sed by disasters as flood even ts. Reducing this risk sha ll contribute to bridging the 
gender gap. Moreover, floods also affect education, which still  represents a key sector for the achievement of 
development challenges in Senegal. In 2009, flood affected more  than 250 schools at the national scale. In the Thiaroye 
locality of Greater Dakar, 57 schools were flooded and 32 were used as shelters for i nhabitants of flooded houses.  
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country an d population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups  
																																																													
4 Most of specific data on Senegal are extracted from: Rapport d’évaluation des besoins post- catastrophe – Inondations urbaines à 
Dakar 2009, Government of Senegal and GFDRR, 2010,  
5 Source: Senegal Dashboard Natural Hazards, World Bank 
http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/clim ateportalb/home.cfm?page=countr y_profile&CCode=SEN&ThisTab=NaturalHazards


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 47 
 
	
	E
Senegal is still one of the least developed countries according  to the United Nations. However, poverty rate has 
decreased: the share of the popul ation living on less than 1.25  USD a day fell from 66% in 1991 to 34 % in 2011, 
though according to national standards, 46.7% of the population  was still under the poverty line in 20116. Senegal 
ranks 154 out of 186 in  the Human Development Index classificat ion. 
Floods affect the poorest residents, those who tend to live in underequipped and low-lying periurban areas. With the 
projected demographic growth of Senegal (44% of the population is under 15) and the mushrooming urban population, 
the social problems associated to floods is expected to increas e. 
Presently, rain events with a 1.5 year return period is causing  major damages. As climate change will most likely 
increase frequency of major rain events, increased impact on po orest population is to be expected. Sea-level elevation 
will also aggravate the problem in  coastal cities like Dakar or  Saint Louis.  
Feasibility of the project identifies the main gaps that need t o be bridged in order to build-up resilience to floods, in a 
context of climate variability: 
1. Knowledge of watershed and groundwater tables ; 
2. Knowledge of land use and  associated stakes ; 
3. Knowledge of rain events and hazards; 
4. Integration of flood risk a ssessment in urban planning; 
5. Drainage infrastructure design and planning; 6. Crisis and post-crisis management; 
7. Meteorological prevision; 
8. Inter-institutional cooperation. 
This analysis concurs with the 2011 WB-GFDRR Senegal country pr ofile identified the information and data 
gaps. First and foremost, many gaps exist in flood prevention and res ponse, including a lack of detailed forecasts and 
risk zone maps, and suitable flood vulnerability assessment met hods and data collection systems. Building such a 
system could offer guidance on co st-effective solutions for res ilience at the national level.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Financial needs. Needs for investment are high – the INDC that was submitted by the Government of Senegal in 
September 2015 evaluates the am ount of climate change adaptatio n investment in flood risk mitigation at 2.136 billion 
USD, of which 1.976 billion USD from external financing. For Gr eater Dakar alone, estim ates from the Drainage 
Masterplan show that at least 20 0 million USD worth of investme nt are required. Experience in detailed study for 
drainage in some area s of the suburbs of D akar shows that those  estimates are greatly underestimated. 
Senegal is still nowadays among t he list of the Least Developed  Countries according the United Nations, but on the 
middle-income countries according to World Bank criteria. After  retaking a promising trajectory in the first half of the 
2000s, Senegal's growth has been slowing down since 2006. In th e second part of the decade, growth was reduced 
to an annual average of 3.3 %, a pace barely above that which p revailed between 1980 and 1994 and that is equal to 
population growth. The multiple s hocks (energy, food, financial ) that the country has suffe red, and the limited number 
of growth sectors have prevent ed Senegal’s economy to take-off.  
There is therefore a strong financ ial need to comply with the c ommitments of the Senegalese Government in terms of 
investment in infrastructure. One of the objectives of the proj ect is to make sure that each investment is done with 
maximum efficiency and that every  other possible way to build-u p resilience to floods  have been tried. 
Social need. In Dakar and other urban center s, people most vulnerable to flo od risk are situated in new and/or informal 
urban areas where unplanned urban development have not taken in to account the hydrological dynamics of the terrain. 
They are usually poorest people who (i) have come from rural ar eas or (ii) were progressively pushed from old urban 
																																																													
6 Source: World Bank Development Indicators


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 47 
 
	
	E
centers to suburbs. With Senegalese cities growing at a rate of  3.9% per year, there is a significant social need to 
mainstream flood risk policies in urban management. 
Institutional need. Floods have been a major issue in Senegal since 2005 and after a phase of emergency response 
by the Government of Senegal – which involved many institutions  in the development of flood management measures, 
mainly through infrastructure co nstruction – the flood manageme nt sector is now at a turn ing point. Indeed, floods are 
now a consistent trend of recurri ng events, especially in urban  centers. There is thus a need to consolidate the 
institutional framework of fl ood-risk management in Senegal. 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ie s) ownership of, and capacity to impleme nt, a funded project 
E.5.1. Existence of a national c limate strategy and coherence w ith existing plans and polic ies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Senegal produced a National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA)  in 2006, which details the country’s priority 
adaptation responses. These include: reforestation, restoration  of mangrove swamps, biol ogical stabilization of sand 
dunes, physical protection against beach erosion and saline int rusion (using ditches, barriers, or other protection 
means), irrigation projects, restoration of soil fertility, wat er conservation methods, us e of alternative crops, and 
improved education on adaptation. 
In 2010, Senegal submitted its second national communication to  the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC). This communication defines an adaptati on strategy in order to foster a more 
comprehensive management of aspects related to climate change. This strategy is focused on three strategic areas: 
(i) development of knowledge on the effects of climate change a nd transfer of appropriate technologies, (ii) 
strengthening prevention and the fight against shocks and (iii)  promoting sustainable management of natural 
resources. The second area explic itly mentions recommendations for intervention in the housing sector: “ Investments 
to improve living conditions in areas often affected by flooding is important for vulnerable populations. Therefore, 
strengthening rainwater drainage networks, effective implement ation of urban plans and social housing strategies are 
recommended in order to protect people against the flood risks .” (Second national communication). The project 
addresses both strategic areas regarding development of knowled ge and strengthened prevention. In particular, the 
recommendation regarding investm ent is fully addressed, through  optimizing cost-effectiveness  
Senegal has also submitted in September 2015 its Intended Natio nally Determined Contributions (INDC) with the 
support of Germany (through GIZ) , France (through the INDC Faci lity) and the Global Environment Facility. French 
support was focused on the economic analysis of adaptation and mitigation measures of the  INDC, in order to ensure 
their integration in the national development plan ( Plan Sénégal Émergent ). Investment to reduce vulnerability to floods 
is one key feature of adaptation measures considered in the IND C – the amount of investment needed for the 2016-
2035 period is 2.136 billion USD, 1.976 billion USD being sough t from external financial resources. The project will 
directly contribute to these objectives (i) directly through su b-component 2.3 which includes investment in drainage 
infrastructure and (ii) indirectly though long-term measures th at will help increase cost-effi ciency of investment in 
infrastructure and lead to long term strategies for vulnerabili ty reduction. 
  
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entit ies and executing entities t o deliver  
Accredited entity.  AFD has been active in Senegal for more than 70 years and fina nces project in various sectors 
according to the priorities set by the Government of Senegal. I n the water, sanitation and drainage sector, AFD currently 
has a 70 M€ living portfolio, that should grow to 200 M€ before  the end of 2016. AFD leads, along with the European 
Union, the political dialogue between donors and the Government  in the urban water and sanitation sector.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 47 
 
	
	E
Drainage and integrated flood management one of four areas of o peration in AFD’s sectorial strategy. Across Sub-
Saharan Africa, AFD has a portfolio of more than one billion eu ros in drainage projects. AFD also has a long track 
record in assisting Trans-boundary Basin Organizations, such as  OMVS (Senegal), CICOS (Congo), ABN (Niger), with 
the aim of strengthening operational hydrological monitoring in  a perspective of Integrated Water Resources 
Management (IWRM) promotion. 
At a global level, AFD has been accumulating significant climat e finance experience for over 10 years. Since 2005, 
AFD has allocated more than 17 billion euros (2.9 billion euros  in 2014) for climate-smart development projects and 
activities. In 2011, AFD formally  reflected the growing importa nce of the fight against climat e change in its activities by 
adopting a core operational climate strategy: AFD 2012-16 Clima te & Development Action Plan. This strategy is based 
on three pillars including: (i) an ambitious objective to alloc ate at least 50% of its annual financial commitments to 
activities that have positive climate co-benefits on mitigation  and/or adaptation, (ii) a systematic portfolio-wide 
measurement of climate impacts, through carbon footprint and re silience risk assessments, and (iii) project selectivity 
according to their impacts on climate change. 
In Senegal, AFD climate change portfolio since 2007 includes 9 projects for a total amount of 104 million Euros : 
‐ 6 adaptation projects, mainly in the agricultural sector; 
‐ 2 mitigation projects; 
‐ 1 project addressing both adaptat ion and mitigation objectives.  
AFD has a local office in Dakar, which is in charge of ensuring  correct communication and coordination with local 
project sponsors. 
Executing entities. The five executing agencies were selected according to (i) the correspondence of their mandate 
with the activities under their responsibility in the project b ut also (ii) their capacity to deliver.  
‐ MRUHCV: MRUHCV is composed of var ious Directorates which have d ifferent roles and lead different types 
of project. In terms of flood ri sk management, two main Directo rates are involved: (ii) the Directorate of Urban 
Planning and Architecture, for preventive flood-risk reduction actions at urban planning level and (ii) the 
Directorate of Flood Zones Rest ructuration, for curative flood- risk reduction actions on existing urban fabric. 
Both Directorates have led si milar projects in the past.  
‐ ONAS: The core activity of ONAS is building and operation of sa nitation systems, which will be the main activity 
under its responsibility in the project, along with some capaci ty building activity. As an operational structure, 
ONAS has teams specialized in p roject management and procuremen t. 
‐ ANACIM and DGPRE: Both institutions are specifically responsibl e for the operation of respectively the 
meteorological and hydrological data production and monitoring system. They employ skilled engineers 
specialized in those domains. They  have led similar projects in  the past.  
‐ APIX: APIX is an experienced pro ject sponsor that has successfu lly led large scale complex projects (for 
instance the Dakar-Diamniadio highway).  
For all of the executing entities, the risk of inefficient impl ementation is mitigated by sub-component 4.3, which purpose 
is to provide expert support to  project implementation. 
E.5.3. Engagement with civil societ y organizations and other re levant stakeholders  
Engagement of the local authorities will also be critical in th e implementation of an integrated urban flood management 
policy framework and will be sought through Project Management Assistance and communication to CRDI and CDGI7.
																																																													
7 See section C.7 for more details on those committees.


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 47 
 
	
	E
Civil society was also engaged in the elaboration of the Enviro nmental and Social Management Plan as well as the 
Resettlement Action Plan for drainage infrastructure in Pikine Irrégulier Sud. The NGO ENDA is in charge of 
implementing the resettlement actions directly with the populat ion.  
Also, sub-component 2.3 will include Information, Education and  Communication (IEC) services aimed at Pikine 
Irrégulier Sud populations – with a special focus on women and their needs – and will involve other stakeholders, 
including municipalities and ci vil society. It has the ambition  to deal with two subjects: 
‐ On the one hand the acceptance a nd protection of drainage infr astructure – the service will include 
communication efforts with the public to (i) present and explai n the project and its objectives (ii) ensure the 
protection of infrastructure dr ainage, among others against the  infiltration of wastewater and solid waste. 
Regarding wastewater, beyond promoting public network connectio n, the provision will also aim to highlight 
the on-site sanitation solutions  implemented by the Structuring  Fecal Sludge Market Program, funded by the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.  
‐ On the other hand, the service will lead consultations with lo cal population on the development of retention 
ponds. A consultation will be conducted with residents living n earby projected retention ponds to define the 
development of the surroundings of these basins that best fits the aspirations of the inhabitants of these 
neighborhoods. These adjustments can then be made as part of th e works of Sub-component 2.3 of this 
project. 
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fi nancial soundness of the  proje ct 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
The whole project has been designed to increase cost-efficiency  and effectiveness of future investment in flood risk 
mitigation in Senegal. Moreover, procurement procedures, based on international open competitive bidding, aim at 
cost-effectiveness. Through proje ct implementation, and especia lly the regular meeting of the CNGI, duplicates will be 
avoided. 
Infrastructure.  Infrastructure under sub-component 2.3 has been engineered to ensure maximum cost-efficiency of 
the investment in terms of popul ation protection against flood events. Indeed, retention p onds are designed to reduce 
flow capacity of evacuation c hannels down-stream, by cutting pe ak flows – thus drastically r educing civil works costs. 
This approach has been subject to a global validation through t he Drainage Master Plan for Dakar Region and to 
detailed design during project preparation. Moreover, the whole  system has been designed to let water flow 
gravitationally, thus avoiding pum ping and associated energy co sts. 
Mapping. Flood risk mapping, as proposed in sub-component 1.1, requires the elaboration of a DTM that might be 
costly. The proposed technique is based on satellite imaging, w hich is usually cheaper than other techniques, including 
airborne laser telemetry. 
Radar.  The real-time monitoring system o f meteorological events in Gr eater Dakar, based on X-band radar and loose 
network of rain gauges is more efficient and less costly than m ost traditional systems that require greater quantity of 
rain gauges or larger radars. 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveragi ng and mobilized lo ng-term investm ents (mitigation only)  
The ratio between GCF grant and total amount of the project is 21%.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Flood risk management is a non-merchant public service that doe s not generate cash-flow for public authorities. As 
such, there is no financial viab ility to be expected from the p roject.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 47 
 
	
	E
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
The project was designed according to good practices in the fie lds of disaster risk management. It follows the 
recommendations of the Sendai Framework for Action, and the Wor ld Bank “Guide to Integrated Urban Flood Risk 
Management for the 21st century”. 
In terms of technical best pract ices, the project will ensure t o provide the best quality-inve stment ratio in a perspective 
of long term sustainability through: 
‐ Best available GIS software; 
‐ Appropriate and up-to-date technologies for hydrological and me teorological data production, processing and 
transmission. 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF 
core 
indicators Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investmen t cost / expected lifetime emiss ion reductions 
(mitigation only)  
Not applicable.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed proj ect and as a result of the Fund’s 
financing, disaggregated by public a nd private sources (mitigat ion only) 
Not applicable.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. e stimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project) Not applicable.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 47 
 
	
	F
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
Economic Analysis. An economic analysis of the project has been made to evaluate c osts and benefits generated by 
the implementation of the projec t, compared to a situation with out the project. According to  standard methodology, the 
benefits are evaluated as avoided damages (now and in the futur e). 
The economic analysis is made for a 35 years horizon time. 	Since the project focuses on the floods in cities, the 
geographical perimeter of the economic analysis include 25 urba n centers that were pre-identified by the Senegalese 
Government as the most flood-pr one areas. Damages caused by flo ods were estimated for four different return periods: 
1.5 year (the estimated return period of the 2009 flood event),  10 years, 100 years and an infinite return period (for 
which it was assumed that the project would not avoid any damag e). 
According to the economic analysis, the project’s breakeven poi nt is reached nine year after the project starting date. 
This economic efficiency of t he project can be explained by: 
‐ Significant damages reduction fo r very frequent floods in Pikin e Irrégulier Sud, thanks to the construction of 
drainage infrastructures; 
‐ Significant reduction of damages for most of the floods in Sene gal thanks to a better urban planning. Indeed, 
the urban population growth in Senegal is very important, resul ting in a demographic pressure in cities. Without 
the project, the urban population increase would lead to an inc rease in population living in flood prone areas, 
and consequently, to an importa nt increase in damages. 
The internal economic profitab ility rate is estimated to reach 28%. 
Financial Analysis.  Flood risk management is a non-merchant public service that do es not generate direct cash-flow 
for the public authorities. As su ch, there is no financial retu rn on investment to be ex pected from the project.  
F.2.  Technical Evaluation   
Technical solutions for hard-engineered drainage infrastructure  in Pikine Irégulier Sud have been designed to fit the 
guidelines that are laid in the Drainage Master Plan for Greate r Dakar. Those guidelines are based on the principle of 
systems composed of retention ba sins that cut the peak flows an d drainage canals to evacuate storm water to the outlet 
(see section E.6.1 for cost-efficiency of this solution). The i nfrastructure’s detailed design has been validated by the 
Project Sponsor’s executing agency’s technical team (APIX). It has been revised and approved by the Engineer that 
has been recruited for works su pervision, including revision of  the hydraulic model. 
The design storm that has been used to elaborate detailed desig n of the infrastructure is based on the data available 
since 1896 from the Yoff meteorological station (placed next to  Dakar’s airport). From this per spective, the infrastructure 
was designed for a 10-years return period. This return period i s standard in Senegal and is sufficient to protect most of 
the population from most flood events, even in the context of c limate change that is expected to increase the frequency 
of intense rain events. It shoul d be reminded at this point tha t the rain event that caused the disastrous flood events 
that occurred in 2009 has been ev aluated to have a very short r eturn period: 1.5 year.  
The outlets have been places 50 centimeters higher than present ly necessary to take into account the elevation of sea 
level due to climate change. Even with this constraint, the inf rastructure will let storm water flows gravitationally through 
the channels.  
  
 
  
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Consideratio ns


---
*Page 37*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 47 
 
	
	F
The GCF-funded sub-components of the project will not have any negative impact on environm ental, social and gender 
aspects, as it consists mainly of capacity building and institu tional work. The main impacts to be expected are related 
to component 2.3, financed by AF D and the Government of Senegal . 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment.  An Environmental and Social Im pact Assessment (ESIA) has been 
made in 2013 for the drainage infrastructure which is the proje ct activity with major impacts, and that will be financed 
under sub-component 2.3. The ESIA was carried out as part of th e Pikine Irregulier Sud rest ructuration project, which 
comprises the drainage project under consideration as well as s treet rehabilitation and social equipment components 
being currently implemented under a separate World Bank and AFD  financing. The ESIA is included as an annex to 
the present Funding Proposal. It includes an effective consulta tion process, an ESMP that ensures proper monitoring 
of E&S issues and mitigation me asures throughou t the process. 
Impact analysis showed significant positive impacts during the life-cycle of the drainage infrastructure and some 
negative impacts during the construction phase, which can be mi tigated with the implementation of the proposed 
mitigation measures. The measures were detailed in the ESMP for  their implementation and monitoring. The ESMP 
also contains a book of Environmental and Social Clauses that w ill be included in the tendering documents. The 
application of all the environmental and social measures that w ill be retained in the tendering documents should be 
systematic for full respect of the principles of preservation a nd protection of the environment.  
The impacts during construction phase are addressed in the ESMP  which recommends different mitigation measures 
to minimize impacts on the physical environment (soils, air, wa ter, flora, fauna and wastes) and social-economic 
environment (health, safety, job creation, transport, business,  housing and livelihood), both during construction and 
operational phases. The ESMP includes training and awareness pr ogram on health (including STDs such HIV) and 
safety (security, accident prevention) working conditions for w orkers, contractors and project owner. Adequate safety 
gear and equipment will be provided to all workers employed by the project. The ESMP also proposes solutions to 
promote sound resour ces management, especially energy and water . 
For the wastewater collection infrastructure under the sub-comp onent 2.3, studies will be carried out in the coming 
months that will also include an E&S impact assessment. The val idation by AFD of the ESIA regarding that part of sub-
component 2.3. is a condition precedent to the disbursement of the funds relative to the construction of the wastewater 
collection infrastructure as per AFD-Government of Senegal fina ncing agreement. According to AFD’s procedures the 
ESIA must meet World Bank’s standards. 
Wastewater management impact.  Currently, people living in Piki ne Irrégulier Sud are mainly e quipped with latrines 
or septic tanks, which operation is greatly disturbed by the pr esence of the water table close to the surface. This can 
cause the pits to overflow. The consequences in terms of pollut ion of the water table and unhealthy conditions of the 
area are significant. The evacuation of rain water and lowering  of the water table provided under Sub-component 2.3 
should greatly improve the situation. 
However, previous experience in storm water drainage in Dakar s how that a significant risk of intrusion of wastewater 
into storm drains networks must be taken into account especiall y as the majority of outlets of Pikine Irrégulier Sud 
drainage system bring the water to Hann bay, which is a very fr agile ecosystem that the Government of Senegal is 
trying to decontaminate.  
Sub-component 2.3 includes wastewater collection infrastructure  that will essentially protect  drainage infrastructure 
against illegal connections. It is not intended to finance indi vidual connections, which is usua lly not a problem in Greater 
Dakar. However, the possibility of arranging for local resident s to access the sewer netwo rks for dumping gray water 
will be assessed. The wastewater collection infrastructure will  be connected the Hann bay treatment system that is 
planned to begin operation in 2018. 
 
Social impact.  The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for sub-component 2.3 was d eveloped in the framework of the 
overall urban restructuration project in Pikine Irrégulier Sud (Cf. above). It was developed according to national


---
*Page 38*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 47 
 
	
	F
standards and in accordance with the principles of the World Ba nk8. The RAP has also been the subject of consultations 
with the people concerned. In the c ontext of drainage works in Pikine Irrégulier Sud, people who need to be resettled 
are mostly people living in the areas to be developed as retent ion ponds. These basins are located on low topographic 
area, and are the first site to be flooded. They are therefore the most vulnerable population. The first estimate of the 
number of Project Affected People adds up to 700. This number w as determined through extensive field survey by local 
authorities during the elaboration of the RAP but might be slig htly modified during implementation. The most probable 
evolution in the number is a dec rease, as people tend to leave their houses. The execution of the Pikine Irregulier Sud 
project RAP is currently on-going and is being subject to imple mentation reports el aborated by APIX.  
Any person affected by the project is entitled to a compensatio n payment of damages incurred on the basis of a 
compensation matrix by type of  loss, according to the Senegales e and international standards. The compensation 
process is monitored by the Operational Group of Dakar, whose t asks are information and sensitization of the 
populations affected by the project, identification, assessment  and payment of compensation, and resettlement of the 
population. A resettlement zone covering an area of 165 ha has been built in Tivaouane Peulh, in the municipality of 
Rufisque. This zone of Greater Dakar is currently undergoing ma jor urbanization, with housing being established and 
several resettlement projects. The plots have connection to the  ele ctri city grid, acce ss to cl e an wate r, wa stewater 
collection infrastructure as we ll as social facilities (places of worship, schools, health centers). The resettlement process 
is being monitored by APIX. 
The RAP’s budget is estimated at 6 million euros for the draina ge infrastructure and will be fully financed by the 
Government of Senegal. Registration in the State budget of the necessary funds has been set up as a condition 
precedent to the disbursement o f AFD fund as per the AFD-Govern ment of Senegal financing agreement.  
Gender issues. Gender equality has been integrated in the appraisal documents,  the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and especially i n the Resettlement Action Pla n (RAP).  
The RAP found out that there is an important gender disparity w ith respect to property and land ownership. The 
identified assets to be lost under the project are mainly owned  by men while women represent a small share of the 
people directly affected. Woman headed households represent 20%  of the households affected and have been 
identified as vulnerable. According to World Bank Operating Pro cedure OP 4.12, an elaborat e vulnerability scheme has 
been set up to identify vulnerable PAPs (women, children, elder ly, people with disabilities, etc .) who are entitled to more 
comprehensive compensations and assistance throughout the reset tlement process whether  it is for dwellings or 
commercial activities that are impacted. For example, single wo men headed households are being given priority access 
to housing as well as commercial concessions. 
The ESIA takes into account how the project, during its constru ction phase, will affect men and women in a differentiated 
manner, mostly because of their respective economic activity. F or example, small shops and especially restaurants 
employ more women, while small i ndustries and craftsmanship mos tly employ men. The ESIA also recognizes gender 
as a factor contributing to vulnerability and the fact that flo oding problems affect more vulnerable people. Flood events 
and lack of appropriate sanitation services have significantly more impacts on women, as they bear most of the burden 
of health problems caused by stagnating unhealthy water. 
The Environmental and Social Management Plan contains measures such as strengthening working skills of women, 
aimed at increasing the project positive impacts towards women,  including their access to jobs created by the projects.
More importantly, gender aspects will be dealt with specificall y during project implementation. Indeed, gender issues 
will be included in three of the project’s sub-components: 
‐ Sub-component 1.2: Flood risk awareness campaigns will have a s pecial focus on gender issues, to prevent 
specific risks on women and children. 	The diagnosis in terms of gender in relation to flood risk will  be realized 
																																																													
8 Please refer to the World Bank ’s Operational Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement  for further details on RAP methodology.


---
*Page 39*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 47 
 
	
	F
as part of the services of flood-risk awareness campaign, based  on extensive field surv eys, and the strategic 
program of the campaign will be designed ac cordingly. 
‐ Sub-component 2.1: The role of women will be taken into account  in the non-structural measure 
recommendation that will be issued in the framework of the proj ect. Gender-specific measures will thus be 
issued. 
‐ Sub-component 2.3: The Information, education and communication  (IEC) services that will be financed as part 
of sub-component 2.3 in Pikine Irrégulier Sud will also specifi cally target women as they have a pivotal role in 
health risk prevention, waste and wastewater disposal. As descr ibed in detail in section E.5.3., the IEC services 
will address acceptance of the dr ainage and sanitation infrastr ucture as the options for developments around 
retention ponds (parks, spor t facilities) that best fits the as pirations of the inhabitant s of these nei ghborhoods. 
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement 
The complete financial resources of the project will be passed on to the Senegalese executing entities, as described in 
section C.7. The financial management and procurement on the pr oject, including financial accounting, disbursement 
methods and auditing will be deta iled in the financing agreemen t that will be finaliz ed after the Board’ s approval. It will 
be consistent with AFD’s inter nal procedures that have been app roved through GCF’s accreditation. 
Procurement.  All procurement related to the project’s components financed o r co-financed by G CF’s funds will be 
undertaken in accordance with AFD’s Procurement Guidelines9.	The bidding process is conducted in compliance with 
local regulations and international good practices under the so le responsibility of the project owner. AFD is particularly 
vigilant about compliance with the principles of transparency a nd opening to competition. It requires all project 
stakeholders to have the highest standards in terms of ethics a nd social and environmental responsibility. The 
publication of general procurement notices by each of the publi c executing entity involved in the Project, as per the 
requirements of the Public Procu rement Code, will be monitored by AFD. The publication o f these notices is under the 
responsibility of the executing entities in application of the national legislation.  
AFD consequently provides projec t owners with model templates a nd conducts controls, under the principle of 
subsidiarity, to ensure that the procurement process runs smoot hly. In particular, according to AFD procedures, a no-
objection is given by AFD at each step of the procurement proce dure: procurement process, draft tender documents, 
technical and financial evaluations, draft contracts. Internati onal competitive bidding procedures will be used for any 
significant contract (for more  details see accreditation applic ation). 
All financing allocated by AFD has been untied since 1st January 2002. AFD consequently finances all goods and 
services regardless of the country of origin of the supplier or  service provider, or o f the amount of the contract. 
Disbursement methods.  Two main disbursement methods are used in AFD-financed project : (i) direct payments made 
by AFD to third party contractors as well as refinancing of exp enses paid by the beneficiary and (ii) payment by 
renewable advances. 	
Audits.  Mid-term and final technical and financial audits will be carr ied out by a reputable and independent auditing 
firm, paid on the funds of the project. The auditing firm shall  verify that all amounts drawn on the project funding have 
been used in accordance with the terms of the financial agreeme nts. Renewable advances will be disbursed on a 
special project account held by the Ministry of Finance. Annual  financial audits will have to be carried out, and the audit 
reports will be a condition precedent to each drawdown. 
																																																													
9 The Procurement Guidelines are available online at the followin g address: 
http://www.afd.fr/webdav/site/af d/shared/L_AFD/Opportunites_d_a ffaires/Directives-Passation- Marches-Etats-Etrangers-va.pdf


---
*Page 40*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 47 
 
	G
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
An institutional risk was identified in the implementation 
of the project. Indeed, most of the project is based on 
institutions that have been newly appointed as the lead 
in their field: MRUHCV for integrated flood management policy and ONAS for infrastructure construction and maintenance. Their legitimacy is crucial to the implementation of the project and coordination with 
other stakeholders is critical.
 
 Technical and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project was designed to fit the institutional strategy of t he Government of Senegal in terms of flood management. 
The central role of ONAS in infrastructure building and mainten ance was validated in the PROGEP Steering 
Committee that is presided by the Prime Minister’s office. 
Adequate coordination with all competent authorities will also be sought through the activities financed under 
component 4.  
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
The resettlement of most vulnerable populations of 
Pikine Irrégulier Sud is critical to reach the expect 
outcomes of the project and constitutes a socially sensitive activity. The availability of adequate funding is of the essence. 
 Financial  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
Five risk factors have been identified for the project, graded medium to low. Appropriate mitigation measures are 
brought through the project. 
‐ Risk Factor 1: operational risk on the effective change in the institutional framework of flood management.  
‐ Risk Factor 2: financial risk on the effective availability of credits from the Government of Senegal for the 
resettlement sub-component.  
‐ Risk Factor 3: financia l risk on the reimbursement of the AFD loan for sub-component 2.3. 
‐ Risk Factor 4: environmental r isk on potential degradation of Hann bay, where outlets of the drainage 
infrastructure will be set up. 
‐ Risk Factor 5: social risk on the implementation of the Resettl ement Action Plan.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 47 
 
	G
The entry in the State budget o f the amount needed to proceed t o compensation of resettled population is a 
condition precedent to the disb ursement of the funds available under the loan facility. 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Sub-component 2.3 will be in part financed by AFD by 
the means of a loan to the Government of Senegal. The 
financial risk associated to the sustainability of this debt 
is to be considered.  Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Despite an upward trend in external debt in recent years, Seneg al over-indebtedness risk remains low ("green" 
country) according to the latest debt viability analysis of the  IMF and the World Bank updated in January 2015.The 
rating agency Standard & Poor's  (S&P) confirmed in December 201 4 the sovereign rating of Senegal to B+/B with a 
stable outlook, saying that Senegal suffers from low levels of income and a reduced monetary flexibility, and that the 
reduction of public deficits and the current account will only happen gradually. It considers, however, that the country's 
institutions are relatively strong compared to other countries in West Africa. Meanwhile, Moody's assesses the same 
rating to B1, with a stable outlo ok. As a lender to the Republi c of Senegal, AFD will monitor c ontinually its risk rating. 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Sub-component 2.3 has potential negative 
environmental impact, as the outflow of the drainage infrastructure is bound to be delivered on Hann bay, which is a fragile ecosystem that the Government of 
Senegal is struggling to decontaminate – with the 
technical and financial support of AFD. Intrusion of wastewater or solid waste in the outflow would be 
harmful to the ecological state of the bay.
 Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Hann bay is situated in Dakar and presently is in a disastr ous ecological state due to disposal of untreated 
domestic and industrial wastewater. The Government of Senegal h as been working on decontaminating this bay for 
years and is about start with the technical and financial suppo rt of AFD, works to set up wastewater collection and 
treatment in Hann bay. 
The wastewater activity of sub-c omponent 2.3 aims at giving acc ess to the wastewater colle ction infrastructure to the 
population of Pikine Irrégulier Sud in the most strategic areas  to ensure protection of the rainwater drainage 
infrastructure. Moreover, solid waste intrusion in the drain ch annels is deemed to be low, because channels are buried 
and entrances are closed with grates. 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring


---
*Page 42*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 47 
 
	G
A risk is identified for Sub-component 2.3 in the field of 
social safeguards as many poor people have built their houses or conduct their economic activity in the highly 
vulnerable low-lying areas and they will have to be 
relocated. The estimate at t his stage of the project is 
700 Project Affected Persons.
 Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) of the drainage infrastructu re in Pikine is a part of the project in its own right, to 
protect the inhabitants of the most vulnerable areas. The RAP w as elaborated according to the guidelines of the 
Operational Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement  of the World Bank. It will be financed by the Government of 
Senegal. The executing agencies APIX is experienced in implemen tation of such RAP and a close monitoring of the 
advances of the resettlement will be done by AFD. Resettlement action on the field will be led by a NGO, along with 
Fondation droit à la ville, which is the main operator of curative urban intervention in Se negal. A resettlement zone 
has been developed in the outskir ts of Dakar to offer a possibl e alternative for displaced populations.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 47 
 
	
	H
H.1.  Logic Framework.    
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development The project aims at reducing t he vulnerability of the populatio n of Senegal to flood risks that 
are expected to rise with the effects of climate change and inc reasing urbanization. While 
financing most urgent investment in infrastructure, it will hel p the Government of Senegal in 
flood management policy-making by (i) building knowledge on the  actual and projected risk, 
(ii) recommending alternative solutions to costly hard-engineer ed solutions and integrating 
flood risk to urban planning, (iii) optimizing management of ex isting and future infrastructure 
and (iv) ensuring mainstreaming of integrated flood management in the governance of the 
sector. 
Expected Result Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target 
Assumptions Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund-level impacts  
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions Change in expected 
losses of lives and 
economic assets 
(US$) due to the 
impact of extreme 
climate-related 
disasters CNGI 
annual 
reports 0  apprx
8 000 
000 
$ per 
year Recommendations 
as to structural 
and non-structural 
measures and 
protocols are 
implemented 
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change Number and value of 
physical assets 
made more resilient 
to climate variability 
and change, 
considering human 
benefits CNGI 
annual 
reports 0  apprx
8 000 
000 
$ per 
year Recommendations 
as to structural 
and non-structural 
measures and 
protocols are 
implemented


---
*Page 44*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 47 
 
	
	H
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project leve l 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if applicable)   Final  
Project outcomes Outcomes that c ontribute to Fund-level impacts 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory systems for 
climate-responsive planning 
and development Institutional 
and regulatory 
systems that 
improve 
incentives for 
climate 
resilience and 
their effective 
implementation Urban 
planning 
documents 
taking into 
account 
flood risk 0  6 Adequate 
enforcement of the 
urban planning 
documents 
A6.0 Increased generation 
and use of climate information 
in decision-making  Use of climate  
information 
products/servic
es in decision-
making in 
climate-
sensitive 
sectors CNGI 
annual 
reports 0  4/year 
or 20 
total 
(CNGI 
meetin
gs) Adequate 
communication 
and availability of 
flood risk 
information and 
data 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks Total 
geographic 
coverage of 
climate-related 
early warning 
systems and 
other risk 
reduction 
measures 
established/str
engthened ANACIM 
reports 0  550km2 Coordination 
between ANACIM 
and ONAS 
A8.0 Strengthened awareness 
of climate threats and risk-
reduction processes  Number of 
males and 
females made 
aware of 
climate threats 
and related 
appropriate 
responses  
Awareness 
campaign 
reports 0   
500000 
 
 
 
 N/A


---
*Page 45*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 47 
 
	
	H
Including 
female ratio 50% 
Project outputs Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. The knowledge of flood risk 
in Senegal has been 
enhanced, mapped, and made 
publicly available. Number of 
urban centers 
with publicly 
accessible 
detailed GIS 
on flood risk 
Number of 
people that 
has been 
made aware of 
flood risk 
Including 
female ratio  
PMA report 
 
Awareness 
campaign 
reports  
0 
 
0   
6 
 
500000 
 
50% Adequate 
communication 
and availability of 
flood risk 
information and 
data 
N/A 
2. Risk has been reduced in 
Pikine Irrégulier Sud and tools 
are available to reduce the risk 
at national scale in a cost-
effective and efficient manner. Number of 
people who 
benefit from 
risk reduction 
measures 
 
Female ratio of 
people that 
has been 
consulted 
through IEC 
services 
 
Number of 
flood risk 
assessment 
developed and 
used 
 
 
Meters of 
drainage 
system 
installed in 
Pikine 
Irrégulier Sud 
  
CNGI 
annual 
reports 
 
 
ONAS 
evaluation 
reports 
 
 
 
APIX 
evaluation 
reports 
 
 
  
PMA reports 0   
200000 
 
 
 
50% 
 
1.000. 
000Tot
al 
 
 
 
 
20000 
 The infrastructure 
is respected and 
duly maintained


---
*Page 46*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 47 
 
	
	H
3. Hazard monitoring and 
response have been 
developed to enhance existing 
drainage infrastructure 
operations. Surface 
covered by 
real-time 
hazard 
monitoring 
Number of 
preventive 
actions led by 
ONAS based 
on 
meteorological 
alert. ANACIM 
reports 
 
ONAS 
reports 0 
 
   
550km2 
 
 
25 The equipment is 
duly installed and 
maintained 
 
Communication 
between 
monitoring and 
operator is 
operational 
4. Stakeholders of flood 
management policy-making 
work together in an efficient 
and coordinated manner Coordination 
meetings with 
all 
stakeholders 
that take into 
consideration 
policy-making 
decisions on 
flood 
management CNGI 
annual 
reports 0  4/year 
(CNGI 
meetin
gs) Political support to 
decision taken in 
the CNGI 
Activities Description Outputs Assumptions 
1.1 Mapping flood risk at 
national and local levels See section C.3 Flood risk GIS Existing studies and data are 
made available 
Funds are sufficient to 
operate, maintain and make 
publicly available GIS data 
1.2. Population and institutions 
awareness raising See section C.3 Awareness-raising 
campaign Action is taken on the 
information provided 
2.1 Recommendations for 
structural and non-
structural measures See section C.3 Regulatory 
recommendations – 
Guidebooks – 
Proposition of 
incentives Recommendations are 
followed and incentives are 
efficiently implemented 
2.2 Processing flood risk 
information for infrastructure planning and design See section C.3 Investment plans – 
Models – Protocols 
– Training programs 
– Communication 
program Tools are made available 
and used by stakeholders for 
planning and designing 
infrastructure


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 47 
 
	
	H
 2.3 Construction of drainage 
and sanitation infrastructure in Pikine 
Irrégulier Sud See section C.3 Drainage 
infrastructure – 
Sanitation 
infrastructure – 
Training programs – 	
IEC campaign Delivery of necessary 
permits  
People accept to be 
resettled 
The infrastructure is 
respected and duly 
maintained 
3.1 Setting-up real time 
hazard monitoring in 
Greater Dakar See section C.3 Monitoring 
equipment and 
software – 
Forecasting models 
– Training programs Information on existing 
equipment and protocols is 
provided 
Sufficient resource to 
operate and maintain the 
equipment 
3.2 Elaboration of operational 
protocols and guidelines 
for preventive action on 
drainage infrastructure See section C.3 Protocols – Training 
programs Information on existing 
protocols is provided 
Protocols are followed by the 
drainage infrastructure 
operator 
4.1 Support to c oordination 
and policy-making See section C.3 Decisions of the 
Technical 
Committee – 
Decisions of the 
CNGI – 
Communication 
strategy Outputs of the project are 
presented to CNGI 
4.2 Institutional consolidation 
and capacity building See section C.3 Institutional 
diagnostic – Training 
program  Existing studies and data are 
made available 
Recommendations are 
implemented 
4.3 Supporting executing 
entities for project implementation See section C.3 Tender documents – 
Evaluation reports – 
Validation of 
products Conformity of procurement 
process 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 47 
 
	
	H
This section reflects the monitoring and accountability framewo rk that was approved by the Board in the decision B11/10. 
It is subject to the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) that is still on negotiation and to the Funded Activity Agreement 
(FAA) that will be signed by AFD and the GCF. 
1. DURING THE PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD  
Continuous monitoring.  To monitor the progress of the Project in achieving the planne d outcome and outputs, the 
Project Management Assistance (PMA) will establish and maintain  a project performance management framework, which 
will be designed to permit adequate flexibility to adopt remedi al action regarding project design, schedules, activities, and 
development impacts.  
PMA will refine the monitoring framework, confirm achievable ta rgets, firm up monitoring and recording arrangements, 
and establish systems and procedures no later than six months a fter project implementation begins. Baseline and 
progress data will be reported at  the requisite time intervals by the executing entities to PMA . PMA will be responsible for 
analyzing and consolidating the reported data, and for reportin g the outcome to AFD through the quarterly progress 
reports. Moreover, progress re ports will be presented to the CN DI, which gathers all pertinent authorities on flood risk 
management in Senegal. Based on this information, the PMA will elaborate on a yearly basis an annual performance 
report (APR) which will include indicators p rogress reports, im plementation issues, financial management data that 
include dates and amounts disbursed for each funded activity an d compliance with financial covenants and updates 
procurement plan. 
During the whole implementation period, AFD will lead a continu ous monitoring of project act ivities led by the executing 
agencies. The project will be supervised on day to day basis by  the local AFD Office that is in continuous and close 
dialogue with the implementing entities. The project manager, b ased at AFD’s Headquarter s, will lead supervision 
missions at least on a half-year ly basis to monitor progress in  the implementation of the proj ect, compliance with project 
agreements and financial covenants and make necessary adjustmen ts in its organization, budget or implementing 
arrangement.  
Mid-term review. A midterm review will be conducted  within two and half years of  project being effective and shall include 
a review on institutional, techni cal, environmental, social, ec onomic and financial issues, assessment on the performance 
of the funded activity against the GCF investment criteria and assess, as the case may be, the need to restructure the 
project. The outcome of the midt erm review will be incorporated  as recommendations for improving the implementation 
during the second half of the project’s duration. 
Final review.  Within 6 months of the closing of the 	project, the Technical Committee will submit a project completi on 
report to AFD that includes eval uation of outcome an impact ind icators and assessment based on the 6 GCF investment 
criteria.	
2. DURING THE POST IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD  
Two or three years after the closing of the project, an indepen dent evaluation is made by a consultancy firm. If the AFD 
Evaluation Department selects the  project an impact assessment would be conducted by a consultancy firm with the 
support of the local agency. 
3. COMMUNICATION STRATEGY  
Within the communication strategy  of the project (related to bo th institutional and awareness campaigns issues), AFD 
shall ensure that the visibility  of the GCF contribution is gua ranteed.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 47 
 
	
	I
 
 I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☐ NDA No-objection Letter (expected) 
☒ Feasibility Study  
☐ Integrated Financial Model that p rovides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing c ommitment  
☐ Term Sheet  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact A ssessment (ESIA) or Environme ntal and Social Management Plan 
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations 
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project 
☒ Timetable of project implementation 
☐ Project confirmation (see the temp late in Annex I to the Accred itation Master Agreement)


---
*Page 50*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 47 
 
	
	I
 
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
  
Figure	2‐Map	of	flood‐prone	urban	centers	in	Senegal


---
*Page 51*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 47 
 
	
	I
 
	
Figure	3‐Situation 	of	Pikine	Irrégulier 	Sud


---
*Page 54*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.04
Environmental 	and	social	report(s)	 disclosure 	
Basic	project/programme 	information 	
Project/programme 	title	SENEGAL	INTEGRATED	URBAN	FLOOD	MANAGEMENT	PROGRAM	
Accredited 	entity	 AFD	
Environmental 	and	social	
safeguards 	(ESS)	category 	Category	A	
Environmental 	and	Social	Impact	Assessment 	(ESIA)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	disclosure	
on	accredited	
entity’s	website	2016‐04‐07	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	FRENCH	(2016‐01‐26)	and	ENGLISH	(2016‐04‐07)	
Link	to	disclosure	 	http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/do wnloadDocument.action?idDocum ent=2241	
Other	link(English)	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/downloadDocument.action?idDocume nt=2311	
Page	link	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/consulterProjet.action?idProjet=CSN1405	
Environmental 	and	Social	Impact	Assessment 	(ESMP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	disclosure	
on	accredited	
entity’s	website	2016‐04‐07	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	FRENCH	(2016‐01‐26)	and	ENGLISH	(2016‐04‐07)	
Link	to	disclosure	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/downloadDocument.action?idDocume nt=2241	
Other	link(English)	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/downloadDocument.action?idDocume nt=2311	
Page	link	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/consulterProjet.action?idProjet=CSN1405	
Resettlement 	Action	Plan	(RAP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	disclosure	
on	accredited	
entity’s	website	2016‐04‐07	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	FRENCH	(2016‐01‐26)	and	ENGLISH	(2016‐04‐07)	
Link	to	disclosure	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/do wnloadDocument.action?idDocume nt=2240	
Other	link(English)	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/do wnloadDocument.action?idDocume nt=2312	
Page	link	 http://www.afd.fr/base‐projets/co nsulterProjet.action?idProjet= CSN1405	
Any	other	relevant 	ESS	reports	and/or	disclosures 	(if	applicable) 	
Description	of	
report/disclosure	The	same	documents	as	above	were	also	published	by	APIX	(Senega l,	one	of	the	
executing	entities)	at	the	following	links	
Date	of	disclosure		 2016‐02‐03	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	FRENCH	(2016‐02‐03)	and	ENGLISH	(2016‐06‐16)


---
*Page 55*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.04 	
	French		http://autoroutedakard iamniadio.net/sites/default/files/downloa d/PAR%20R
estructuration%20de%20PIS_Studi%200313%201‐2mini.pdf	
http://autoroutedakard iamniadio.net/sites/default/files/downloa d/PAR%20R
estructuration%20de%20PIS_Studi%200313%202‐2mini.pdf	http://autoroutedakard iamniadio.net/sites/default/files/downloa d/EIES%20PI
S%20partie%201.pdf	http://autoroutedakard iamniadio.net/sites/default/files/downloa d/EIES%20PI
S%20partie%202.pdf	
	English	 http://autoroutedakard iamniadio.net/sites/default/files/downloa d/20160406_
CSN1405_esia_pikine_irregulier_sud_en_final_anglais_opt.pdf	
http://autoroutedakard iamniadio.net/sites/default/files/downloa d/20160406_
CSN1405_rap_pikine_irregulier_ sud_en_final_anglais_opt.pdf	
_
_______