=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/CreationDate: D:20160921135141+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20160927140959+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration	of	funding	
proposals	–	Addendum	II	
Funding	proposal	package	for	FP019GCF/B.14/07/Add.02 
27	September	 2016	Meeting	of	the	Board	
12	–	14	October	2016	
Songdo,	Incheon,	Republic	of	Korea	
Provisional	agenda	item	11(f) 	
Summary		
This	addendum	contains	the	following	three	parts:	
a)A	funding	proposal	 titled	“Priming Financial and Land-Use Planning
Instruments to Reduce Emissions from Deforestation”	 submitted	by	 UNDP;
b)A	no‐objection	letter	issued	by	the	national	designated	authori ty	or	focal	point;	and
c)Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure.
The	documents	are	presented	as	submitted	by	the	accredited	enti ty,	and	national	designated	
authority	or	focal	point,	respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.02 	
Page	b	
Table	of	Contents 	
Funding	proposal	submitted	 by	the	acc redited	entity	
No‐objection	letter	issued	by	th e	national	designated	authorit y	or	focal	point	
Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

	
Project Title: 
 Priming Financial and Land-Use Planning Instruments to 
Reduce Emissions fr om Deforestation 
Country/Region: Ecuador  
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme 
Date of Submission: V1: 3 December 2015; V2: 15 Ju ne 2016; V3: 29 July 2016; 
V4: 25 August 2016; V5: 9 Sept 2016


---
*Page 4*
---

	
							
	
Contents 
 
 
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY   
 Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAIN ST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AN D MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING 
 
Section I  ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
 Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accre dited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, a ccredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information . Accredited entities can either  directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary info rmation in the proposal with c ross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
FP-UNDP-090916-5768


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 3 of 79 
	 A
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project title Priming Financial and Land-Use Planning Instruments to Reduce E missions from 
Deforestation  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country  Ecuador 
A.1.4. National designated 
authority  Mrs María Victoria Chiriboga - Undersecretary o f Climate Change  (Focal Point), 
Ministry of Environment  
A.1.5. Accredited entity United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☐  Direct ☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / 
beneficiary Executing Entity : The Ministry of Environment (MAE) is the executing entity 
responsible for overall impl ementation of this project. 
 
The Ministry of Livestock, Agric ulture, Aquaculture and Fisheri es (MAGAP) is a 
Responsible Party, responsible  for implementation of sub-compon ent 2.1. 
 Three Water Funds – the Fund fo r Water Protecti on (FONAG), the Regional Fund 
for Water (FORAGUA), and the Water Fund for the Protection of t he Paute River 
Watershed (FONAPA) – are Responsibl e Parties, responsible for t he 
implementation of sub-component 3.2 in their respective jurisdi ctions. 
 Other national entities will sup port implementation: the Minist ry of Foreign Trade, 
the Ministry of Finance, the Internal Revenue Service (SRI), th e National 
Secretariat for Planning and Development (SENPLADES), local gov ernments 
(GADs), and line ministries responsible for applicable Policies  and Measures 
(PAMs) to reduce GHG emissions from deforestation. UNDP will dr aw upon 
relevant partners, including the UN-REDD partnership, for techn ical expertise as 
needed and in full agreement with the Government of Ecuador. 
 
Beneficiaries : approximately 1,106,000 total beneficiaries in the project 
intervention area, including forest sector stakeholders, agricu ltural and livestock 
producers, forest-de pendent communities, and indigenous peoples . 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total 
investment, million USD) ☐  Micro (≤10) 
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☒  Mitigation ☐  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission V1: 26 November 2015; V2: 15 June 2016; V3: 29 July 2016; V4: 2 5 August 
2016; V5: 9 Sept 2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, 
position Helen Negret, Regional Technical Advisor 
Pierre Yves Guedez, Regional Technical Advisor 
Organization United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Email address helen.negret@undp.org 
pierre-yves.guedez@undp.org 
Telephone number +507 3024500 
Mailing address UNDP, UN House, Building 129, M uir Street, City of Knowledge, C layton, 
Panama City, Panama.  
   
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐ Low emission transport


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 4 of 79 
	 A
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapi d bus system, etc.)  
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-ef ficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, et c.)  
☒ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and ma nagement, agroforestry, agricul tural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)
 
Increased resilience of: 
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate ch ange – diversification of supply sources and supply chain manag ement, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)
☐ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, e fficient irrigation systems, et c.)
☐ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) ☐ 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Ecuador is finalizing its REDD+1 readiness process2. A Forest Reference Emission Level (FREL) was submitted and 
technically assessed by the UNFCCC in 20153 and a REDD+ Action Plan (REDD+ AP4) has been approved. The Action 
Plan presents the policies and measures prioritized to address the drivers of deforestation5. It has a national scope and 
includes the 5 REDD+ activities. It is designed to support the national objective of achieving zero net deforestation by 
2020.  
 
The GCF project will co-finance the REDD+ AP by providing targe ted investment to control agricultural expansion into 
forest areas; optimize existing financial, economic mechanisms to implement agricultural and livestock production 
practices that reduce deforestation; align land-use zoning plan s with national climate change-related targets; strengthen 
restoration, conservation and sustainable production in vulnera ble watersheds; redesign public credit lines to orient them 
towards sustainable agricultural production practices; promote tax incentives for REDD-supportive activities; and 
strengthen purchasing policies for deforestation-free commoditi es, their certification and traceability.  
 
The emission reductions that Ecu ador will achieve by implementi ng its REDD+ AP during the GCF project’s lifetime 
(2017-2021) will be assessed in 2018, 2020 and 2022, through th e Biennial Update Reports to the UNFCCC6, with 
reference to the FREL.  
 
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) October 2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) N/A  
Estimated implementation star t and end date Start: January 1, 2 017   End: December 31, 2021 
Project/programme lifespan The GCF funds for this project will be disbursed over a period of 5 years, 
from 2017 to 20217. 
																																																													
1 REDD+:“Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degrada tion, and the role of conservati on, sustainable management of f orests and 
enhancement of forest carbon sto cks in developing countries”: F or more information see http://redd.unfccc.int/   
2 http://redd.unfccc.int/   
3 http://redd.unfccc.int/files/submission_frel_ecuador.pdf   
4 See Annex IIc: National REDD+ Action Plan. 
5 In this document, ‘reduce defor estation’ is used as short-hand  for all 5 REDD+ activities, which are all included in the nati onal REDD+ AP, and 
‘analysis of drivers of deforesta tion’ is used as short-hand fo r ‘analysis of drivers of defor estation and forest degradation,  and of barriers to the 
conservation of forest carbon st ocks, sustainable management of  forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks. 
6 As per the UNFCCC Warsaw Framework: http://redd.unfccc.int/fact-sheets/ redd-mrv-and-results-based-p ayments.html   
7 The lifespan of the project, understood to be the period over which direct benefits take place , matches the estimated lifetim e of the longest-lived 
investment facilitated by the project: 20 years for the infrast ructure in the collection centres and for the full transition o f some of the production practices 
based on agro-forestry implemented under Component 2. Given tha t this is a national policy, MAE and MAGAP will continue provid ing assistance in the 
areas where the projec t will be executed even when the GCF proj ect is completed. Also, UNDP is open to supporting post-project  implementation 
and/or monitoring of results dur ing the project lifespan, provi ded there is more guidance from the GCF Board on what is expect ed, including details on 
how many years after project closure this support is to be carr ied out, and what form it will take.


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 5 of 79 
	 B
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Program me 
1. The cost of implementing the REDD+ AP in Ecuador is estimate d at USD 250 million by 2025. The GCF input of 
USD 41.17 million will cover 16.4% of the total financial requi rements. The co-finance leveraged by the GCF project 
stands at USD 42.84 million, while other complementary financin g sources under joint progr amming stand at USD 74.76 
million. Together, these sources of finance represent USD 158.7 7 million, and contribute approximately 63% of the total 
estimated cost of implementation of the REDD+ AP.  
 2. The justification for reques ting a grant and not a loan from  the GCF for this proposal is based on the following 
elements. First, the project financial evaluation
8 reveals that the project is not  financially viable (see annex XII, ‘Economic 
Analysis’, for the full financial evaluation of the project). T he simulated project results under the conservative scenario 
show a negative financial net present value (FNPV) of USD 46.73  million. However, the project is nonetheless highly 
desirable for society: the project is economically positive, wi th an economic net present value (ENPV) of USD 181.52 
million, an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 55.3% an d a cost-benefit ratio of 5. Thi s valuation does not consider 
the inclusion of REDD+ Results -Based Payments (RBPs) since ther e are uncertainties associated with this mechanism, 
notably regarding prices, availability of funds and conditions of payments, among others.  
 3. Second, all project components are targeting risk and inform ation barriers via public framework expenditures. 
These public framework expenditures include capacity building t o overcome public and private actors’ knowledge 
barriers (components 1 and 2 as w ell as sub-component 3.2); dev eloping, implementing and monitoring climate policies 
to remove technical, legal and adm inistrative barriers to inves tment (sub-component 1.4 and component 4); supporting 
the transition from R&D to comme rcial roll-out (sub-component 2 .1); law enforcement (su b-component 1.2 and 1.3); 
land-use/spatial planning and mappi ng (sub-components 1.1, 1.2) ; and establishing measuring, reporting and 
verification (MRV) systems (sub-components 2.5 and 4.1). Detail ed information on the baseline scenario, including the 
business as usual allocation of public funding to the proposed activities, the specific barriers, and the support requested 
of the GCF, are provided for each component and sub-component i n Section C.3 of this proposal.  
 
4. Third, given the current state of Ecuador’s public finances,  these public expenditures can only come from 
international grants. Indeed, Ecuador is facing a significant r eduction in fiscal revenue associated with the April 2016 
earthquake, placing serious constraints on the Government’s abi lity to finance environmental programmes. This 
combination of factors, in addition to the fact that the projec t is not considered financially viable, mean that a loan would 
not be an option to finance this project. Furthermore, given cu rrent strong budgetary restraints, this grant finance will not 
displace “business as usual” public finance.  
 5. The requested investment w ill strengthen Land Use and Zoning  Plans (PDOTs) to include  climate change criteria, 
and will identify land uses appropriate for reducing deforestat ion and for reforestation. Including these considerations 
into land-use planning will unlock resources through multi-annu al investment projects that are developed using the 
PDOTs as a basis. This, coupled with strengthened enforcement, will enhance the uptake of land uses that reduce 
deforestation, promote the reduction of greenhouse gas emission s and catalyse strong socio-economic co-benefits.  
 6. To facilitate the uptake of t hese land uses in the short ter m, project investment will suppo rt producers to transition 
to more sustainable production systems. In order to do so, the project will compensate pr oducers’ opportunity costs 
during the transition / reconver sion stage and reduce any adver se economic displacement that may occur. This support 
will be complemented by the implem entation of responsible purch asing policies and the certification and traceability of 
deforestation-free products, t hereby increasing income through access to markets for certified produce in the medium-
term. These actions will also correct market failures such as t he lack of access to the formal credit market, coverage for 
loss of profit due to land-use change, and the high costs assoc iated with certification and traceability of deforestation-
free products.   
7. In non-forest areas identified as critical, and where agricu ltural production is not considered appropriate in land-
use plans, there will be investm ent in restoration processes to  enhance carbon stocks, and in conservation and forest 
management. In order to catalyse private investment, interventi on areas have been selected that coincide with 
watersheds critical for hydroelectric supply. Supporting refore station and conservation in these upper river basin areas 
																																																													
8 Based on the estimate of incom e and expenditure, financial flo ws and operating income were programmed to a horizon of 30 year s, i.e. until 2044, the 
model components are linked with  the objective of structuring a  time trend for each of the main v ariables that determine the p rofitability of the 
programme. The flow of operational results are brought to prese nt value at a discount rate of 6%.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 6 of 79 
	 B
will not only increase carbon stocks but will also reduce the c osts associated with sedimentat ion in hydroelectric facilities.  
In turn, this will facilitate Ecuador’s shift towards cleaner e nergy, reducing the use of petro leum-based energy generation 
in the long-term and reducing em issions still further (Section E.1.1). Prioritizing these wate rsheds will also contribute to 
secure, sustainable and predictable water flows and will genera te indirect benefits for the surrounding populations by 
improving water quantity and quality.  
 8. The different proposed project components, with the respecti ve requested GCF funding, are shown in the following 
table. 
 
Table 1: Financial Elements pe r project component (GCF grant)
9 
Component Sub-component Amount (for 
entire project) 
(USD) GCF 
funding 
amount 
(USD) Co-financing 
funding amount 
(USD) 
Component 1: 
Investment in enabling 
policies to reduce the 
drivers of deforestation 
and its associated 
emissions Sub-component 1.1: PDOTs and Life 
Plans updated and implemented with 
climate change criteria and actions 4,069,700 1,722,600 2,347,100
Sub-component 1.2: Local capacity 
building for supervision of land-use 
planning and zoning 726,400 726,400 0
Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening 
forest control 4,286,423 1,972,000 2,314,423
Sub-component 1.4 : Formal Inter-
Institutional Coordi nation Structures 
within the framework of PDOTs, Life 
Plans and land-use zoning 2,328,924 882,000 1,446,924
Sub-component 1.5: Project 
management 1,067,726 722,098 345,628
Sub-total 12,479,17 3 6,025,098 6,454,075
Component 2: 
Implementation of 
financial and economic 
incentives towards the 
transition to sustainable 
production systems in 
non-forest areas Sub-component 2.1: Provision of 
incentives for the su stainable production 
transition period 19,016,284 9,257, 518 9,758,766
Sub-component 2.2: Promote the 
coordination and implementation of 
existing tax incentives that will allow for 
the transition to sustainable production 
systems 500,000 500,000 0
Sub-component 2.3: Support the 
redesign of public credit lines to reorient 
them to sustainable production practices 1,321,090 780,000 541,090
Sub-component 2.4: Responsible public 
and private procurement for 
deforestation-free production 1,069,091 560,000 509,091
Sub-component 2.5: Certification and 
traceability of deforestation-free products11,320,497 4,439, 726 6,880,771
Sub-component 2.6: Project 
management 1,067,726 722,098 345,628
Sub-total 34,294,688 16,259,342 18,035,346
 
Component 3: Financial 
and non-financial 
mechanisms for 
restoration, conservation 
and connectivity Sub-component 3.1: Strengthen 
conservation, resto ration and forest 
management processes through the 
National Socio Bosque Programme 20,157,117 7,768, 000 12,389,117
Sub-component 3.2: Strengthen 
mechanisms for integrated water 7,655,499 4,470,000 3,185,499
																																																													
9 The budget total includes project management costs but exclude s the fee of the GCF Accredited Entity.


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 7 of 79 
	 B
 resource management (IWRM) in the 
basins located within prioritized areas 
Sub-component 3.3: Project management 771,598 722,098 49,500
Sub-total 28,584,213 12,960,098 15,624,115
Component 4: 
Implementation of 
enabling instruments to 
reduce the drivers of 
deforestation and its 
associated emissions Sub-component 4.1: Support to the 
implementation of the Warsaw 
Framework for REDD+ and other 
operational processes 5,061,492 3,697,995 1,363,497
Sub-component 4.2: Operationalization 
of the financial architecture of the 
REDD+ AP 2,519,911 1,508,110 1,011,801
Sub-component 4.3: Project 
management 1,067,726 722,098 345,628
Sub-total 8,649,129 5 ,928,203 2,720,926
Total project financing 84,007,202 41,172,739 42,834,463
 
9. Please see Annex V for the budget breakdown by expenditure t ype (project staff and cons ultants, travel, goods, 
services, etc.) and disbursement schedule.  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  84.01million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient (i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees (v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants *  ……………
…… 
……………
…… 
……………
…… 
41.17 Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million 
USD ($) (  )  years 
(  )  years 
  
 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
        (   ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in se ction F.1 for the concession ality that GCF is expected 
to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing 
and that of accredited entities.  Please note that the level of concession ality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against t he investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  41.17 million 
USD ($)  
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of Institution Tenor Pricing Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
 31.76 
8.49 
0.68 
0.82 
1.09 million USD 
($) 
  Ministry of Environment 
 Ministry of Agriculture  
 UNDP and UNEP   
 F A O   
 UNDP  (  )  
years 
(  )  
years 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: Central Government. 
 
10. Co-financing was leveraged during the elaboration of the RE DD+ AP and the GCF proposal, and 
the associated consultation proc esses. It includes only new and  additional resources which have 
not yet been committed and which are specifically linked to the  GCF proposal. This includes funds 
from a Global Environment Facilit y (GEF) project, from UNDP, UN EP and FAO, as well as national 
resources reoriented to co-finan ce the implementation of the RE DD+ AP10. 
																																																													
10 Important co-financing from the Mi nistry of Foreign Trade (USD  5.76 million) is under discussion to support sub-component 2.5  but has yet to be 
secured through a letter of commitment.


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 8 of 79 
	 B
 
11. In addition to these new and additional resources, it is ex pected that other very significant co-
financing will be leveraged in the near-future to support the i mplementation of the GCF project. 
This includes the REDD Early Movers Programme of Germany and No rway, the Forest Investment 
Programme led by the Multilateral Development Banks, as well as  co-financing from the Ministry 
of Foreign Trade of Ecuador. MAE is presently at an advanced st aged of discussion with these 
initiatives. These new sources  of funds will be considered as c o-finance for the GCF project once 
secured, and co-financing letters will be provided.  
 
Complementary 
financing to 
recipient 
 Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of Institution 
Grant 
Grant/loans 
Grant 4511 
2412 
5.76  million USD ($) 
 REM (KFW) 
FIP (MDBs) 
Ministry of Foreign Trade 
 
  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitm ent in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d)Financial 
terms between 
GCF and AE N/A 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
12. Specific information related to a financial markets overvie w is provided below under sub-component 2.2, as well as 
in Annex XIIIf, “Credit allocated by the financial system to th e agricultural sector in the Amazon - 2013” and in Annex 
XIIIg Parts 1-4, “Investment Cat alogue for Strategic Projects”.   
 
13. The fee arrangement for the proposed project will be aligne d with the GCF Board’s decision on fees, taken at the 
11th meeting of the Board. The budget figures presented in this  proposal exclude the fee: i.e. the resources required to 
cover quality assurance and oversight services performed by UND P over all phases of the project cycle as follows: (i) 
oversight of proposal development; (ii) appraisal (pre and fina l) and oversight of project start-up; (iii) supervision and 
oversight of project implementat ion; and (iv) oversight of proj ect closure.
																																																													
11 Cash 
12 Cash


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 9 of 79 
 
	C
C.1. Strategic Context  
General policy on climate change  
14. The Government of Ecuador (GoE) fully acknowledges the impa cts of climate change13 and has adapted its policy 
and institutional framework to comply with the commitments and principles of the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Ecuad or ratified the Kyoto Protocol  in 1999 as a Non-Annex I (NAI) country and was the 
first country in the world to adopt the Rights of Nature in its  Constitution14 (2008).  
 15. In 2009, the Government declared climate change mitigation and adaptation to be a State Policy
15, committing to 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions as a voluntary act under the UNFCCC, and establishing the institutional structure 
to direct national climate change policy and action under the M inistry of Environment (MAE). In 2010, the Interinstitutional 
Committee on Climate Change (CICC), presided over by MAE, was e stablished to coordinate with other Ministries and 
to facilitate the execution of national policies on climate cha nge and UNFCCC commitments. In 2012, MAE launched 
the National Climate Change Strategy (NSCC) 2012-2025. 
 
UNFCCC reports 
16. Ecuador submitted its Second National Communication16 in 2011 and is preparing its third. The process of 
developing National Communications has evolved from a fragmente d institutional effort to compile the country’s climate 
change endeavours to one of great er institutional coordination within a detailed agenda based on the National 
Development Plan (“Plan Nacion al para el Buen Vivir”) 2009-201317. 
 
17. Ecuador’s Forest Reference Emission Level  (FREL)18 was submitted to the Convention in December 2014 for 
technical assessment, as requested by the Warsaw Framework for REDD+. It is based on the most accurate information 
available for estimating GHG emissions in the LULUCF sector and  covers all Ecuador’s continental territory. It only 
includes deforestation and might be updated in the future, foll owing the step-wise approach agreed on in Decision 
12/CP.1719.  
 
18. According to Ecuador’s first submitted FREL, on average 130 ,000 hectares/year were deforested in Ecuador 
between 1990 and 2000, and 109,000 he ctares/year between 2000 a nd 2008. During this period, 99.4% of the deforested 
areas were transformed into agricultural areas and less than 0. 6% into infrastructure and other uses. The expansion of 
the agricultural frontier includes crops for local markets and subsistence such as maize; livestock production for dairy 
products; and commodity production, notably beef, palm oil, cac ao and coffee. Average annual emissions from 
deforestation at the national level were 52.7 MtCO 2eq between 1990 and 2000, and 43.4 MtCO 2e for the period 2000-
2008.  
 
National REDD+ Action Plan  
19. During the REDD+ readiness process (2012-2016), the direct and indirect drivers of deforestation in Ecuador were 
analysed from economic, financial, political, social and techni cal perspectives. Historical patterns of deforestation were 
identified along with geographical areas with similar (homogene ous) deforestation profiles. Of the 14 areas of 
deforestation identified, 7 have been prioritized in the REDD+ Action Plan (AP), based on a multi-criteria analysis, 
including forest coverage, risks  of deforestation, potential fo r increasing carbon stocks, and other non-carbon benefits. 
(Annex IIe). 
																																																													
13 Ecuador is susceptible to sever al climate change impacts inclu ding frequent extreme climate events such as: El Niño /La Niña –Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO), increase in sea-level and the retreat of gl aciers, among others; also to external factors with an economy largely 
dependent on oil exports.  
14 This recognises and respects N ature and the maintenance and re generation of its lifecycle, s tructure, changing roles and proc esses. 
http://www.asambleanacional.gov .ec/documentos/constitucion_de_b olsillo.pdf   
15 Executive Decree Nº 1815: 
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rc t=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1 &cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CB8QFj AAahUKEwiKh6in2vnIAhWFcT4KH
f0MCuo&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.planetaverde.org%2Fmudancasclimatic as%2Fdown.php%3Farq%3D231109-
110115DECRETO_N1815%255B1%255D.pdf %26pasta%3Dlegislacao_clima&u sg=AFQjCNFtXHg0sVbLriM5-35xn8Gnn7Q-
sw&sig2=as_4u5eOU_nRe19jt-i1Rg&bvm=bv.106923889,bs.2,d.dmo   
16 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ecunc2.pdf   
17 http://www.planificacion.gob.ec/w p-content/uploads/downloads/20 12/07/Plan_Nacional_para_el_Buen_Vivir.pdf   
18https://unfccc.int/files/land_use_and_climate_change/redd/appli cation/pdf/2014_december_frel_submission_ecuador.pdf   
19 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2011/cop17/eng/09a01.pdf


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 10 of 79 
 
	C
 
20. Specific national and local-l evel measures to address defor estation drivers were defined based on a cost efficiency 
analysis and to minimize social and environmental risks and max imise potential benefits. The list of measures and 
actions to be implemented to reduce deforestation, degradation and enhance carbon stocks is included in the REDD+ 
AP (Annex IIc).  
 
21. The REDD+ AP includes the 5 eligible REDD+ activities and h as five components: i) land-use zoning and 
institutional management policies; ii) transition to sustainabl e production systems (out side forests); iii) forest 
management / increased forest value (inside forests); iv) resto ration and connectivity; and v) monitoring, safeguards and 
knowledge management20. Ecuador is developing a system to report on how the Cancun sa feguards agreed under the 
UNFCCC are being addressed and respected during the implementat ion of the Policies and Measures (PAMs) prioritized 
in the REDD+ AP (detailed in Section F).  
 
Land-use planning policy  
22. Decentralized Autonomous Governments (GADs) are responsible  for formulating Development and Land-use Plans 
(PDOTs), and ensuring their comp lementarity with one another an d with existing Plans in the various levels of 
government21. These regional, provincial and local PDOTs seek to align and harmonize strategic development decisions 
on human settlements, economic and production activities, and n atural resource management with the characteristics 
of land in their territories through guidelines for land-use22. PDOTs are also the main input for the allocation and 
regulation of land use, land-use  change and occupation at a can tonal and/or district level, and are required to prepare 
public investment plans, budgets and other management instrumen ts. Life Plans are also a relevant land-use 
management tool, as they are formulated by indigenous people lo cated in important areas of forest. Life Plans must be 
incorporated within the PDOTs fo r them to be officially recogni zed. 
 
Transforming agricultural production 
23. The agriculture, livestock, hunting and fishing sector is a  key element of the national economy, accounting for 7.2% 
of total GDP. The area dedicated to agriculture covers 7.3 mill ion ha (see Annex XIIIe)23. Permanent crops represent 
20% of the total agricultural surface. Sugarcane, banana and Af rican oil palm are the principal crops at the national level. 
The increased production of palm oil and other agricultural com modities has provided important revenue to the country 
but increased production has been mostly through geographical e xpansion (and forest encroachment) rather than 
increased yields. If this expansi on continues, encroachment int o primary forest will increase.  
 
24. The Amazon region accounts fo r 17% of the total agricultura l surface, of which grassl ands (cultivated and natural) 
cover 1.1 million ha and permanent crops 131,400 ha. The livest ock sector is dominated by beef cattle (with 5.1 million 
head) and swine (with 1.2 million head). 15% of the national to tal of beef cattle are in the Amazon. Despite having 
opportunity costs below US$ 5/tCO 2e, the livestock sector has registered an increase in grassland  surface cover in the 
last 10 years24. 
 
25. Low productivity is the main challenge to the production of  dairy and meat. Large areas of land are occupied, 
grasslands are poorl y utilized, and CO 2e emissions per milk or meat unit are inversely proportional to  the level of 
productivity.  
 
26. The Agenda for Transforming Production in the Amazon (ATPA25) is a key policy that targets subsistence farmers 
seeking to “convert current agricultural production activities in the Amazon to agro-production systems that are 
																																																													
20 MAE (2015), REDD+ Ecuador Action Plan . Ministerio del Ambiente. Pr ograma Nacional Conjunto ONU REDD+  Ecuador. 
21 The Constitution and the Organic Code of Territorial Organizat ion, Autonomy and Decentralization (COOTAD) establishes that th e GADS 
should develop PDOTs. http://www.ame.gob.ec/ame/pdf/cootad_2012.pdf  
22 The Organic Code for Planning and Public Finance (COPLAFYP22, Art.43 and 44) defines the PDOTs: http://www.finanzas.gob.ec/wp-
content/uploads/downloads/2015/03/COPFP.pdf   
23 Results from INEC (2013), Survey on Continuous Agricultural Surface and Production .  
24 Leguia, D., y Moscoso, F. (2015), Medidas y Acciones REDD+ Ecuador: Aplic ación del enfoque paisaje y flujo / stock . Programa Nacional 
Conjunto ONU REDD Ecuador y Minis terio de Ambiente del Ecuador.  Quito, Ecuador. 
Vera, A., & Berrezueta, L. (2010), Desarrollo de sistemas silvopastoriles para rehabilitar  pastizales en la zona norte de la región amazómica 
del Ecuador . Quito, Ecuador: INIAP / MAGAP. 
25 The ATPA integrates a set of MAG AP projects and programmes inc luding: i) Land Project and SIGTIERRAS: Farm Integrated Plan 
Management and Land Allocation to Communities; ii) Coffee and C ocoa Reactivation Project; iii)  Aquaculture; iv) 2KR Support Pr oject for


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 11 of 79 
 
	C
sustainable from economic, social, cultural and environmental p erspectives” through both cert ification and traceability of 
deforestation-free products. It also aims to transform 300,000 hectares of grassland to chacra  systems; semi-intensive 
and intensive agroforestry system s, silvo-pastoral systems and forestry systems26.  
 
27. ATPA promotes productive transformations from traditional t o sustainable in 5 sectors: i) cattle ranching practices 
(pasture land/grassland) to chacra  (high density of timber trees – up to 86 per ha), ii) semi-int ensive agroforestry (medium 
density of timber trees – up to 30 per ha), iii) intensive agro forestry (low density of timber trees – up to 20 per ha) for 
Robusta coffee, Arabica coffee, or cacao and timber, fruit and medicinal herbs, iv) silvo-pastoral systems for milk or 
meat, or forestry systems, and v) aquaculture. The transition p eriod from conventional to sustainable production is 
estimated to be 1-3 years. Duri ng this period, income is signif icantly reduced and can fall to zero.  
 
28. The willingness of smallholders to adopt sustainable practi ces is affected by reluctance to change, high perceived 
risk of failure, and low value placed by farmers on future retu rns. At a higher discount rate, the present value of returns 
to productive transformation falls substantially and with it th e farmer’s interest to engage in the process. High discount 
rates among poor farmers, from 8% to upwards of 25%, are well d ocumented in the literature27,28.  In this context, farmers 
will continue with existing practices rather than assume the ri sks of failure in exchange for futu re returns of little present  
value to them. A grant that cover s farmers’ lost profit is a be tter suited instrument, given that it minimizes the risks 
assumed by the farmer and provides immediate returns. Technical  assistance is key to supporting farmers to overcome 
the reluctance to change.   
 
Product certification 
29.  Ecuador has two existing product certification schemes: (i ) ’Marca País’ is a national-l evel initiative launched by 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade that seeks to promote high-qualit y products for export; (ii) ‘Punt o Verde’ is a national-level 
certification scheme launched by  MAE that recognizes good envir onmental practices in the industrial and service-
providers sectors. ‘Marca Pais’ does not yet have certification  criteria for cacao, coffee or palm commodities and their 
related by-products. ‘Punto Ve rde’ encourages the public and pr ivate sectors to employ new and better production and 
service practices. It serves as a tool to promote competitivene ss in industry and services, committing them to protect 
and conserve the environment. 	To support the transformation of agricultural practices, the GC F project will help to 
develop deforestation-free crite ria and traceability mechanisms  for ‘Marca Pais’ and ‘Punto Verde’, and farmers will be 
supported in having their produ cts certified and marketed under  these labels.  
 
Finance mechanisms for agriculture  
30. In Ecuador’s Amazon Region, agricultural financing comes ma inly from the former National Development Bank 
(BNF), now BanEcuador29. In 2013, the total amount of loans was US$ 76.1 million, of w hich the BNF contributed 73% 
of total funding, followed by f unding from Credit and Savings C ooperatives amounting to 17.2%, as well as private 
banking contributions of 8.3% and the National Financial Corpor ation (CFN) of 1.5%. From the total credit operations for 
the agricultural sector, the amount conferred to the Amazon reg ion represents 3.6%, which is equivalent to 0.08% of 
GDP (Annex XIIIf). However, credits from key financial institut ions, tax concessions and financial incentives for 
agriculture do not fully incorporate criteria for ensuring sust ainable production practices or production based on non-
timber forest products. A recent analysis shows that 27 differe nt tax and financial incentives  are directly or indirectly 
related to palm oil production in the agriculture sector, witho ut considering the effects they have on deforestation, 
degradation or conservation of carbon stocks30. Additionally, these funding mechanisms are not linked to land -use zoning 
decisions. Thus, there is a disconnect between finances support ing production practices and the objectives of the 
REDD+ AP.  
																																																													
production infrastructure in comm unities; v) Livestock; vi) Tec hnological Innovation, as a techni cal assistance for implementa tion; and vii) 
Production chains. See http://www.produccion.gob.ec/transformacion-productiva/  
26 Chacra  is a smallholder farm system and combines a number of crops an d non-timber forest products (NTFPs). ATPA targets are 10% 
conversion to improved agroforest ry systems; 38% semi-intensive  agroforestry; 10% intensive agroforestry; 28% silvopastoral sy stems; and 
13% forestry systems.  
27 Chomitz 2006, Ninan and Sathyapalan 2005,  Naidoo and Adamowic z 2006 
28 GEF (2006), The Role of Local Benefits in Global Environmental Programmes , Evaluation Report 30. GEF Eva luation Office, Washington, 
D.C. 
29 https://www.bnf.fin.ec/index.php?option=com_content&view=articl e&id=592%3Alogica-de-trabajo- de-banecuador-sera-en-territorio-
&catid=27%3Anoticias -principales&lang=es   
30 UNEP Finance Initiative and Ministry of Environment of Ecuador . Fiscal policy in the Palm Oil Sector and its Implications for REDD+ in 
Ecuador , Quito, December 2014.


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 12 of 79 
 
	C
 
Finance mechanisms for forestry 
31. There are several baseline initiatives that provide funding  for conservation and forest restoration. These include: 
 The Natural Protected Areas Heritage of Ecuador (PANE), which represents 20% of the c ountry’s land area in 
51 public protected areas, cover ing 5 million ha of terrestrial  land including large forested areas. 
 Socio Bosque Programme (SBP), wh ich provides financial incenti ves to individual and community landowners 
who voluntarily commit to conserve native forests for a 20-year  period. Since 2008, SBP has signed 2,748 
agreements with 34,973 families, reaching 173,233 beneficiaries  and covering an area of 1.4 million ha of tropical 
forests. It is expected to add approximately 200,000 ha of fore st per year until 202031. SBP is of great relevance 
for the Amazon, particularly for indigenous lands that make up 88% of the sub-region. SBP also includes 
incentives for restoration and sustainable forest management. 
 The National Forest Restoration Plan 2014-2017, which will ref orest approximately 568,000 ha by 2017, followed 
by an expected 100,000 ha per year. This plan and the SBP, whil e important, do not guarantee the achievement 
of national REDD+ results due to the risk of displacement of em issions to forest areas not covered by them and 
because they are not implemented across all priority forest are as. 
 
Hydroelectric potential an d energy transformation 
32. Ecuador’s water availability (~20,700 m3/person/year) far exceeds the world average (1,700 m3/person/year)32. 
Host to the main tributaries of the Amazon River and with the h ighest concentration of river s per square kilometre in the 
world, Ecuador has great potential for hydroelectric generation . However, Ecuador’s electricity generation is currently 
largely based on oil. A recent public policy33 seeks to transform the energy m ix to produce more than 90% of electricity 
from hydroelectric power by 2017, resulting in avoided emission s of up to 8 million tCO 2e/year. Thirteen hydroelectric 
projects are located in the REDD + AP’s target areas and their w atersheds will benefit from the implementation of 
measures prioritized in the REDD+  AP. Actions to reduce defores tation34 in upper watersheds will contribute to 
maintaining water quality and quantity35, thus helping to ensure the flow of water required for clean e nergy generation 
while simultaneously contributi ng to the objectives of the REDD + AP. 
 
33. Several planned projects/pr ogrammes will co-finance the pro posed GCF project. These include: 
 The UNDP-implemented, GEF-financ ed proposal (2016-2020) for ‘I ntegrated management of multiple-use 
landscapes with high conservation value for the sustainable dev elopment of the Ecuadorean Amazon Region’. 
To be executed by MAE, this projec t seeks to catalyse the trans formation of planning, management and land 
use in the Amazon Special Territorial Constituency (CTEA) by bu ilding a governance framework based on a 
landscape approach and optimizing ecosystem services and people ’s welfare.  
 Climate Change Vulnerability Analysis for Hydroelectric Centre s (CHECC)36 is an adaptation project aimed at 
integral management and conservation of paramos, forests and pr otective vegetation as well as anthropic 
ecosystems in the major water basins of key hydroelectric plant s (Coca Codo Sinclair, Delsitanisagua and 
Quijos) to reduce vulnerability to climate change.  
 Targeted Support projects (2016-2017) supported by the UN-REDD  Programme to: i) facilitate REDD+ 
processes and promote effective stakeholder participation, incl uding the elaboration of the safeguard information 
system (SIS); and ii) support the implementation of a National Forest Monitoring System (NFMS).  
 
34. Furthermore, very important initiatives are being designed in conjunction with the GCF proposal and are fully aligned 
with the PAMs outlined in the REDD+ Action Plan, thus providing  valuable complementary funding. These include:   
																																																													
31 http://sociobosque.ambiente.gob.ec/node/44   
32 SENAGUA et al. 2009 
33 Article 15 of the Constitution indicates that the State shall promote the use of environment ally clean technology and non-pol luting and low-
impact alternative energy in the p ublic and private sectors. Th e Electrification Master Plan 2013-2022 energy policy (Annex XI IIk) is 
consistent with this provision. 
34 REDD+ M&A that can improve wate r regulation include measures f or the reduction of deforestati on and forest conservation; tech nological 
change in timber extraction fo cusing in reducing impact; fire c ontrol; rehabilitation of degraded forests; and the introductio n of agroforestry in 
areas currently used for convent ional and extensive agriculture  (WCMC 2014; PNC ONUREDD+ Ecuador 2014).  
35 Forests contribute to the water cycle by retaining, storing an d providing water and moisture. Additionally, forests filter wa ter and thus 
maintain its quality by acting as a physical barrier against th e movement of sediments and precip itation impacts (Echavarría 1 999). Forest 
cover combined with soil have a key regulation role in the wate r cycle, especially in areas with steep slopes (WCMC, 2014). 
36 http://suia.ambiente.gob.ec/c entrales-hidroelectricas


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 13 of 79 
 
	C
 The Forest Investment Programme (FIP) (2016-tbd) supports Ecua dor’s REDD+ efforts by providing upfront 
bridge financing for readiness reforms and public and private i nvestments to address the underlying drivers of 
deforestation and forest degradation and barriers to doing so, while taking into account opportunities to increase 
forests’ resilience to climate change and contribute to multipl e benefits  
 The REDD Early Movers (REM) Programme (2016-tbd) is a global p rogramme designed to reward the most 
advanced countries in REDD+ read iness. By providing financial s upport for the REDD+ interim phase, REM 
aims to assist in closing funding gaps. REM will provide suppor t to Ecuador through financial contributions and 
targeted technical assistance. 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
35. Under the BAU scenario, Ecuador will not implement the PAMs  prioritized in the REDD+ AP at scale due to a 
number of constraints, including domestic resource limitations and the still-uncertain future  of RBPs under the UNFCCC. 
The barriers to be targeted by the GCF project are described in  detail under each sub-component outlined in Section 
C.3, based on a typology presented  in the Climate Focus and Cli mate Policy Initiative paper, “Three Tools to Unlock 
Finance for Land-Use Mitigation and Adaptation”37. This typology identifies i) viability barriers, ii) risk barr iers, and iii) 
information barriers. 	
 
36. The GCF project’s activities are targeted to address these barriers in order to unlock finance for forest and land-
use mitigation:  
a) Targeting viability barriers (a rising from cost s that exceed  revenues, deterring privat e sector investment) by 
increasing / creating / protecting revenues: e.g. through prefe rential market access (publ ic and private purchasing 
policies), direct payments (subsi dies) and paym ents for environ mental services.  
 
b) Targeting viability and risk bar riers (where technological, political, financial or market r isks prevent public or private 
investment) by reducing (public and private sector) costs throu gh different measures. Traditional instruments include 
investment grants to reduce private investment needs, concessio nal loans to reduce the cost of capital, and tax 
breaks.  
c) Targeting risk and information barriers (where lack of knowl edge or institutio nal capacity prevent investment) via 
public framework expenditures. Public framework expenditures in clude capacity building for overcome public and 
private actors’ knowledge barrier s; developing, implementing an d monitoring climate policies to remove technical, 
legal and administrative barrier s to investment; R&D; law enfor cement; land-use/spatial planning and mapping; 
building MRV systems; and devel oping demonstration projects.  
																																																													
37 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/ecunc2.pdf


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | Page 14 of 79 
 
	C
37. Sub-optimal implementation of the REDD+ AP will undermine 
its emission reduction potential and the sustainability of resu lts 
achieved. The GCF project seeks  to provide targeted investment to 
overcome constraints and ensure the implementation of top 
priorities in four components as a first phase to laying the fo undation 
for the implementation of the entire REDD+ AP over time and 
through a variety o f funding strategies. 
 
38. The REDD+ AP focuses its inte rvention in different areas as  
follows: i) those with high threat of deforestation due to live stock and 
agricultural expansion; ii) those representing conservation gap s: i.e. 
areas of forests that are not under any conservation policy and  are 
located near main highways and z ones of greatest agricultural 
expansion; iii) protected areas a nd their buffer zones; iv) are as with 
high socioeconomic benefits (water  regulation, poverty reductio n, 
biodiversity conservation); and v) those where hydroelectric an d 
mining projects are located. Based on these criteria, the REDD+  AP 
and the GCF project will target t he Amazon (Northern, Central a nd 
Southern Amazon) and Southern Dry Forests (Zones 1, 2, 3 and 6:  
see adjacent map). This covers a total of 7 provinces and 38 
cantons, and represents 4,935, 638 ha, of which 1,530,817 ha are  
protected areas, 1,037,272 ha are grasslands under intensive 
systems and 2,500,687 ha are forest  areas under some threat of 
deforestation and/or fall within c onservation gaps. The GCF pro ject 
will cover 20% of the total area prioritized in the REDD+ AP.  
 39. Land-use planning and zoning processes are compulsory in 
Ecuador. However, to be successfully implemented they need 
robust enforcement mechanisms. T his is of particular concern in  areas where commodities a re expanding, opportunity 
costs are high and subsidies are insufficient to promote compli ance with land-use restrictions. The GCF project will 
support the elaboration, imple mentation and participatory enfor cement of land-use plans in the 38 cantons included in 
the area of intervention.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
40. Based on the analysis of the direct and underlying causes o f deforestation in Ecuador, the project will contribute to 
the implementation of the PAMs outlined in the REDD+ AP for the  first five years (2017-20 21). Background analysis and 
feasibility studies related to t he PAMs and to be supported by the GCF are provided in annexes, including:  
 
 Analysis of the drivers of deforestation (including agricultur al expansion as the principal driver and the 
interventions identified in the REDD+ AP): Annex Iic 
 Opportunity cost analysis: Annex Iid, Part 1 
 Cost-benefit analysis: Annex Iib, Part 2 
 Prioritization of geogr aphical areas: Annex Iie 
 REDD+ AP Finance Strategy: Annex Iif 
 Economic analysis: Annex XII 
 Detailed budget for the GCF pr oject, including co-financing: A nnex XII 
 Summary of consultations in t he development of the National Ac tion Plan: Annex XIIIa 
 
Project components and target area  
41. In accordance with Ecuador’ s REDD+ AP, the pr oject will con tribute to transforming current agricultural production 
systems to ones with low levels of emissions from deforestation  and will also engender behav ioural shifts through a 
market approach. It will focus on four geographical areas: Nort hern, Central and Southern Amazon, and Southern Dry 
Forests (Zones 1, 2, 3 and 6) (see Section C.2 and Annex IX). T he project will ensure that reducing emissions from 
deforestation: i) enhances the main environmental and social be nefits of the REDD+ AP; ii) coordinates the territorial


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 15 of 79 
 
	C
approach with national policies and objectives, including the p roduction transformation agenda, sustainable energy policy 
and natural heritage governance policy; and iii) integrates a s et of national initiatives with the objectives of the current 
proposal (see Section C. 5. for more details).   
 
Table 2: Summary of interventions 
Component / 
Sub-
component Type of intervention Target geographical / 
land-use areas Beneficiaries Estimated average 
amount per beneficiary 
Component 1 Technical assistance and 
capacity building for PDOTs, Life Plans and forest control 
activities  GCF project entire 
intervention area (Amazonia and Northern 
Loja Province) Local governments and 
indigenous communities Not applicable 
Sub-
component 2.1 Incentives and capacity 
building for sustainable 
production through support for production kits   Converted forest-areas 
owned by smallholder farmers in the Amazon 
region, adjacent to large 
forest areas Individual smallholder farmers 
practicing subsistence 
agriculture, and local production organizations  USD 450 (cost of each 
kit)/ha/year for three years –  
for agroforestry systems   
USD 344 (cost of each 
kit)/ha/year for three years –for silvo-pastoral systems  
 
Benefiting 1,500 smallholder families  
Sub-component 2.2 Technical assistance and 
capacity building to remove barriers for sustainable 
production systems Converted forest-areas 
owned by smallholder 
farmers in the Amazon 
region, adjacent to large forest areas Individual smallholder farmers 
practicing subsistence agriculture, and local production 
organizations  Not applicable 
Sub-
component 2.3 Technical assistance and 
capacity building to redesign existing public credit lines with 
favourable financial conditions 
for sustainable production practices Converted forest-areas 
owned by smallholder 
farmers in the Amazon region, adjacent to large 
forest areas Individual smallholder farmers 
practicing subsistence 
agriculture, and local production 
organizations Not applicable 
Sub-
component 2.4 Technical assistance and 
policy support to promote deforestation-free commodities GCF project entire 
intervention area 
(Amazonia and Northern 
Loja Province) Individual smallholder farmers 
practicing subsistence 
agriculture, and local production 
organizations Not applicable 
Sub-
component 3.1 Incentive payments through 
MAE’s Socio Bosque Programme project portfolio to 
predetermined areas and 
beneficiaries Forested areas in GCF 
project intervention area  Indigenous communities and 
smallholders  USD 25-35/ha/year 
 
Benefiting up to 25000 families 
Sub-
component 3.2 Incentives via existing 
restoration projects supported by 3 Water Funds (FONAG, 
FORAGUA, FONAPA), to 
predetermined areas and beneficiaries Water Funds’ targeted 
watersheds in GCF project intervention area  Rural communities in the 
watershed areas  USD 280,000 per Water 
Fund per year 
Sub-component 4.1 Technical assistance and 
capacity building to monitor 
REDD+ implementation 
nationally National All REDD+ stakeholders 
Indirectly Not applicable 
Sub-
component 4.1 Technical assistance and 
capacity building to 
operationalize REDD+ Action Plan National REDD+ stakeholders  Indirectly Not applicable 
 
Component 1.  Investment in enabling policies to address drivers of deforesta tion and reduce associated 
emissions  
 
42. This component will strengthen land-use planning policies t o include land uses and measures identified spatially 
and thematically in the REDD+ AP as relevant to reducing defore station in the project target areas. It will strengthen 
local government and community c apacities for implementation an d enforcement.


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 16 of 79 
 
	C
43. As the Amazon contains large areas of Indigenous Lands, the  GCF project will also support the upgrading and 
implementation of Life Plans and ensure, through inter-institut ional coordination, their incorporation into the PDOTs of 
the Autonomous Decentralized Governments (GADs). MAE will enter  into agreements with indigenous peoples (Ips) and 
communities, Afro-Ecuadorian people and Montubio people to supp ort land-use zoning and reinforce existing forest 
areas, local capacity building,  and strengthen forest control. Actions in Indigenous Lands will be undertaken only in those 
Lands where the respective Indigen ous Peoples have indicated wi llingness to participate.  
 
44. Specific sub-components and related activities are presente d below. Detailed activities and associated budget lines 
are presented in Annex XIIb.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: PDOTs and Life Plans updated, taking into ac count climate change mitigation and 
adaptation dimensions, and implemented  
 
Table 2: Summary of sub-component 1.1 
Baseline Scenario PDOTs were developed and approved in 2015 and are valid until 2 019. PDOTs must be updated every year. So 
far, MAE has invested USD 25,000 to support the development of 6 climate change plans for 6 GADs. These 
plans will be included in the actualization of their PDOTs; how ever, only one of these GADs is in the prioritized 
REDD+ area.  
Barriers 
 Information barriers: Lack of information to include climate ch ange and deforestation considerations in the PDOTs: 
e.g. carbon stocks of forests and their contribution to nationa l CC targets and to the generation of multiple benefits; 
alternative options for producti on to reduce forest loss, etc. Information recently generated through the REDD+ 
readiness process has not yet been disseminated widely to local  planning authorities.   
Specific activities supported 
by GCF to overcome barriers (why grants are needed) Targeting information barriers via public framework expenditure s. 
 Capacity building for local authorities to include deforestatio n and climate change considerations in PDOTs in the 
cantons included in the ar ea of intervention. 
 
Updating and implementing PDOTs (provincial and municipal) and Life Plans (to be presented in 2019), as well 
as land-use zoning at a sub-nati onal level to identify and prot ect forest areas that s hould not be subject to 
agricultural expansion in the cantons included in the area of i ntervention. 
Co-finance (leverage of public 
and private finance) and for what purposes MAGAP: USD 1.91 million for ATPA to develop mechanisms for info rmation management, tenure and land use 
that allow for integrated farm management plans, including map of current land use at scale of 1:100,000 for 
planning and production zoning pl ans, geo-referenced database w ith information from the project beneficiaries’ 
properties, and interdisciplinary technical teams trained to ac company beneficiaries.  
 
MAE: USD 0.4 million for the Achuar Nationality, and USD 0.042 million for Coca Codo Sinclair hydroelectric 
facility to include variable c limate change in the planning pro cess in at least 3 GADs within two years; and to 
include variable climate change in the planning process of at l east 1 GAD within two years. 
Complementary finance 
under joint programming 
 REM: USD 0.65 million for MAE Action Plan and MAGAP to support land legalization programme to support the 
implementation of the REDD+ AP. 
 FIP: USD 5 million. 
Leading Entity & Support Entity for implementation MAE SCC, MAGAP, GADS. 
 
45. In 2019, the PDOTs will be officially reviewed by the Natio nal Secretariat for Planning and Development 
(SENPLADES). This institution has authority over matters of nat ional planning and fiscal budget expenditure, and will 
align national and sectoral resources and programmes with the r evised PDOTs, thus optimizing funds for their 
implementation.   
 
46. The GCF project will update 18 PDOTs (12 municipal, 6 provi ncial) and 5 Life Plans38. The PDOTs will be updated 
to reflect information, measures, actions and monitoring relate d to climate change and reducing emissions from 
deforestation. Activities within the PDOTs include, for example , water supply, residues management, irrigation, 
production infrastructure development, and support for the regu larization of land tenure. Sub-component 1.1 will also 
support the implementation of off-farm measures prioritized in the 18 PDOTs39. Finally, this sub-component will cover 
																																																													
38 http://www.planificacion.gob.ec/w p-content/uploads/downloads/20 12/07/Plan_Nacional_para_el_Buen_Vivir.pdf  
39https://unfccc.int/files/land_use_and_climate_change/redd/appli cation/pdf/2014_december_frel_submission_ecuador.pdf


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 17 of 79 
 
	C
skills trainings for technical staff and improved coordination across associated institutions. Following a needs 
assessment, ATPA-MAGAP will devel op a training plan adapted to local needs.  
 
47. Based on information provided by the Units of Planning and Coordination of the Ministries of Environment and 
Agriculture, as well as the Annual Budget Planning (ABP) of the  local offices of MAE and MAGAP, the cost for elaborating 
a PDOT is typically USD 5,000-10,000 in the case of municipal P DOTs, USD 10,000-20,000 for provincial PDOTs, and 
USD 5,000-8,000 for the Life Plans in indigenous territories. E ach PDOT is context-specific  and therefore the measures 
and actions prioritized will vary significantly from one PDOT t o the other. Activities included usually in a PDOT are related 
to water supply, residues manag ement, irrigation, production in frastructure development, etc. The GCF funds will only 
be used to finance activities directly related to climate chang e and reduction of deforestation as detailed in the REDD+ 
AP, such as sustainable forestr y management, non-timber forest production, monitoring of REDD+ M&As to be able to 
report against REDD+ performance indicators included in the PDO Ts, as well as support for the regularization of land 
tenure. The average cost of implem enting these PDOTs is around USD 150,000-200,000 for life plans, USD 500,000 for 
municipal GADs and USD 800,000-1 million for provincial GADs 
 
Sub-component 1.2. Local capacity building for supervision of l and-use planning and zoning 
Table 4: Summary of sub-component 1.2 
Baseline 
Scenario While existing PDOTs include some environmental information, th ey do not include specific actions for GHG 
emissions reduction. MAE has inv ested in the publication and pr omotion of guidelines for GADs on how to include 
climate change in local planning but these are not yet applied.  When PDOTs apply this guidance, oversight for the 
implementation of recommendatio ns and actions related to reduci ng emissions from deforestation will be required, 
and capacity for oversight will need to be strengthened.   
Barriers 
 Information barriers: Lack of capacity to supervise land-use pl anning and zoning at the local level, particularly of 
recommendations for reducing deforestation. This is largely due  to lack of knowledge about the concept, use of 
PDOTs for addressing REDD+ measur es and lack of practical exper ience in their supervision. 
Activities supported by 
GCF to overcome barriers 
(why grants are needed)  Targeting information barriers via public framework expenditur es. 
 Capacity building for peoples, nationalities and organizations  for the supervision and implementation of Life 
Plans in the 38 cantons included in the area of intervention. 
Leading Entity & Support 
Entity for implementation MAGAP and MAE. 
 
48. Sub-component 1.2 will strengt hen local capacity to success fully implement land-use zoning, which is of particular 
importance in areas where the production of commodities is expa nding. Additionally, it will help ensure that REDD+ 
measures and actions result in emission reductions. Focused on non-government stakeholders such as indigenous 
communities, farmers and local civil society, the capacity buil ding will be oriented towards the supervision and the 
implementation of the PDOTs to be elaborated under sub-componen t 1.1.   
 
Sub-component 1.3. Strengthening forest control 
Table 5: Summary of sub-component 1.3 
Baseline 
scenario MAE has invested fiscal funds in forestry control activities si nce 2012. However, under the baseline scenario, 
forestry management is characterized by the following: 
  
 A short-term vision shaped by the following factors: i) forest  management processes are inconsistent with 
species’ natural regeneration ra tes; ii) challenges related to property rights which weaken investment 
opportunities in the forest; and  iii) insufficient data regardi ng the physical-mechanical properties of species 
 Outdated cycle and diameter data 
 Low traceability  
 Low dissemination of regulations 
Barriers 
 Information barriers: Lack of capacity to implement forest cont rol: regulation, protocols, experience in 
implementation, lack of know ledge of the regulations. 
 
Viability and risk barriers: Costs of strengthening forest cont rol are greater than the benefits. REDD+ RBPs 
could change this, but have not yet been actualized. 
Activities supported by GCF to 
overcome barriers (why grants 
are needed)  Targeting information barriers via public framework expenditur es. 
 Updating logging cycles as well as minimum cutting diameters b y species. 
 Assisting the implementation of traceability processes in the cantons included in the area of intervention. 
 Supporting the dissemination and uptake of the Forest Traceabi lity System, through communication 
campaigns in the cantons included in the area of intervention. 
Co-finance (leverage of public 
and private finance) and for 
what MAE:  
 USD 0.9 million for a system of traceability of forest product s.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 18 of 79 
 
	C
 USD 1.4 million for local surveillance and monitoring systems s trengthened to support enforcement 
of land-use plans and sustainabl e agriculture, livestock and fo restry regulations in the CTEA.
Complementary finance under 
joint programming REM: USD 2 million for forestry control measures and support fo r the governance of nationally-owned forest 
lands. 
Leading Entity & Support Entity for implementation MAE’s Sub-secretary of Natural Patrimony (SPN) 
 
49.  Ecuador has a rigorous forest control system; however, eff orts to improve traceability and enforcement are still 
needed. Through this sub-component, the GCF project will suppor t the implementation of traceability processes included 
in the REDD+ AP, namely: a) the definition of specific regulati ons for traceability; b) the development of protocols for 
certification of origin; c) the strengthening of the Forest Adm inistration System tools (SAF) to meet the technological and 
institutional requirements needed for traceability; d) the deve lopment of species identification catalogues and the 
enhancement of the checkpoints’ e ffectiveness; and e) a specifi c monitoring mechanism for illegal timber extraction. 
Lessons from the implementation of this sub-component will be s ystematized and will contribute to the improvement of 
new regulations for su stainable forest management, including ti mber and non-timber forest products.   
 
50. In order to achieve traceab ility, the project will contribu te to the involvement of local communities in the control 
measures implemented by MAE. This will include the implementati on of community monitoring of forest and wildlife, 
which will reduce the risk of leakage (displacement) of illegal  deforestation between areas. Along with community 
monitoring, scientific research will be coordinated with leadin g academic institutions in the country to foster the generation  
of information on logging cycles, species, minimum cutting diam eters by species and other relevant factors for forest 
monitoring. This information will provide feedback to improve f orest control measures.  
 
51. Co-financing for this sub-component includes USD 0.9 millio n from the Government, and USD 1.4 million from GEF, 
which is focused on strengthening local surveillance and monito ring systems to support enforcement of land-use plans 
and sustainable agriculture, livestock and forestry regulations  in the CTEA. 
 
52. Furthermore, USD 2 million from REM 	will support forestry control measures and support for the gove rnance of 
nationally-owned forest lands. 
 
1.4 Formal inter-institutional coordination structures within t he framework of land-use plans, life plans and land-
use zoning. 
 
Table 6: Summary of sub-component 1.4 
Baseline 
Scenario  No defined structure or system exists for inter-institutional c oordination around land-use zoning. A number of 
institutions share responsibilities for forest and land managem ent at all levels (national, provincial, cantonal, 
parochial), creating overlappi ng responsibilities and ineffecti ve planning processes. Enhanced coordination is 
needed both between national insti tutions and GADs and among GA Ds.   
Barriers 
 Information barriers: A lack of cross-sectoral knowledge of rel evant policies contributes to the lack of capacity to 
conduct inter-institu tional coordination.  
 
Budget barriers: There are no resources allocated to inter-inst itutional coordination within the annual investment plan 
of Government institutions. 
Activities supported by 
GCF to overcome barriers 
(why grants are needed)  Targeting information barriers via public framework expenditur es.  
 Creation/strengthening of inte r-sectoral, inter-institutional and multi-level coordination systems/structures for 
the provision of coordinated national sectoral programmes in ac cordance with land-use zoning. The system will 
ensure: 1) relevant stakeholders are aware of their roles and r esponsibilities and have the necessary 
information/capacity to fulfil t heir respective roles; 2) effec tive participation of production stakeholders, GADs, 
indigenous territories and sector ial ministries; and 3) fora fo r enhanced coordination and communication related 
to the implementation of the proposed activities. 
Co-finance (leverage of public and private finance) 
and for what MAE: USD 1.4 million: National m ulti-sectoral coordination and policy strengthened to support sustainable production 
in multiple-use landscapes by: a ) facilitating the implementati on of coordination mechanisms foreseen in the 
Constitution; b) strengthening re gulations on forest conservati on and land use to mainstream guidance for 
sustainable production of non-timber  forest products (NTFPs) an d deforestation-free production of palm, coffee, 
cocoa in high value conserva tion forests; and c) strengthening of national capacities for regulation enforcement. 
Leading Entity & Support 
Entity for implementation MAE and MAGAP.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 19 of 79 
 
	C
53. The GCF project will compleme nt the technical activities un dertaken in the territories through the provision of 
specific support to improve inter-institutional agreements. The  project will support coordi nation mechani sms between 
institutions and existing funds (A TPA, CC, Patrimony, Marca Pai s, GADS, SBP, Water Funds, etc.), and with 
SENPLADES planning and budgeting processes. Co-financing includ es USD 1.4 million from the GEF-Amazonia project, 
which will be focused on national multi-sectoral coordination a nd strengthening policy to support sustainable production.
 
 
Component 2.  Financial and economic incentives for the transit ion to sustainable production systems in non-
forest areas  
54. Component 2 supports the Agenda for Transforming Production  in the Amazon (ATPA). In the early stages of 
production transformation, lives tock producers need resources a nd advice to transition from non-environmentally 
sustainable production practice s to more sustainable models. Su stainable production practices are expected to become 
economically viable only once the transition is complete and ne w practices are fully in effect. However, producers 
frequently fail during this transition due to lack of adequate investment, reduced income during the transition period and 
limited access to the formal fi nancial sector. The objective of  sub-component 2.1 is to provide an economic incentive to 
support livestock producers during the transition to more susta inable production, in order to offset the reduction of income 
expected during the transition fr om a conventional to sustainab le process, thus allowing the new production system to 
grow and consolidate while improving farmers’ living conditions . This incentive takes the form of a direct payment to the 
producer to compensate for the loss of income during the transi tion period, until the production system becomes 
economically viable and sustainable.  
 
55. Grants provided to farmers are necessary despite the fact t hat the transition to sustainab le production will eventually 
generate revenue. This is due to the very risk-averse nature of  beneficiaries and the prevailing culture of resistance to 
change described in Section C.1 and documented during the consu ltation process of the ATPA and REDD+ AP. The 
risks perceived by farmers creat es a gap/barrier which impedes their integration into credit/guarantee-based financial 
schemes. The direct gra nt payment to farmers will only be tempo rary (6 months to 1 year) to overcome this investment 
barrier and will serve to subseque ntly integrate these producer s into more conventional and private sector-driven 
financial schemes.  
56. GCF sub-components 2.2, 2.3 , 2.4 and 2.5 will address the i nformation barriers, the viability barriers for the 
producers, and the risk barriers related to the absence of trac eability systems to support cert ification. These activities 
will address the percept ion that the costs of certification for  the individual private producer outweigh the benefits 
(especially for small producers) that currently impede the deve lopment of fairer value chains for deforestation-free 
products. The barriers faced by smallholders to transform produ ction practices are well described in the literature 
(Salcedo & Guzmán, 2014) (Mejia  & Pacheco, 2013) (Pokorny, et al., 2012).


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 20 of 79 
 
	C
 
Figure	1:	The	Production 	Transformation	Process	
	
Source:	MAGAP‐ATPA	
 
57. At the end of the production transformation process, public  investments are no longer needed and producers will 
have permanently changed their pro duction practices. However, i n reality not all producers are at the same stage of 
transformation, so the implement ation of the various sub-compon ents will overlap in time.  
 58. Important background and feas ibility studies related to Com ponent 2 are available in the annexes:  
 Cost-benefit analysis and estim ation of opportunity costs: Ann ex IId Part 1 to Part 3. 
 Economic analysis: Annex XII. 
 Surface area under agricultural production: Annex XIIIe. 
 Investment catalogue for stra tegic projects: Annex XIIIg Part 1 to Part 4. 
 Credit provided by the financial system to the agricultural se ctor in the Amazon-2013: Annex XIIIf. 
 The National Strategy for the Tr ansformation of the Productive  Matrix, presented in Annex XIIIr Part 1 and Part 
2. 
 Feasibility study analyzing financial and economic incentives,  and their alternatives: Annex XIV, including an 
explanation of the transition period from conventional producti on practices to sustainable production, detailed 
process of transition, durati on of this period, beneficiaries, compensation amount per beneficiary and the 
calculation methodology.  
 
2.1 Provision of incentives to tra nsition towards sustainable p roduction 
 
Table 7: Summary of sub-component 2.1
 
Baseline Scenario Large areas (300,400 ha) will require changes in land use to ac hieve the REDD+ Strategy objectives. 
 
One of the core competencies of MAGAP is technical assistance, which represents a non-monetary incentive for 
the producer. ATPA invested USD 895,776 in technical assistance  in 2015.  
 
ATPA technical assistance also i ncludes working with producers to develop integrated management plans (IMPs). 
IMPs have typically focused on  traditional approaches and do no t fully integrate information on climate change or 
REDD+. However, information generated in the IMP provides a bas eline on which the GCF project will identify types 
of incentives needed for the transition stage (the "valley of d eath") from a conventional system to support sustainable 
production systems that are aligned with the updated PDOTs and REDD+ PAMs. Baseline studies undertaken by 
ATPA will also be used. These include the following studies tha t have been used in the design of the GCF proposal: 
 
 Funding mechanisms for the implem entation of incentives under the Production Transformation Agenda 
Amazon.


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 21 of 79 
 
	C
 Tax incentives for sustainable pr oduction restructuring in the  Amazon. 
 Study of Amazonian producers wh o develop livestock activities and / or maintain grazing on their farms. 
 Native forest species nursery associations to recover the nati ve flora and supply sustainable agroforestry 
systems in degraded pastures.   
ATPA has identified the need for direct payment of incentives t o cover the transition stage. These are USD 500 for 
each property managed under agroforestry systems and USD 650 fo r each property managed under silvo-pastoral 
systems. It has also designated qualified staff to supervise IM Ps on the ground. The budget for 32 field technicians 
and 13 central office specialists in 2015 was USD 895,776. Howe ver, these baseline scenario resources are 
insufficient to take incentives t o scale and significant barrie rs will remain, thereby limiting the contribution of ATPA 
to REDD+ targets. 
Barriers 
 In the early stages of production transformation, small produce rs need resources and advice to transform their 
production practices.  
 
Viability barriers: Agricultural practices are expected to beco me economically sustainable only once the transition is 
complete and new practices are fully functioning, requiring a) additional investments that are not available; b) 
reduced income during the transition period. 
 Risk barriers: The formal financial sector is unwilling to prov ide resources because of the high level of uncertainty 
associated with a change in production. Producers are unwilling  to take on loans to engage in production 
transformation due to perceived risks.    
Information barriers: Cultural reluctance to change, lack of in formation on new practices and lack of trust in their 
feasibility reduces uptake of the practices by farmers. 
Activities supported by GCF to overcome barriers (why grants are needed) Targeting viability and risk barriers by reducing private secto r costs through investment grants to reduce private 
investment needs. 
Co-finance (leverage of public and private finance) and for what MAGAP: USD 1.33 million to support technical staff. 
 MAE: 
 
 USD 3.72 million for land use and management plans implemented  in priority landscapes; strengthening 
extension services for the su stainable production and landscape  approach; training programmes for 
communities and small, medium and large producers on best pract ices and standards for market access; and 
support to producers to access inputs, technology and other ser vices for production. 
 
 USD 4.72 million for Coca Codo Sinclair hydroelectric facility , introducing sustainable management systems in 
300 hectares of farms over the next five years; CHECC DELSITANI SAGUA for silvo-pastoral systems; CHECC 
QUIJOS introducing sustainable management systems on 100 hectar es of farms in the next five years. 
Complementary finance 
under joint programming REM: USD 1.85 million for the design of an implementation mecha nism of the National REDD+ AP (incorporation 
of REDD+ criteria in ATPA). 
Leading Entity & Support Entity for implementation MAGAP  
 
59. The primary beneficiaries will include individuals and loca l production organizations. Women’s organizations and 
indigenous peoples will be encouraged to participate in the inc entive plan. The incentive will be coordinated with an 
Integrated Farm Management Plan, ensuring compliance with land- use planning and zoning requirements, including 
criteria for good environmental pra ctices. The incentive will b e delivered through ATPA under an inter-institutional 
agreement between MAE and MAGAP. MAGAP will be the implementing  entity and will verify beneficiaries’ compliance 
with the new sustainable production system over time. The agree ment will establish the conditions and criteria to be met 
by the beneficiaries.  
 
60. The opportunity cost and the incentives to be paid have bee n assessed during the consultations with local farmers 
and stakeholders, considering the loss of the original producer s’ income from livestock compared to sustainable 
production systems. Data gathered for this proposal shows that USD 142/ha is needed to offset the opportunity cost of 
business as usual production. No netheless, opportunity cost cal culations have some limitations which should be taken 
into account. First, opportunity cost may be an inappropriate v aluation – for example, in the case of illegal logging and 
other illegal activities that res ult in deforestation. Second, it may be inadequate in terms of understanding what payments 
are needed to halt deforestation. Therefore, additional incenti ves (for instance, production kits for improved farming or 
silvo-pastoral systems and technical support) are needed in ord er to overcome the above-mentioned barriers. MAGAP 
has defined the required incentives and associated costs as par t of the plans for integrated farm management


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 22 of 79 
 
	C
considering different incentive ranges per productive reconvers ion. For agroforestry, USD 450/ha per year for up to three 
years is required; for silvo-pas toral lands, USD 344/ha per yea r for up to three years is required. 
 
61. The delivery of new incentives will be subject to complianc e with the IMP, and monitored by the extension units of 
MAGAP. This extension system is responsible for monitoring MAGA P activities at the provincial level and is already 
institutionalized, which guarant ees its long-term permanence. 
 
62. A monitoring and evaluation scheme will be established betw een the provincial directors of MAGAP and the project 
coordination team in the central office. The provincial office will be responsible for devel oping an intervention schedule 
for each farm to continuously monitor activities. A baseline wi ll be set prior to implementation and provision of incentives. 
This information will serve as t he comparison point for monitor ing the results indicated in all four components of the GCF 
project. The expected results of this transition, and hence the  impact of the incentive, will be measured over time, 
depending on the type of crop (short cycle, biennials, perennia ls, forest). An average of t hree years is estimated for a 
transition process to  be complete (see Annex XIIIu and the Feas ibility Study section for more details) 
 
63. Co-financing for this sub-component comes from fiscal resou rces (central Government budget for MAGAP, national 
public banking which provides credits for agricultural producti on, and local governments’ budgets) and external funds 
(international cooperation and private national investments).  
 
2.2 Promote the coordination and implementation of existing tax  incentives that will allow for the transition to 
sustainable production systems  
Table 8: Summary of sub-component 2.2 
Baseline 
Scenario  Ecuador has not developed financial terms and instruments such as: i) concessional loans (s enior and subordinate); 
ii) equity; and iii) guarantees, to deploy to specific climate change projects and programmes. Each financial institution 
(CFN, Ban Ecuador, CONAFIPS and the Water Funds) has its own fi nancial terms and instruments to address 
agriculture and other programmes. Current financial programmes do not include specific i ncentives to encourage 
producers to move towards sustainable production. Two studies40 have been undertaken that identify existing tax 
incentives that may be modified in order to support the transit ion to sustainable production systems but 
implementation is impeded in the baseline scenario by a number of barriers - see below.  
Barriers 
 Information barriers: 
 Lack of capacity to implement exi sting tax incentives by the I nternal Revenue Service.  
 Lack of knowledge about green taxation and impacts of taxation  on deforestation by the Internal Revenue 
Service. 
 Lack of knowledge of green tax incentives on the part of benef iciaries.  
Activities supported by 
GCF to overcome barriers (why grants needed) Targeting information barriers via public framework expenditure s: The potential beneficiaries of these environmental 
tax exemptions will be fully informed and provided with capacit y building for accessing these incentives. The staff of 
the Centre for Fiscal Studies will be trained on issues of gree n taxation. 
Leading Entity & Support 
Entity for implementation MAGAP and SRI (Internal Revenue Service). 
 
64. A framework agreement between SRI and MAE will be signed to  promote the coordination and application of 
existing tax incentives that will allow the transition to susta inable production systems or work in favour of the environment 
and, more specifically, to reduce deforestation. The alignment of existing incentives with REDD+ will be assessed to 
reduce transaction costs and fac ilitate their app lication to ch ange the behaviour of economic  agents or for production to 
be changed to more sustainable sy stems. The potential beneficia ries of these environmental tax exemptions will be fully 
informed about and capacitated to access these incentives. The staff of the Centre for Fiscal Studies will be trained on 
issues of green taxation. 	
 65. Existing incentives offered to producers in Ecuador related  to agriculture, land use and forestry have been analysed 
for their alignment with the purpose of implementing sustainabl e production systems (under the ATPA) and they 
have been classified as: 
 Incentives that do not require m odification but must be coordi nated to support ATPA implementation. 
 Incentives that do require modification to support the goals o f ATPA and are feasible to modify in the short 
term.


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 23 of 79 
 
	C
 Incentives that do require modification to support ATPA but ar e not feasible to modify in the short term. 
 
66. Following this classificatio n, a series of options to modif y incentives have been identified:  
 
 6 incentives associated with M AGAP grant programmes to support  the agricultural sector at national level could 
be coordinated with the implement ation of ATPA to prioritize pr oducers who have IMPs in the Amazon region. 
Additionally, these MAGAP incentives should seek to complement the actions being im plemented by SBP. 
 5 tax exemptions or deductions offered by SRI could support th e process of restructuring the agricultural sector 
since they can have an impact on the choice of cleaner producti on technologies. In this case, it is important 
that MAGAP and SRI undertake a joint effort to simplify process es so that small farmers can benefit from these 
exemptions or deductions. 
 7 incentives that can be modified in the short term are relate d to concessional credit lines or agricultural 
insurance. Through technical as sistance, the project will suppo rt: 
o Changing conditions for credit approval so tha t the proposed u se of the credit is in line with IMPs.  
o Developing criteria that allow farmers with approved IMPs to a ccess more favourable financial 
conditions (term and grace period). 
o Modifying tax incentives to align with sustainable production reconversion. This, though, requires 
amendments to the Tax Code, approved in the National Assembly, so is unlikely to take place in the 
short term. 
 
2.3 Support the redesign of public  credit lines to reorient the m to sustainable production practices 
  
Table 9: Summary of sub-component 2.3. 
Baseline In Ecuador’s Amazon Region, agric ultural financing comes mainly  from the former National Development Bank 
(BNF), now Ban Ecuador. In 2013, the total amount of loans was US$ 76.1 million, of which the BNF contributed 
73% of total funding, followed by funding from Credit and Savin gs Cooperatives amounting to 17.2%, as well as 
private banking contributions o f 8.3% and the National Financia l Corporation (CFN) of 1.5%. From the total credit 
operations for the agricultural sector, the amount conferred to  the Amazon region represented just 3.6%, which is 
equivalent to 0.08% of GDP (see Annex XIIIf).  
 Current financing programmes do not include specific incentives  or conditions to encourage producers/farmers to 
adopt sustainable practices. Rat her, they consist of mechanisms  such as collateral loans to producers that put their 
entire operation and property at r isk if the producer does not generate financial returns in the immediate term. 
Baseline investment US$ 76.1 million 
Barriers 
 Information barriers: 
 Lack of capacity to implement credit lines that are conducive to encouraging producers/farmers to adopt 
sustainable practices.  
 Lack of knowledge of the deforestation impact of existing cred it lines. 
Activities supported by 
GCF to overcome barriers 
(why grants are needed)  Redesign of existing lines of c redit for productive transforma tion and to introduce REDD + criteria into existing 
credit lines.  
 Capacity building to financial institutions on technical crite ria for establishing new c redit lines that promote 
sustainable production prac tices and monitoring.  
 Promotion and uptake support for  the designed public credit li nes. 
 Strengthening the capacity of MAGAP to provide technical assis tance to producers in project proposal 
formulation to access  the new credit lines.  
Co-finance (leverage of 
public and private finance) 
and for what MAE: USD 0.54 million for credit systems for deforestation-free  production in high-value conservation forests, 
training programmes for key fina ncial institutions (banks) to d evelop deforestation-free investment portfolios and 
improve assessment of loans for  sustainable production in High- Conservation Value Forest (HVCF) or degraded 
areas, and support for small producers and alternative products  (e.g. NTFPs and ecotourism). 
Leading Entity & Support 
Entity for implementation MAGAP and Ban Ecuador. 
 
67. Existing credit lines available in the short term for conve rsion to sustainable agricultural practices are:  
 CFN’s Emergency Programme for the Agriculture and Livestock Se ctor credit line: the minimum applicable 
amount is USD 50,000 and the line covers a maximum of 80% of th e total agriculture or livestock project budget. 
Both individuals and associations /cooperatives already accredit ed by MAGAP are eligible. 
 CFN‘s agroforestry credit line: the minimum applicable amount is USD 50,000 and maximum USD 2 million. 
The interest rate varies from 7.5 % to 8.5% over a 20-year term.   
 Services, Commerce and Production Credit (ex-BNF).


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 24 of 79 
 
	C
 Purchase of production land (ex-BNF).  
 National Guarantee Fund.  
 Agricultural Insurance.  
 
68. However, these financial support programmes do not include specific incentives to encourage producers to move 
towards sustainable production. This is due to capacity and inf ormation barriers of the public financial institutions to 
develop appropriate frameworks and financial products to suppor t sustainable production at a reasonable cost for the 
financial institution. Barriers include information on sustaina ble agricultural technologies, lack of information on emerging 
international niche markets for deforestation-free commodities as well as information on the prospects created by the 
‘Marca Pais’ initiative, lack of knowledge of Government effort s for creating an enabling environments through land-use 
planning and integrated farm management plans.  
69. The GCF project aims to address these information barriers by providing capacity building to the financial institutions 
so that they can adjust financial products available to the agr icultural sector so that they are more favourable for 
producers and encourage them to adopt sustainable production sy stems. GCF resources will not be used to capitalize 
credit lines. 
 70. All of the adjusted and new financial products must include  criteria to improve productivity in already-deforested 
areas in line with land-use planning and IMPs. With regard to l ivestock, the transformation of  production will integrate 
economic, ecological, technological and institutional elements to convert marginally profitable and unsustainable 
pastures to other agricultural uses (preferably agroforestry sy stems). The GCF project will support the development of 
criteria to improve productivit y and sustainability of producti on processes. 
 71. While sub-component 2.1 will provide incentives to support smallholders during the transition to sustainable 
production, sub-component 2.3 will support more favourable syst ems to adjust public credit lines so that, once the 
transition is made, smallholders can access additional funding as needed to continue and expand new production 
processes in the future. The combined action of sub-components 2.1 and 2.3 will increase both the scale and the 
temporal reach of the production transformation process.  
72. The capacities of financial institutions and MAGAP to monit or the use of credit for sustainable production systems 
will be strengthened. MAGAP technicians and financial advisors,  together with the smallholder farmers, will define credit 
needs as part of the IMP methodology. This information is passe d to the credit unit in MAGAP’s central office which will, 
in turn, pass this information to Ban Ecuador and other credit agents to evaluate the financ ial feasibility of the credit.  
 
2.4 Promote public and private pr ocurement of deforestation-fre e products 
 
Table 10: Summary of sub-component 2.4
 
Baseline 
Scenario  Most existing fiscal and financial incentives are geared toward s the producer (supply-side) and very few focus on 
consumers of agricultural comm odities (demand-side). The number  of public and private purchasers in Ecuador 
committed to the procurement of sustainable commodities is limi ted, and this is mainly due to a lack of awareness 
and lack of procurement policies for deforestation-free commodi ties in the procurement processes of public and 
private entities.  
Barriers 
 Viability barriers for the producer: There is currently limited  market demand for deforestation-free products. Demand 
is necessary to induce private in vestment in deforestation-free  commodity production.  
 
Information barriers on the demand side (both public and privat e): There is currently a lack of knowledge about 
responsible purchasing policies and certification in general an d an even greater information gap when it comes to 
the concept of deforestation-fr ee commodities. There is also a lack of mechanisms to efficiently connect producers 
and buyers. 
Activities supported by GCF 
to overcome barriers (why grants are needed)  Targeting viability barriers by c reating private producer reve nues: Increase the number of public and private 
purchasers in Ecuador committed  to the procurement of sustainab le commodities. 
 Targeting information barriers via public framework expenditur es: Knowledge exchanges on procurement 
policies for deforestation-free  commodities will be financed, b oth in the public and private sector, to promote 
the inclusion of responsible purc hasing criteria of certified d eforestation-free products in the procurement 
processes of an ever-growing number of public and private entit ies. An inter-institutional cooperation 
agreement will be signed between MAE and SERCOP to promote the inclusion of responsible purchasing 
criteria and certified deforesta tion-free products in all publi c procurement processes.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 25 of 79 
 
	C
Co-finance (leverage of 
public and private finance) and for what MAE: USD 0.51 million: policies and instruments for market acce ss to deforestation-free commodities (coffee, 
cocoa, palm and livestock (north  and south Amazon)), including traceability models and systems, tools to determine 
and promote the demand for products from deforestation-free com modities (sourcing guide lines, business cases), 
and connecting buyers of sustainab le products (palm oil, coffee , beef, cocoa) with producers. 
Leading Entity & Support 
Entity for implementation MAE, MAGAP and SERCOP. 
 
73. The GCF project will increase  the number of public and priv ate purchasers in Ecuador committed to the 
procurement of sustainable co mmodities. It will do so by implem enting 2 different activities:  
 2.4.1 Policy advice and promoti on of best practices in sustain able commodities production.   
 2.4.2 Dissemination of public policies for responsible procure ment, including creation of material for awareness-
raising, training and communicati on on policies on deforestatio n-free procurement.  
 
74. Knowledge exchanges on procurement policies for deforestati on-free commodities will be financed, both in the 
public and private sector, to promote the inclusion of responsi ble purchasing criteria for certified deforestation-free 
products in the procurement processes of an ever-growing number  of public and private entities. An inter-institutional 
cooperation agreement will be signed between MAE and the Nation al Public Procurement Service (SERCOP) to promote 
the inclusion of responsible purchasing criteria and certified deforestation-free products in all public procurement 
processes.  
 
75. In order to incentivize privat e sector entities to undertak e sustainable procurement, MAGAP promotes sustainable 
procurement by linking producers to markets through the organiz ation of markets and fairs, a nd by supporting producers 
with the implementation of the Alternative Markets methodology.  All of these initiatives are undertaken in close 
coordination with ATPA. To date, these mechanisms have been bet ter promoted in the highlands; therefore, this proposal 
will strengthen these initiatives in the selected areas in the Amazon Region, thus creating opportunities for Amazon 
products. 
 
76. In addition, funds will be directed to developing a new Cer tificate of Origin for Amazonian products coming from 
diversified systems of deforesta tion-free production. The certi fication will be promoted among local supermarkets to 
ensure commercialization of these products. A marketing campaig n through mass media will ta ke place to promote their 
consumption. 
 
77. Co-financing for this sub-component comes from the GEF AMAZ ONIA (USD 0.51 million) project and is focused 
on policies and instruments for market access to deforestation- free agricultural commodities (coffee, cocoa, palm and 
livestock (north and south Amazon). 
 
2.5 Certification and traceabilit y of deforestation-free produc ts 
 
Table 11: Summary of sub-component 2.5 
Baseline Scenario  ATPA and its related integrated management plans support farmer s to transition to deforestation-free production. 
They are complementary to the ‘Marca País’ (Country Brand) and the MAE ‘Punto Verde’ certification schemes, but 
are currently uncoordinated with them. They are necessary to al low the domestic and international, public and 
private sectors to purchase def orestation-free products. They a re particularly important for farms located close to 
forest areas with high potential risk of deforestation. 
 
For domestic markets, there is n o national standard available t o certify that the commodities produced through the 
Integrated Farm Management Plans are deforestation-free, or for est-friendly, and to ensure their traceability. This 
has to be integrated into the support provided by ATPA, and wil l focus initially on the following commodities: 
livestock, cocoa, coffee, fores try, fruits and medicines. The M inistry of Foreign Trade is already committed to working 
on four commodities: fine aroma cocoa, flowers, tuna and shrimp . In the GCF project, the cocoa sector will be the 
starting point for collaboration.  
 For international markets, there is no standard available in Ec uador. Nor is there yet a standard for the creation and 
granting of the ‘Marca Pais’ label for palm, coffee, cacao and their by-products. Additionally, Ecuador does not yet 
have specific commodities platfo rms or private-public partnersh ips for promoting deforestation-free or deforestation-
friendly productions.
  
Barriers Information barriers: The lack of certification traceability of  products impedes the procurement of deforestation-free 
products. Current private certi fication schemes cannot guarante e that supply chains are deforestation-free.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 26 of 79 
 
	C
Risk barriers: The absence of traceability systems to support c ertification translates into a perception that the costs 
of certification for the indivi dual private producer outweigh t he benefits (especially for small producers). 
Activities supported by GCF 
to overcome barriers (why 
grants are needed) Targeting information barriers through public expenditures: 
 
 For exports, the project will work on the development of natio nal standards associated with the ‘Marca País’ 
certification for coffee, cocoa and palm oil.  
 For domestic demand, a national standard will be promoted for the supply of deforestation-free production 
according to Integrated Farm Management Plans. Additionally, pr ivate-public partnerships will be encouraged 
for the establishment of defores tation-free commodities platfor ms.  
 The project will also support supply and demand studies and an alyses linked to agroforestry (coffee, cocoa, 
and milk, timber and non-timber forest products), while at the same time creating marketing strategies for each 
specific sectoral brand (coffee , cocoa and palm oil) within the  broader Country Brand.  
 It will also support the construction of two Collection Centre s that are needed as part of the traceability 
processes, price differentiation and the improvement of the pro duction supply. 
 
Targeting viability barriers by increasing/creating/protecting private producer revenues: The project will work with 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade to increase exports of deforestat ion-free commodities within the framework of the 
‘Marca País’ initiative, promoting the differentiation of the e xportable supply of Ec uadorean commodities through 
appropriate country and sectoral  brand marketing strategies. Th is marketing effort should improve foreign market 
access for private producers, thus creating new revenues or pro tect existing market share by increasing the appeal 
of existing products.   
Targeting risk barriers by reducing private sector certificatio n costs: Moving upscale from farm-level certification to 
a landscape-level certification with ‘Marca Pais’ shifts the ce rtification burden from the producer, thereby generating 
economies of scale and greatly  reducing transaction costs.  
 
For the certification and traceability of deforestation-free pr oduction, the Under Secretariat of Natural Heritage (SPN) 
will design and pilot processes for forest-friendly certificati on which will create synergies with the National Forest 
Monitoring System. 
Co-finance (leverage of public and private finance) 
and for what MAGAP: USD 5.26 million for implementation of a national campai gn to promote the consumption of Amazonian 
products and the strengthening of a t least 8 supply chains (cof fee, cacao, fruits, medicines, NFTB, aquaculture 
products, meat and milk). 
 MAE: USD 1.62 million: decentraliz ed institutional structures s trengthened for management and surveillance of 
sustainable production in MULs. 
Co-finance under discussion USD 5.78 million from Ministry of Foreign Trade (MCE) for the P roject Marca País Café (Coffee Country Brand) 
Leading Entity & Support 
Entity for implementation MAGAP, MAE and MCE. 
 
78. This sub-component will promote certification and traceabil ity in the supply chain to enable national and 
international buyers (domestic and external demand) to identify  producers of deforestation-free goods, thus generating 
a differentiation in prices or an improvement in market access41. For exports, the project will work on the development 
of national standards associated with the ‘Marca País’ (Country  Brand) certification for coffee, cocoa and palm oil. For 
domestic demand, a national standard will be promoted for the s upply of deforestation-free production according to 
Integrated Farm Management Plans. Additionally, private-public partnerships will be encourag ed for the establishment 
of deforestation-free commodities  platforms. The project will a lso support supply and demand studies and analyses 
linked to agroforestry (coffee, cocoa, and milk, timber and non -timber forest products), while at the same time creating 
marketing strategies for each sp ecific sectoral brand (coffee, cocoa and palm oil) within the broader Country Brand. It 
will also support the constructi on of two Collection Centres th at are needed to contribute to the traceability processes, 
price differentiation and the im provement of the production sup ply. 
 79. This sub-component will support the inclusion of deforestat ion-free certification in ATPA support to the production 
of various commodities, such as: livestock, cocoa, coffee, fore stry, fruits, medicines, among other Amazon products.  
The project will directly affect at least 57,430 hectares, in g rassland and upper basin areas, particularly close to forest 
areas with high potential risk of deforestation.  
 
80. Furthermore, the GCF resources will also be complemented by  the GEF Amazonia project work on the 
implementation of certification and traceability models in defo restation-free products (i.e. the MAE’s ‘Punto Verde’), 
promoting demand for such produ cts and spaces to connect buyers  and producers of deforestation-free goods.  
																																																													
41 Results from INEC (2013), Survey on Continuous Agricultural Surface and Production .


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 27 of 79 
 
	C
 
81. Finally, the project will work  with the Ministry of Foreign  Trade to increase exports of deforestation-free commodities 
within the framework of the ‘Marca País’ initiative, promoting the differentiation of the exportable supply of Ecuadorean 
commodities through appropriate country and sectoral brand mark eting strategies. The project will develop standards 
for the creation and granting of the ‘Marca Pais’ label for eac h commodity sector (palm, c offee, cacao and their by-
products), and support the devel opment of marketing strategies for selected markets. These standards will be based on 
the criteria (including environm ental) provided by the Ministry  of Foreign Trade. They will be developed together with the 
private sector and will define the guidelines that industry wil l have to follow to obtain the ‘Marca Pais’ label. The Ministry  
of Foreign Trade is already committed to working on four commod ities: fine aroma cocoa, flowers, tuna and shrimp. In 
this project, the coco a sector will be the starting point for c ollaboration.  
 
82. For the certification and tr aceability of deforestation-fre e production, the Under Secretariat of Natural Heritage 
(SPN) will define the criteria, standards and processes for for est-friendly certification. This will be done through internal 
coordination meetings, minutes o f agreements and the establishm ent of a critical road map fo r compliance. Agricultural 
products must sign an agreement with MAGAP and Ministry of Indu stry and Productivity (MIPRO). For the establishment 
of platforms for deforestation-fr ee goods, private-public partn erships will be fostered accordin g to the criteria formulated 
by the MAE and the correspondi ng sectoral authorities. 
 83. The GCF project plans the construction or restructuring of two collection centre s that will be installed in the northern 
Amazon and Central-South Amazon. Construction or restructuring will depend on the results of a study to be 
commissioned for that purpose; t his study will define the exact  location, crop-type, size,  construction costs and other 
technical specifications that will be within the guidelines est ablished by the MAGAP in its technical specifications 
document for collection centres.  However, to give an idea of ap proximate size, collection cent res are typically built in a 
2,000 to 3,000 m
2 area, including all the utilitie s for its correct functioning.  The implementation period and the total cost 
of these centres, including the study, has been estimated as US D 1,300,000 each, as shown in Annex XIIb. 
 84. In order to define the best possible location for the const ruction of the infrastructure, the GADS and the architects 
will take into account the local land-use plans, options to max imize the social and economic benefits of the infrastructure, 
options to reduce costs (such as costs of transportation to be incurred by the producers) and potential negative impacts 
of the construction. The architect and the GADs will complete a n environmental impact assessment, as requested by 
national regulation (TULAS), which will ensure, for instance, t hat management of water and waste are compliant with 
the requirements of the GADS and MAE. The architect will then p repare the ToR for the construction itself, which will 
underline the obligations to be taken into account during const ruction, such as the need to use local workers and material, 
and to be compliant with national legislation related to labour . An entity in charge of the oversight of the construction will  
be hired, and will monitor the co mpliance with these issues as well as the technical dimension of the construction. The 
budget for the construction includes funds requested for the fe asibility and technical studies (architectural, environmental 
impact assessment), the permits, the construction itself (mater ials, workforce), the oversight, the capacity building for 
the staff in charge of operating  the centres and the costs of o peration, and the maintenance of the centres.  
 
85. MAGAP, through AGROCALIDAD (the entity in charge of monitor ing the quality of agricultural and livestock 
products), will monitor the farm s of beneficiaries with the IMP s to ensure that the traceabilit y of products is verified. In 
the case of certifications, MAGAP will support beneficiaries to  comply with all requirements o f the different certifications 
that are linked to this propo sal, such as ‘Marca Pais’. 
 
 
Component 3. Financial and non-financial mechanisms for restora tion, conservation and connectivity 
 
86. Restoration and conservation actions for connectivity play a central role in reducing emissions from deforestation, 
ensuring conservation and enhanci ng carbon stocks. The project will target forest areas that  are currently  not governed 
under any conservation policy but are important for enhancement  of forest carbon stocks, biodi versity, water conservation 
and agroforestry. To address this, the project will pursue two principal lines of action: (i) strengthening (SBP) and (ii) 
optimizing Water Funds. These actions are complementary to Comp onent 2 and will cover 86,000 additional hectares in 
the SBP (68,000 ha for conservati on and 18,000 ha for restorati on). The actions aimed at strengthening forest control


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 28 of 79 
 
	C
and technical assistance will contribute to the gradual transit ion towards sustainable forest management within the 
programme areas (1 .4 million hectares).  
 
3.1 Strengthen conservation, restoration and forest management processes driven through the Socio Bosque 
Programme 
  
Table 12: Summary sub-component 3.1 
Baseline SBP provides financial incentiv es to individual and community l andowners who voluntarily commit to conserve native forests 
for a 20-year period. Since 2008, SBP has signed agreements cov ering an area of 1.4 million ha of tropical forests. It is 
expected to add approximately 200,000 ha of forest per year unt il 2020. Additionally, SBP includes incentives for restoration 
and sustainable forest management. SBP invested about USD 6.2 m illion in 2015 in financial incentives to individual and 
community landowners; however, its geographical scope is still limited and needs to be scaled-up and better coordinated 
with ATPA actions. 
Barriers  Viability barriers for local communities: The costs of conserva tion for the individual private producer or community outweigh 
the benefits (there are no direct revenues from forest conserva tion). 
 
Risk barriers for the Government: Uncertainty as to whether or not REDD+ results-based payments will materialize in the 
future, providing the finance needed to make SBP sustainable in  the medium to long run.  
 
With current resources and the projection of cuts due to the Go vernment’s fiscal constraints, the expansion of SBP to areas 
needed to deliver the emission re ductions foreseen by the REDD+  AP will not occur, undermining the effectiveness of this 
financial instrument in deliv ering emission reductions.  
Activities 
supported by 
GCF to overcome barriers (why grants are 
needed)  Targeting viability barriers by i ncreasing private producer an d/or community revenues: SBP provides financial 
incentives to individual and community landowners who voluntari ly commit to conserve native forests for a 20-year 
period.  
 
 Targeting risk barriers by reducing the costs of SBP for the G overnment. By financing the expansion of SBP, the GCF 
project will help expand coverage to areas that are threatened by deforestation.   
Co-finance 
(leverage of public and private 
finance) and for 
what MAE:  
 USD 5.7 million for MAE’s Reforestation Programme  
 USD 1.1 million to implement native forest conservation projec ts in six provinces, including Orellana, Napo and 
Morona Santiago. 
 USD 0.87 million for incentives to strengthen systems and capa cities to optimize the access to, and distribution 
of, SBP community incentives. 
 USD 4.72 million: Coca Codo Sinclair hydroelectric facility to  enrich 11,952 hectares of native forest species in 
the contributing sub-basins in t he next five years; CHECC DELSI TANISAGUA for conservation and restoration of 
protected areas; CHECC QUIJOS to i ncrease by 350 hectares the s urface areas that are protected to contribute 
to the regulation of the hydrological cycle over the next three  years. 
Complementary 
finance under 
joint programming REM: USD 5.54 million for long-term financing of between 30-35 existing SBP agreements with community partners 
(conservation); 30-35 agreement for the next three years (resto ration); and support sustainable forest management through 
technical assistance and technol ogy transfer (outside forest). 
 FIP: USD 12.5 million. 
Leading Entity & Support Entity for implementation MAE’s SPN. 
 
87. SBP’s main objective is to support conservation of forests through direct payments to small-scale farmers for not 
deforesting their lands. Over t he last 20 years, SBP has suppor ted socio-economic projects including tourism, handicrafts 
marketing and promotion of Amazo n crops, among others. Alternat ive livelihoods have enabled  SBP participants to keep 
standing forest on their lands and thus have directly contribut ed to the REDD+ objectives. To date, SBP has worked in 
the areas that have been prioritized in the national REDD+ AP, but not at sufficient scale. The purpose of sub-component 
3.1 is thus to support the expans ion of SBP outside of its form er areas of intervention, specifically in areas that are under 
threat of deforestation and that have been prioritized in the R EDD+ AP. This includes areas  in the eastern foothills of 
the Andes Mountains. These fore sts are important to water regul ation in the Amazon watershed and resilience to climate 
change, and provide soil/sediment  stabilization and water resou rces for the generation of hydroelectric power, as well 
as maintain the proper quantity and quality of water for human consumption. In addition, the project will also prioritize 
National Protected Area System (SNAP) buffer zones in areas thr eatened with deforestation and degradation that are 
valuable for maintaining and enhancing carbon stocks and preser ving ecosystem services related to water provision. 
 
88. To strengthen conservation, r estoration and forest manageme nt processes driven th rough SBP, criteria and 
activities between the SCC and the SPN will be defined and impl emented using the information generated by the UN-


---
*Page 31*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 29 of 79 
 
	C
REDD Joint National Programme. In SNAP buffer zones, IMPs and L ife Plans will be used to guide interventions in 
coordination with the National Directorate of Biodiversity. SBP  will be the mechanism to reach out to beneficiaries located 
in prioritized areas. Both conser vation and restoration of ecos ystem services will be included in Life Plans and IMPs in 
these areas to enable the transition to sustainable production systems. Furthermore, ecos ystem services will generate 
fundamental co-benefits, such as water regulation, food supplie s, biodiversity production and soil conservation; these 
will drive agroforestry systems  and sustainable forest manageme nt. 
 
89. Today, SBP is keeping under con servation 1.5 million hectar es of forests, moors and ot her vegetation, benefiting 
187,634 people annually. By the end of 2015, SBP had signed 2,7 75 agreements, including 2.562 individual, 190 
collective and 23 mangrove agreements. The GCF project, through  sub-component 3.1, will expand SBP’s support to 
farmers for conservation of critical forests prioritized in the  REDD+ AP. This will be done in three main areas: a) North 
zone – buffer areas of the national protected areas Cofan-Berme jo, Cayambe Coca, Antisana and Zumaco- Napo 
Galeras. (78.000 ha approx.)  b) Central zone – buffer areas wi thin Pastaza Watershed between Llanganates and 
Sangay national park (30.000 ha approx.). c) South zone – buffe r areas of Podocarpus national park and SB conservation 
areas along the provinces of Loja and Zamora (65.000 ha approx. ), as described in the map below.  
 
	
Map 1: Future SBP areas  of intervention, to be supported by GCF  
	
90. These activities will complement sub-component 2.1, impleme nted through MAGAP’s ATPA, which focuses on 
incentivising farmers in areas adjacent to forests that have al ready been converted to sustain able production practices. 
Both ATPA and SBP are complementary and contribute to the ultim ate objective of REDD+, to reduce emissions from 
deforestation. The GCF project will support inter-institutional  coordination through the alignment of incentives. 
 
91. In terms of sustainability, SBP has been prioritized by SEN PLADES, the authority in matters of national planning 
and fiscal budget expenditure. As the budget for SBP is priorit ized in the national budget, its sustainability is ensured. 
Nevertheless, SBP is also attrac tive for international financin g given that it delivers a ran ge of environmental and social 
benefits. It is anticipated that a  fraction of future RBPs will  be channelled to SBP,  further consolidati ng its sustainability .


---
*Page 32*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 30 of 79 
 
	C
 
3.2 Strengthen mechanisms for integrated water resource managem ent (IWRM) in the watersheds located 
within prioritized areas 
 
Table 13: Summary of sub-component 3.2 
Baseline There are 5 operational non-commercial Water Funds, and three o f them, selected for the GCF project, are located 
in the 6 areas prioritized by the REDD+ AP; FONAG in Quito, ope rating since 2000; FONAPA in Río Paute, since 
2008; and FORAGUA, since 2009. The Water Funds are trust funds,  established by different water users within a 
certain geographical area of common interest. In all the funds,  a large majority of constituents are public agencies, 
such as municipal water utilities, state-owned hydropower entit ies and municipalities themselves. Contributions to 
the trust funds are mostly public , and a few private constituen ts provide smaller contributions. Steering Boards of 
the Funds are composed of all constituents, and take all major decisions on budgets, expenditures, priorities, hiring 
of technical implementation team s in a Technical Secretariat, e tc.  
 The Funds can be supported via two different and complementary mechanisms. The first, capi talization of the Funds, 
comes from financial contributi ons by the Fund’s Constituents, both public and private entities. The returns on capital 
are invested in projects and programmes for the protection, con servation, restoration and revaluation of water 
resources and watersheds in their geographical areas of interve ntion. The second mechanism has been created to 
allow other institutions, such as international donors which ca nnot legally capitalize a fund, to directly support the 
implementation of projects in the watersheds without having to channel their resources via the Funds themselves. 
The GCF support will follow this second support modality: the G CF funds will not capitalize the Water Funds but 
will, instead, contribute to implementation of conservation and  restoration projects under taken by the Water Funds, 
and aligned with the PAMs defined in the REDD+ AP.  
FONAG is a trust fund that has been operating since January 200 0. The equity capital of FONAG draws from 
financial contributions from the Fund’s Constituents, which are  public and private companies as well as NGOs. The 
returns on capital are invested in projects and programmes for the protection, conservation, restoration and 
revaluation of water resources  and watersheds supplying the Met ropolitan District of Quito. The following 5 
programmes are supported by the Fund: Communications programme for the dissemination of information relating 
to the protection of water resources; Programme for recovery of  vegetation cover through afforestation, reforestation 
and restoration; Environmental education programme, ‘Water Guar dians’, contributing to the development of a new 
culture of water use among children and youth; Programme for wa ter management in the upper basin of the 
Guayllabamba River and its direct areas of influence; and the p rogramme for sustainable water conservation areas, 
which contributes to the sustainable management of the buffer z ones of the Antisana Ecological Reserve (REA), 
the Cayambe Coca Ecological Reserve (PNCAY) and Cotopaxi Nation al Park (PNC). 
 FONAPA is a trust fund established in 2008, which aims at the c onservation, protection, preservation and restoration 
of water resources and the ec ological environment of the Paute River water basin through income generated by its 
assets, which are sourced from  contributions of the constituent s and through donations. The Fund´s constituents 
are private and public instituti ons, NGOs and the Municipal GAD s (local governments) of the Paute and Gualaceo 
cantons. The Paute River Basin is one of the most important in the country, in which 18 sub-basins flow towards 
the main hydroelectric generation complex in Ecuador. The contr ibutions to the trust fund are calculated according 
to the water use and the category of the water user. Entities a nd people who do not use water in their management 
or production processes make a voluntary contribution. The prog rammes funded through FONAPA are: the 
Programme for protection, conservation and recovery of water re sources and the ecological environment; 
Monitoring and research progra mme; Sustainable economic alterna tives programme; and the Programme for 
environmental education and training. 
 FORAGUA is a trust fund created in 2009 by 5 Municipal Governme nts (GADs), the Nature and Culture International 
Corporation, and the National Finance Corporation. These instit utions contribute to the fund which, in turn, uses its 
financial returns to support programmes and projects for the co nservation, protection and recovery of environmental 
services and biodiversity of fragile ecosystems in Loja, El Oro  and Zamora Chinchipe provinces. The financial 
contributions from the GADs come from environmental taxes. FORA GUA supports the following programmes and 
projects: the protection of water  resources for the conservatio
n of biodiversity - financial mechanisms to protect 
water basins in Ecuador; reforest ation projects in areas of hyd rological importance; training and capacity building 
programmes; a project to implement a network of meteorological stations; a hydro-meteorological monitoring project 
in paired basins; and restoration of degraded areas, among othe rs. 
Baseline investment The three selected Water Funds (FONAG, FORAGUA and FONAPA) spen d approximately US D 6 million per year 
for conservation, capacity building and restoration activities. 	Each Fund manages roughly between 1.5 to 3 million 
to implement around 5 to 6 programmes and projects as described  above.   
Barriers 
 Viability barriers for the beneficiary: The costs of conservati on for the individual private producer or community 
outweigh the benefits. There are no direct revenues from forest  conservation in key watersheds. 
 
Information barriers for the financiers: The lack of knowledge about the operations of Water Funds impedes the flow 
of resources from hydro producer s to agricultural producers and  local communities.


---
*Page 33*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 31 of 79 
 
	C
Activities supported by GCF 
to overcome barriers (why 
grants are needed)  
 Targeting viability barriers by i ncreasing private producer an d/or community revenues: Grant funds will be 
made available to implement spec ific climate change mitigation activities. 
 Targeting information barriers through public expenditures to create an enabling regulatory environment for 
water users to channel resources towards agricultural producers  and local communities, thus ensuring long-
term sustainability. 
 Inter-institutional cooperation agreements will be signed with  the municipal GADs with jurisdiction in these river 
basins. This will assist in the definition of technical and leg al criteria for issuing env ironmental legal ordinances 
and determining economic financial c ontributions by water consu mers.  
 The project will evaluate ec onomic benefits and producer surpl us, analyze willingness to pay and determine 
financial contributions in the water tariff for hydroelectric p lants, mining and water consumers.   
Co-finance (leverage of 
public and private finance) 
and for what MAE: USD 3.2 million for sensit izing and strengthening capaciti es in local government and communities on climate 
change issues, controlling erosi on processes and sediment flows , and aligning socioeconomic development of the 
watersheds with water resource p reservation and conservation of  biodiversity.  
Complementary finance 
under joint programming REM: USD 3 million for design of  REDD+ AP implementation mechan isms and inclusion of REDD+ objectives and 
measures in Water Funds.  
 FIP: USD 12.5 million. 
Leading Entity & Support Entity for implementation MAE’s SPN and SENAGUA. 
 
92. This sub-component involves strengthening existing financia l schemes FONAG, FONAPA and FORAGUA. These 
mechanisms promote integrated water resource management in the upper watersheds located in the eastern foothills of 
the Andes, in Paute river basin and in Loja Province (see Basel ine in Table 13 for details). These Funds already have a 
legal basis, financial structure and criteria for the developme nt of their activities. These financial mechanisms are 
important as they provide resources for forest management and r estoration action, thus contributing to avoided 
deforestation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.  The mec hanism foreseen in this proposal is to strengthen three 
existing Funds’ capacity to implement their existing portfolios  in predefined areas and incorporate local authorities in the 
development of financial structur es for development of conserva tion activities and management of watersheds. 
 
93. The added value of GCF investment is to support the Funds t o increase the number of projects in the prioritized 
REDD+ areas, through the implementation of policies and measure s as defined by the REDD+ AP, and following the 
criteria of the Funds. The GCF project aims to inject additiona l funds in order to overcome information barriers and 
strengthen financial mechanisms through specific studies on wil lingness to pay of contributors in water supply billing 
(activity 3.2.1), a strategy for  integration of related financi al mechanisms (activity 3.2.3) , and grants to implement specifi c 
climate change mitigation acti vities (activity 3.2.2). 
 
94. Hence, Sub-component 3.2 is s pecifically focused on protect ing forests in watersheds, which contributes directly to 
component 4, “Conservation and Restoration”, of the REDD+ AP, w hich sets actions for biodiversity conservation, 
management of water resources and ecosystems, and restoration a nd reforestation. Sub-com ponent 3.2 is then clearly 
focused on mitigation activities, as defined by the UNFCCC; it also contributes to adaptation needs, but these are framed 
as ‘co-benefits’. 
 
95. The Funds will undertake monitoring of quality and quantity  of water, reforestation, e cosystems restoration, 
sustainable management of forests, and land-use planning throug h Technical Secretariats which coordinate this work 
with the Parish GADs and other members of the Water Funds. Spec ific agreements will be signed with the Water Funds 
or Parish GADs, which will estab lish the kind of activities tha t will be financed by GCF funding. The agreements will also 
establish monitoring and evaluation mechanisms for the use of t he funds and the progress of the activities funded. Figure 
1 illustrates the specific arrangement proposed to provide fina ncial support to the Water Funds’ conservation and 
restoration programmes and projects (activity 3.2.2):


---
*Page 34*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 32 of 79 
 
	C
Figure 1. Resource flow chart to provide financial support to t he water funds’ conservation and restoration 
programmes and projects (Activity 3.2.2)  
 
 
 Component 4. Implementation of REDD+ systems (safeguards and fo rest monitoring) and REDD+ National Fund 
 
Table 14: Summary of sub-components 4.1 and 4.2
	
Baseline 
Scenario The REDD AP was developed with support from the UN-REDD Nationa l Joint Programme, GIZ and others. The first iteration 
of the FREL was also submitted.  This support created the basis for the national forest monito ring and safeguards information 
systems. This is a sound baseline on which to build but is not sufficient to comply with the Warsaw Framework. Under the 
baseline scenario, Ecuador is lacki ng financial resources to co -finance its REDD+ AP and its specific PAMs.  
Barriers 
 Information barriers: 
 Lack of capacity to implement the Warsaw Framework for REDD+ d ue to a lack of institutionalization of national forest 
monitoring and safeguards information systems. 
 Lack of capacity to operationalize the financial architecture of the REDD+ AP due to a lack of knowledge of international 
requirements to receive results -based payments. This includes a  lack of knowledge of GCF accreditation procedures 
for national entities. 
Activities supported by 
GCF to overcome 
barriers (why grants are 
needed) Targeting information barriers through public expenditures: 
 To create the necessary capacity and to institutionalize the n ational forest monitoring and safeguards information 
systems 
 To create a financial architect ure to receive and channel resu lts-based payments for REDD+ through a National Entity 
accredited by the GCF, thus ensur ing the long-term sustainabili ty of the REDD+ National Strategy. 
Co-finance 
(leverage of 
public and private finance) and for 
what Sub-component 4.1: 
 FAO through UN-REDD (USD 0.82 million). 
 MAE (USD 0.54 million) for strengthening decentralized structur es for managing and monitori ng sustainable production 
in sustainable productive landsca pes, and specifically the capa city of local governments to support deforestation early 
warning systems, and monitori ng and surveillance linked to the national forest monitoring system.  
 
Sub-component 4.2 : 
 UNDP and UNEP through UN-REDD targeted support (USD 0.68 milli on). 
 MAE (USD 0.3 million) for strengthening systems and capacities  to improve access to, and distribution of, SBP 
incentives. 
Complementary finance under joint programming Sub-component 4.2
: REM: USD 11.15 million for design of the implementation mechani sms for REDD+ AP.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 33 of 79 
 
	C
 
Leading Entity & 
Support Entity for implementation MAE’s SCC. 
 
4.1 Support the implementation of  the Warsaw Framework for REDD + and other operational processes  
	
96. This sub-component includes in vestment in the establishment  of an integrated information system for the 
implementation of REDD+, including the NFMS, the GHG inventory system and the Safeguards Information System 
(SIS), as well as a REDD+ PAMs R egistry. These systems exist, b ut have not been fully institutionalized, are only partially 
operational, and are not currently  interconnected. The project will support the integration of these systems to ensure 
timely and coordinated efforts among the different institutions  in order to facilitate r eporting to the UNFCCC.  
 
4.2 Operationalization of the fin ancial architecture of REDD+ A P	
 
97. The Ministry of Environment is currently working on the est ablishment of a financial mechanism for the operation 
and management of an Environmental National Fund. The design wi ll include a review of sinking fund arrangements as 
a mechanism to distribute resources from a variety of sources t o cover the costs of implementing environmental 
initiatives, including REDD+ AP PAMs for reducing emissions fro m deforestation. The Fund is expected to receive 
resources from different sources, including international and n ational investment and potentially results-based payments 
in the future. This financial mechanism is being designed joint ly with the Ministry of Fi nance. A roadmap has been agreed 
and is being implemented to ensure concrete agreements by the f inal quarter of 2016. The design and set-up of the 
Fund is being supported and funded by the Targeted Support Init iative of the UN-REDD Programme, the Biodiversity 
Finance Initiative, Central Government and UNDP, among others. 
 
98. GCF funds will be used to support the operationalization of  the National Environmental Fund. The project will pilot 
the distribution of funds thr ough different funding windows and  different entities involved in the implementation of the 
REDD+ AP, such as MAGAP, the GADs, the PSB and the Water Funds.  MAE will be responsible for administrative 
actions related to the establishment of the National Environmen tal Fund. Note that GCF resources will not be used to 
capitalize the Fund. 
 
99. GCF funds will also  support the creation of an inter-instit utional and multi-level coordination platform to ensure 
proper coordination between management instruments with land-us e planning guidelines and the different financial and 
non-financial incentives. This will include the following entit ies: MAE (SCC, SPN), MAGAP (ATPA, SSTRA), SRI, 
SENPLADES, ECORAE, municipal and provincial GADs, production se ctor enterprises, indigenous peoples and 
communities. MAE will lead this platform with the support of SE NPLADES and the National Secretariat for Policy 
Management. 
 100. It is intended that, with support from the GCF project, a national entity will be accredited by the GCF to manage the 
National Fund to obtain and receive results-based payments. Thi s a key sub-component to ensure the full transition of 
Ecuador from Phase 2 to Phase 3 of REDD+. Future REDD+ RBPs wil l in turn be used to co-finance the REDD+ AP, as 
an iterative process allowing pr ogressive expansion of its cove rage and sustainability. This arrangement is consistent 
with UNFCCC COP Decision 10/CP.19. 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Exe cuting Entity) 
101. Since the REDD+ AP is a cross-cutting national instrument,  there are a number of key sponsors for the GCF project. 
These can be classified as: the Executing Entity (MAE); Respons ible Parties (see Section C.7: MAGAP and three Water 
Funds (the Fund for Water Protec tion (FONAG), the Regional Fund  for Water (FORAGUA), and the Water Fund for the 
Protection of the Paute River Watershed (FONAPA)); and other in volved institutions (the Mi nistry of Foreign Trade, the 
Ministry of Finance, the Inter nal Revenue Service (SRI), and th e National Secretariat for Planning and Development 
(SENPLADES)).  
102.  MAE, the executing entity, is the UNFCCC Focal Point, the  national environmental authority in charge of forest-
related policies and regulations, and the NDA for the GCF. It w ill lead the project’s execution. MAE has four Under-
Secretariats, two of which will be instrumental in the project and are the principal sponsors. The Under-Secretariat for


---
*Page 36*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 34 of 79 
 
	C
Climate Change is in charge of leading climate change adaptatio n and mitigation actions in Ecuador, including the 
promotion of technology transfe r, finance and communication mec hanisms – which includes t he REDD+ Strategy. The 
Under-Secretariat of Natural Heritage houses the National Fores try Directorate and the National System of Protected 
Areas (SNAP), as well as the SBP. MAE has successfully implemen ted a wide range of programmes related to forest 
management and will provide leader ship and support to th is project’s opera tions.  
 103. MAGAP, the Ministry of Lives tock, Agriculture, Aquaculture  and Fisheries, is responsible for the implementation of 
sub-component 2.1. MAGAP implements the Agenda for Transforming  Production in the Amazon (ATPA), which is a key 
element of the proposed project.  
104. The Fund for Water Protection (FONAG), the Regional Fund f or Water (FORAGUA) and the Water Fund for the 
Protection of the Paute River Wa tershed (FONAPA) are responsibl e for the implementation of sub-component 3.2. MAE 
will sign an inter-institutional agreement with the Water Funds  as Responsible Parties, and UNDP will sign a Standard 
Cooperation Agreement with each Responsible Party. At the reque st of MAE, and based on a detailed work plan, budget 
and procurement plan, UNDP will adv ance cash funds on a quarter ly basis, which in turn w ill report expenses through 
Funding Authorization and Certifi cation of Expenses (FACE) form s. UNDP will not contribute to capitalization of the 
Water Funds, nor hold any position in the Water Funds’ Governan ce Boards. The GCF contribution is directed to the 
implementation of projects and programmes.   
 
105. Other supporting institutio ns include: the Ministry in cha rge of the Coordination of Strategic Sectors (MICSE), 
through the National Secretariat for Planning and Development ( SENPLADES), the Ministry of Foreign Trade, the 
Internal Revenue Service (SRI), t he National Financial Corporat ion (CFN), BanEcuador, and the Decentralized 
Autonomous Governments (GADs) - regional, provincial cantonal, district and parish.   
 
106. The details of which institutions will be in charge of mon itoring certification and traceability is provided in Section 
C.3, sub-component 2.5. The information related to the experien ce of the Executing Entity in developing climate change 
criteria for ensuring sustainable production practices in credi ts from financial institutions , tax and financial incentives fo r 
agriculture is detailed in Section C.3, sub-component 2.3. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
107. While the project does not have a market f ocus, it will fo ster the supply of sustainable agricultural products as well 
as their traceability and certification. In this context, the m ain market sectors related to the project are summarized below,  
including a description of barri ers for deforestation-free prod ucts to achieve access market, the identification of the 
competitors for the listed products, the pricing structures of deforestation-free products, price controls, subsidies 
available and government involvement. More detailed information  relating to the market overview is available in Annex 
XV. 
 
108. According to the Third National Agricultural Census, there  are 843,000 agricultural production units (APUs), of 
which 63.5% are small producers characteri zed mainly for having  a production area of less than 5 hectares; 30% of the 
producers have between 5 and 50 hectares, and the rest are larg e producing areas. There is a serious issue associated 
with the distribution of productive land, which is reflected in  the APUs, where production areas of less than 5 hectares 
occupy only 6% of the total national agricultural surface. Like wise, only 68% of small producers have a land title, 5% 
have access to credit, 95% do not receive technical assistance and only 7% belong to a formal partnership (union or 
association). The agricultural sector has a traditional structu re with low productivity and high levels of poverty, with 
agricultural workers lacking adequate access to education, heal th services and overall quality of life.   
 
109. Permanent crops r epresent 20% of the to tal agricultural su rface, and those with highest production nationwide are 
sugarcane, banana and African oil palm. Temporary crops represe nt 13.7% of the agricultural surface, with rice, dry 
maize and potato the crops with  the highest production at natio nal level.  
 
110. African palm oil: The production of African palm oil is co ncentrated in the provinces of Esmeraldas (49%), Santo 
Domingo (18%), Los Rios (13%), P ichincha (7%), Sucumbíos (5%), Guayas (3%), Orellana ( 2,4%), among others. 
Ecuador is the fifth-largest exporter of palm oil, representing  1.8% of global exports. The primary markets for Ecuadorian 
Palm Oil are the following: Venez uela, Colombia, the Netherland s, the Dominican Republic, Germany, USA, Spain and


---
*Page 37*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 35 of 79 
 
	C
Great Britain. The increase in production has been the result o f the expansion of the geographical agricultural frontier 
instead of the result of i ncreased productivity.  
 
111. Cocoa: The production of cocoa is concentrated in the coas tal region, the mountain range and in the Amazon. The 
provinces of Guayas and Los Rios have the largest production. I n Ecuador, two types of cocoa varieties are produced: 
´fino de aroma´ and CCN-51. The Ecuadorian cocoa is destined fo r production of chocolates and other refined products. 
Ecuador, being the fifth-largest exporter of cocoa in the world , exported a total of 198,777 tonnes of cocoa in 2014, 
registering USD 6 billion in wor ldwide exports. Furthermore, Ec uador is the top producer of cocoa ´fino de aroma´, with 
a share of over 63% of the world market. The objectives of Ecua dor’s cocoa sector in the next two years are to reach 
between 280,000-300,000 metric tonnes of exports, and to increa se exports to emerging countries such as China. As 
such, the second component of the GCF project proposal offers a n opportunity for the adoption of sustainable practices 
and the implementation of norms of certification which will inc rease production and protect the forests which are nearby 
and which surround the cocoa plantations.  
 
112. Coffee: Two types of coffee are produced: Arabica and Robu sta coffee, in the four regions of the country. Arabica 
coffee can adapt to a large variety of climates in differing ec osystems in all four regions, while Robusta coffee only grows 
in the tropical humid areas of the Coast and the Amazon, for in stance in Los Rios, Santo Domingo de Los Tsachilas, 
Esmeraldas, Sucumbíos, Napo and Orellana. The area where coffee  is produced (grano de oro) comprises 97,687 
hectares. Productivity is low due to the prevalence of older co ffee plantations, amongst other issues. Coffee exports in 
2014 reached 67,907 tonnes. Ecuador represents 0.1% of total wo rldwide coffee exports. MAGAP is backing a 
programme to rejuvenate the coffee sector. As such, the second component of the GCF project offers a strategic 
opportunity for the adoption of sustainable practices and norms  of certification, which c an incentivize increased 
production without affecting t he forests adjacent to the planta tions. 
 
113. The livestock sector: The Coastal and Amazon regions produ ce meat livestock, while in the mountain range the 
focus is on the production of milk. In the Amazon region, there  are 751,400 cattle head. The livestock sector makes an 
important contribution to GDP and milk production is one of the  most important areas of the agricultural sector. Within 
the Andean region, Ecuador is the third-largest producer of mea t (12%) and the second-largest producer of milk (21%). 
About 25% of the milk is used for feeding calves. The availabil ity of milk for human and industrial consumption is about 
75%, of which 25% is for indust rial purposes and 75% is for dir ect human consumption, local  production of cheese and 
other products. 
 114. The area devoted to pastures constitutes about 41% of the total land area under agricultural use while the 
approximate area suitable for the development of pastures corre sponds to 16% of the Amazon. The production of beef 
is concentrated on the coast and in the foothills, accounting f or up to 65% to the national production. There is a high risk 
of expansion of the livestock indu stry at the expense of forest  areas because of high domestic demand and because 
production has reached its maximum potential in the mountains a nd in some areas is declining because of soil 
erosion/degradation on badly-managed farmlands. Through the sec ond component, the GCF pr oject will promote the 
adoption of more efficient and sustainable practices in order t o improve the productivity of livestock in the Amazon region 
and at the same time reduce the ri sk of expansion of the agricu ltural frontier. 
 115. Smallholders’ market access barriers: Several studies have  been conducted in Ecuador on barriers for smallholders 
to access markets under fair terms. Among the most critical bar riers the literature describes are high transaction costs 
of intermediation, lack of tec hnical assistance and capacity bu ilding preventing producers f rom conforming with market 
requirements, deficiency of institutional arrangements and abse nce of appropriate financial instruments  (Hellin, y otros, 
2002) (Cavatassi, y otros, 2009 ) (Mejia, y otros, 2013). 
 
116. Considerations for marketing deforestation-free products: While cacao and coffee are destined for export markets, 
the main deforestation drivers such as cattle and palm oil expa nsion are mainly driven by d omestic markets. However, 
in the future, it is foreseen that further expansion to regiona l or even international marke ts will happen. As such, the 
primary objective of the GCF project is to target the important  smallholder production destined to national markets in 
order to reduce deforestation and degradation whilst improving livelihoods and sustainability. Nonetheless, in parallel 
the GCF project will explore defor estation-free products for ex port markets as a foundation to safeguard the future of 
forests against threats that are h ighly likely to materialize.


---
*Page 38*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 36 of 79 
 
	C
 
117. Hydropower: Most of Ecuador’s electricity supply is from t hermal power generation (50%), hydroelectricity (46%) 
and imported electricity from Co lombia (3%). Electricity genera tion using non-conventional renewable resources 
(biomass, wind, solar) does not exceed 1% of the total supply. Until 2007, hydroelectric supply was concentrated in 4 
large plants in the National Interconnected System: Paute (1.1 MW), Agoyan (156 MW), Pisayambo-Pucara (74 MW) 
located in the Amazonian slopes; and the central Marcel Laniado  (213 MW) in Guayas province. Together, these plants 
accounted for 90% of the countr y’s hydroelectric generating cap acity. These have since been augmented by an 
additional 12 small, medium and large capacity hydroelectric pl ants (1-1,100 MW) and 39 small plants belonging to 
electricity distribution companies, municipalities and private companies. Currently, 8 hydroelectric plant projects are 
under construction (3,000 MW in total) and will contribute to t he medium-term goal of self-sufficiency through clean 
production, for which the hydraulic component will exceed 90% o f the renewable energy production in 2016. However, 
these predictions rely on steady h ydrological resources, which are currently vulnerable to sedimentation and watershed 
deforestation. As such, the GCF project is crucial to the relia bility of HEP as a leading source of clean energy in Ecuador. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
118. The National REDD+ AP has been developed as part of a nati onal policy for climate change mitigation and is 
embedded in the official planning process of the Government of Ecuador through the National Secretariat of Planning 
and Development (SENPLADES). This ensures coherence and complia nce with national laws and regulations. In 
addition, the process of developing the REDD+ AP included setti ng up a robust system of social and environmental 
safeguards (see Section F.3 fo r details) that will further dete rmine relevant regulations and compliance needs. These, 
and UNDP’s own Social and Environmental Safeguards, will be clo sely monitored during implementation.  
 
119. Works, programmes or projects implemented in Ecuador that could cause an environmental impact are subject to 
an environmental impact assessment by MAE. To do so, the progra mme must obtain an environmental categorization, 
which in turn determines the type of environmental permit from the Unified Environmental Information System (SUIA).  
The types of permits are: a) Certificate (voluntary for minimal  risk of environmental impact); b) Registration (required for 
low risk of environmental impact); or c) Licence (mandatory for  medium or high risk of environmental impact). Each type 
of permit is accompanied by a set of obligations with which the  recipient must comply. For the GCF project, a registration 
will be needed for the activities related to agriculture, and a  certificate will be requested for the construction of the 
Collection Centres, as long as native vegetation is not impacte d. 
 
120. Currently all projects in Ecuador are subject to 14% VAT; however, UNDP is currently negotiating with the 
Government of Ecuador the reco very of this tax, under the Stand ard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA). 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
121. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the SBAA 
between UNDP and the Government of Ecuador (Annex XIIIh), the C ountry Programme Action Plan (CPAP, Annex XIIIi), 
and the policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). 
 
122. The national executing entity - also referred to as the nationa l “Implementing Partner” in UNDP terminology or 
“Executing Partner” in GCF terminology - is required to impleme nt the project in compliance with UNDP rules and 
regulations, policies and procedures (including the NIM Guideli nes). According to the UNDP POPP, an Implementing 
Partner is “the entity to which the Administrator has entrusted  the implementation of UNDP assistance specified in a 
signed document along with the assumption of full responsibilit y and accountability for the effective use of UNDP 
resources and the delivery of outputs, as set forth in such doc ument.” By signing a project document, an implementing 
partner enters into an agreement  with UNDP to manage the projec t and achieve the results defined in the relevant 
documents. In addition, an implem enting partner may enter into agreements with other organizations or entities, known 
as “Responsible Parties ”, which may carry out project activities and produce project ou tputs on behalf of the 
Implementing Partner. Responsible Parties are accountable direc tly to the Implementing Partner.   
 
123. In legal terms, project implementation will be governed by  the national Government’s signature of the UNDP SBAA 
together with a UNDP project doc ument, which will be signed by the UNDP Country Office in Ecuador and the 
Implementing Partner. 
 
124. The Implementing Partner for this project will be MAE. MAE  will undertake programmatic and administrative-
financial control and responsibility for implementing the proje ct, and will be responsible for approving deliverables prior


---
*Page 39*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 37 of 79 
 
	C
to their reporting to the GCF by UNDP. MAE will be accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the 
monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving p roject outcomes, and for the effective use of GCF 
resources. 
 
125. Responsible Parties fo r this project will be: 
 
 MAGAP, the Ministry of Livestock,  Agriculture, Aquaculture and  Fisheries, responsible for implementation of 
sub-component 2.1.  
 Three Water Funds – the Fund for Water Protection (FONAG), the  Regional Fund for Water (FORAGUA) and 
the Water Fund for the Protecti on of the Paute River Watershed (FONAPA) – responsible for the implementation 
of sub-component 3.2. 
 The disbursements will be perfo rmed directly from UNDP to the Responsible Parties after approval and 
authorization of MAE and UNDP, ba sed on the AWP, the procuremen t plan, and a quarterly report that the 
Responsible Parties will have to  present to the Project Board f or revision and approval 
	
126. UNDP shall provide the follow ing project cycle management services: 
 
 Providing financial and audi t services to the project. 
 Overseeing financial expenditures against budgets. 
 Ensuring that activities incl uding procurement and financial s ervices are carried out in strict compliance with 
UNDP procedures. 
 Ensuring that the reporting to GCF is undertaken in line with GCF requirements and procedures. 
 Contracting the project mid-term and final evaluations and tri ggering additional reviews and/or evaluations as 
necessary and in consultation wi th project counterparts.    
 
127. UNDP will provide project assurance, supporting the Projec t Board by carrying out objective and independent 
project oversight and monitoring functions. UNDP Technical Spec ialists in the Sustainable Development Cluster at the 
Regional Centre (in Panama) and the Energy and Environment Unit  at the Country Office will be  involved as necessary 
in key project meetings, consul tations, events and reviews of t echnical and other reports.  
 
128. Project Board: The Project Board is the project coordination and decision-maki ng body. It will meet semi-annually 
to review project progress. The responsibility of the Board is to see that project activities lead to the required outcomes 
as defined in the project docume nt. The Board will oversee proj ect implementation, approve work plans and budgets as 
supplied by the National Project Manager, approve any major cha nges in project plans, approve major project 
deliverables, arbitrate any conf licts which might arise, and be  responsible for the overall evaluation of the project. Any 
significant deviation from original plans will require the subs equent approval of the AE. The make-up and TORs of the 
Board will be agreed and finalized in the Project Inception Wor kshop, but will certainly include MAE, UNDP, MAGAP and 
the three participating Wate r Funds, as outlined above. 
 
129. The Project Board will be responsible for making executive  decisions for the project, in particular when guidance is 
required by the Project Manager. The Project Board will play a critical role in facilitating in ter-ministerial coordination, 
project monitoring and evaluations by quality-assuring these pr ocesses and products, and using evaluations for 
performance improvement, accountability and learning. In additi on, it will approve the appointment and responsibilities 
of the National Project Manager and any delegation of its proje ct assurance responsibilitie s. Based on the approved 
Annual Work Plan, the Project Boar d will approve any essential deviations from the original plans. 
 
130. In order to ensure UNDP’s ultimate accountability for the project results, Project Board decisions will be made in 
accordance with standards that s hall ensure management for deve lopment results, best value for money, fairness, 
integrity, transparency and effective international competition . In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, 
final decision shall rest with  the UNDP Programme Manager. The Board will consist of t he following members:  
 
 The Executive Secretary, or the National Project Director as i ts representative, who will chair the Board. This 
role will be filled by the highes t authority of MAE or his/her delegate.


---
*Page 40*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 38 of 79 
 
	C
 A representative of the Senior Supplier, who will provide guid ance regarding the techni cal feasibility of the 
project. This role will be filled by UNDP.  
 A representative of the partner project beneficiaries, who wil l represent the interests of  those who will ultimately 
benefit from the project and ensure the achievement of project outputs from the perspective of project 
beneficiaries. This role w ill be filled by SENPLADES. 
 
131. National Project Director: The project will be under the overall leadership of a National Project Director (NPD), 
who will be a representative of  the Under-Secretary of Climate Change of MAE and will be responsible for orienting and 
advising the National Project Manager (NPM) on Government polic y and priorities. The NPM will also be responsible for 
maintaining regular communication with relevant stakeholders to  ensuring that their interests are communicated 
effectively to the Natio nal Project Director. 
 
132. National Project Manager: A National Project Manager will run the project on behalf of th e Implementing Partner, 
within the framework delineated by the Project Board, and in co mpliance with UNDP POPP by: 
 
 Taking responsibility for the strategic management of the proj ect.  
 Coordinating and supervising the Annual Work Plans (AWPs) and Procurement Plans as well as the 
achievement of high-quality resu lts within the specified limits  of time and costs. 
 Ensuring that activities and i nputs are in line with AWPs, the  logical framework of the project and also the 
monitoring of progress  towards main goals. 
 Maintaining contacts with proj ect partners at the national, st ate and local level. 
 Supervising technical and support team results. 
 Providing monitoring, supervision and guidance to the technica l teams based in the project areas. 
 Acting as the signing authority of requests to UNDP for disbur sements of project funds.  
 Promoting involvement in, and coordination with, MAE, the Resp onsible Parties and UNDP. 
 Ensuring, with MAE and public organizations related to the pro ject, the achievement of commitments included 
in the UNDP project document (in  line with the country’s rules and policies). 
 Coordinating and strengthening relations and project actions w ith national and regional institutions and other 
relevant stakeholders; as well as establishing strategic allian ces with other cooperating agencies and 
international organizations.  
 Acting as the focal point betw een MAE, UNDP, National Entities  and line Ministries. 
 Identifying and monitoring project risks and issues 
 
133. Technical Project Advisors: Four Technical Project Advisors  (TPAs), one for each technical component of the 
project, will support the National Project Manager with the imp lementation of the project, providing technical expertise, 
reviewing and preparing TORs, and reviewing the outputs of cons ultants and other sub-contractors. They will be hired 
based on a competitive process. T he Technical Project Advisors will: 
 
 Ensure the logistical, adminis trative and financial effectiven ess of the project in each technical area. 
 Prepare project reports, work plans, budgets and accounting re cords. 
 Prepare drafts of TORs, technica l specifications and other doc uments.  
 Identify and hire consultants and supervise consultants and su ppliers.  
 Oversee the implementation of p roject activities in a timely a nd efficient manner.  
 Provide substantive guidelines to organize seminars, workshops  and field trips linked to  project activities.  
 
134. The TPAs will produce in a timely fashion inputs for annua l work plans and budgets of their components, to be 
consolidated by the National Project Manager and then presented  for approval by the Project Board, and annual progress 
reports for subm ission to the Board. The reports will provide d etails about the progress made, any shortcomings and the 
necessary adjustments made to achieve project outcomes.  
 
135. Technical Committee: The National Project Manager will be advised by a Technical Com mittee composed of 
representatives of MAE (the National Project Director), MAGAP-A TPA, UNDP and the extended project technical team,


---
*Page 41*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | Page 39 of 79 
 
	C
which will meet on a quarterly b asis. The Technical Committee w ill also advise the NPM on ensuring coordination 
between the project and other rel ated initiatives and current a nd emerging projects.  
 
136. Use of existing human capacities  and recruitment of consultants : multidisciplinary coordination teams from 
each ministry will develop operati onal plans and guidelines for  implementing the project activities established by the 
GCF. However, extra staff will be needed for the detailed desig n, coordination and monitoring i n the field. Existing field 
technicians are already fully tasked with existing projects. Fu rthermore, not all have the expertise required to perform 
specific support and studies for this project. Specialized cons ultants and temporary st aff will be needed. This is 
considered a temporary measure as the GCF project is centred on  priming financial measures for implementing the 
REDD+ strategy and, once these are developed and related capaci ties strengthened in the relevant institutions, they will 
be self-sustaining. 
 
Figure 2. Organizational Structure 
 
 
 
137. Property of Equipment and Goods: Goods and equipment purchased as part of this project will belo ng to the 
UNDP Country Office according to the provisions stated in the S BAA signed between the Government of Ecuador and 
UNDP on January 19, 2005 (See A nnex XIIIh), and the following i nstruments: UNDP policy for NIM projects, financial 
regulations, and corporate management guidelines on equipment a nd goods. During the implementation phase, transfer 
to national beneficiaries will be u ndertaken in accordance with  UNDP procedures and policies, subject to agreement 
with MAE as the Implementing Part ner. Only national organizatio ns will be considered as beneficiaries.  
 
138. Audit: According to UNDP’s general corporate audit regulations, intern al and external audits will be carried out and 
these costs will be covered by t he project. The audit will be p erformed in accordance with UNDP financial regulations 
and rules and applicable to audit policies on UNDP and GCF proj ects. The audit will be conduct ed by a specialized and 
certified audit firm. UNDP will be responsible for making audit  arrangements for the project in communication with MAE.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 40 of 79 
 
	C
UNDP and MAE will provide audit management responses and the Na tional Project Manager and project support team 
will address audit recommendations.  
 
139. Learning and knowledge-sharing: Results from the project will be  disseminated within and beyond  the project 
intervention zone through existi ng information-sharing networks  and forums. The project w ill identify and participate, as 
relevant and appropriate, in sci entific, policy-based and/or an y other networks, which may be of benefit to project 
implementation though lessons learned. The project will identif y, analyse and share lessons-learned that might be 
beneficial in the design and implementation of similar future p rojects. There will also be a two-way flow of information 
between this project and other projects/programmes of a similar  focus.   
 
140. Communications and Visibility Requirements: The project will comply with UNDP’s (see 
http://intra.undp.org/coa/ branding.shtml), MAE and GCF Brandin g Guidelines: specific guidelines on UNDP logo use 
can be accessed at: http://int ra.undp.org/branding/useOfLogo.ht ml. Amongst other requirements, these guidelines 
describe when and how the UNDP and the logos of donors to UNDP projects are used. Specific guidelines on MAE logo 
use can be accessed at the Corp orate Identity Manual. Full comp liance will also be observed with the GCF’s 
Communication and Visibility Guidelines. In order to accord pro per acknowledgement to the GCF for providing funding, 
a GCF logo will appear on all relevant project publications, in cluding, among others, project hardware and equipment 
purchased with GCF funds. Any citation on publications stemming  from the project w ill also accord proper 
acknowledgment to the GCF. 
 
141. Consistent with Article III of the SBAA, the responsibilit y for the safety and security of the implementing partner and 
its personnel and property, and of  UNDP’s property in the imple menting partner’s custody, rests with the implementing 
partner.  
 
142. For an entity to be engaged as an implementing partner or responsible party on a UNDP project, a capacity 
assessment must be performed. Parties concerned with project fo rmulation and design, particularly the UNDP office, the 
Government and the institution that will manage the project, mu st review needed capacities . They first determine which 
tasks apply to the project. For each applicable task, the parti es define any additional measures to ensure that tasks can 
be performed. The measures must be documented for follow-up act ion. This may be done, for example, through an 
action plan, an annex to the project document or through minute s of a design meeting or  workshop. Additionally, UNDP 
assures that its partners are screened against UN Sanctions and  Eligibility through a UN Security Council online system 
that contains a database of possi ble violators. In addition, UN DP has access to the United Nations Global Marketplace 
in order to verify if any supplier has been involved in terrori sm and corruption. Moreover, UNDP has a policy on Due 
Diligence and Partnerships with the Private Sector in which a R isk Assessment Tool is applied before any agreement is 
made. This tool includes the fo llowing exclusionary criteria:  
 
 Controversial weapons or their components 
 Armaments and/or weapons or thei r components, including milita ry supplies 
 Replica weapons 
 Tobacco or tobacco products 
 Violations of UN sanctions, UN ineligibility lists or UNDP ven dor sanctions list 
 Pornography 
 Substances subject to internati onal bans or pha se-outs, and wi ldlife or products regulated under CITES 
 Gambling (excluding lotteries with charitable objectives) 
 Violation of human rights or com plicity in human rights violat ions 
 Forced or compulsory labour 
 Child labour 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
A timetable of project implementation is provided in Annex X. T he details of GCF funding disbursements have been 
addressed in the Term S heet. A Disbursement S chedule is include d in Annex Va.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 41 of 79 
 
	D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement   
143. The additionality of this pr oposal is that it will overcom e technological, risk and market  barriers that currently impede  
farmers from adopting sustainable production practices (describ ed in detail in Section C.3 above). Once these barriers are 
overcome, farmers will implement s ustainable practices that are  aligned with land-use plans that have taken into account 
REDD+ related factors. It is envisaged that these practices, su pported through a range of financial mechanisms, will enable 
sustainable incomes for farmer s. In turn, the adoption of these  practices will contribute to ach ieving the objectives defined 
in the national REDD+ AP in terms of emission reductions and sh ould ultimately lead to obtaining results-based payments 
(RBPs). These RBPs will supplemen t the available funding to sup port the REDD+ AP in the long-term.  
 
144. The financial strategy for RE DD+ in Ecuador is available i n Annex IIf. It provides cost estim ates of implementing the 
REDD+ AP and potential sources of funds and financial mechanism s to finance its implementation. The financial strategy 
concludes that, given the uncerta inty regarding REDD+ RBPs, in addition to the national resources already committed to 
finance the REDD+ AP, Ecuador sh ould seek to mobilize resources  from the FIP (ongoing) as well as from the GCF.  
 
145. Financing provided through the GCF to support the implemen tation of the REDD+ AP of Ecuador will be absolutely 
critical. The REDD+ AP includes the most cost-effective PAMs to  be implemented at the national and local levels, in 
prioritized areas affected by deforestation.  
 
146. For Component 1 , without the support of the GCF sub-national governments would  not have the capacity to 
implement the activities prioritized in the REDD+ AP and GCF pr oposal. The existing public funding allocation is provided 
by MAGAP funds from the fiscal budget. However, GCF funding is needed to support local governments’ decentralization 
processes and overcome the barri ers detailed in Section C.3. Co mpetency (jurisdiction) on forest and agriculture has been 
transferred from the central State to sub-national governments.  However, they still depend on MAGAP and MAE for 
technical expertise to manage th ese two sectors. For the REDD+ AP to be effectively implemented at the sub-national 
level, further integration of RED D+ measures and actions into t he PDOTs is needed, as well as the funds to implement 
them.  
 
147. For Component 2 , without GCF support the private sector would not have suffici ent incentive to demand and procure 
deforestation-free products giv en the high costs associated wit h the certification of produ cts; and thus many producers 
committed to the transformation to sustainable production would  have to abandon these practices due to loss of income 
or they would have to access informal financing with its associ ated risks and high financial costs, which would directly 
undermine the likelihood of this transition to take place. Furt her information is provided in Section C.3. 
 
148. For Component 3 , without GCF support SBP will not be able to expand to new are as within the National REDD+ 
Action Plan priority areas, and he nce its climate change mitiga tion impacts, and contribution to  national targets to reduce 
deforestation, would be diminished. Existing Water Funds would have limited capacity to develop and implement projects 
to restore watersheds within the National REDD+ Action Plan pri ority areas. 
 
149. For Component 4 , without GCF support Ecuador would not be able to the fully in tegrate its NFMS or SIS. These 
systems are part of the require ments of the UNFCCC and the Wars aw Framework for REDD+, and are pre-requisites for 
any countries willing to access R EDD+ Result Bas ed Payments fro m the GCF or other sources of funds. 
 
150. In general terms, with GCF funding, 16.4% of the financial  requirements of the REDD+ Action Plan will be covered 
(USD 250 million for the period 2016-2025). When the co-financi ng leveraged and the complementary finance under joint 
programming is included, an additional 47% will be covered. Wit hout the GCF grant, REDD+ financing would be difficult 
to acquire, thus leading to slower or non-prioritized execution . By providing incremental funding, the GCF will enable 
solutions that can shift current win-lose situations to win-win  situations, thus leveraging additional national funding for 
replication in the future. It will also maintain the momentum o f REDD+ in the country until conditions for RBPs are in place, 
catalysing continued and scaled-u p implementation of mitigation  and reducing deforestation policies and programmes. 
D.2. Exit Strategy


---
*Page 44*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 42 of 79 
 
	D
 151. The expected long-term impact of the REDD+ AP (30 years) i s to shift to a low-emission rural development pathway 
in Ecuador. This will require substantial public investments in  the creation of public goods for which grants are required in 
the short term (2016-2021). A progressively diminishing level o f investment will be required in the medium-term to 
consolidate the institutional and technological changes induced  by the project. This level of investment will be maintained 
in the medium-term by accessing RBPs from REDD+ and channeling these resources towards the successful PAMs. In 
the long-term, some of the public investments will no longer be  needed as markets for commodities and agricultural 
technology and practices will be permanently transformed. It is  most likely that investment in land zoning enforcement and 
forest monitoring will need to be permanently supported through  state budgetary resources. A dditionally, the existence of 
a credible international mechanism to deliver RBPs could attrac t other sources of funding for this type of investment in the 
future. 
 
152. Activities to ensure long term sustainability are embedded  in the project components as described below:  
 
 F o r  Component 1 , investments in reformulating PDOTs in targeted GADs will ensu re the inclusion of forest 
mitigation actions over time, through policies, regulations and  actions financed by public funds. The GCF project 
will contribute directly to start-up processes and to their sus tainability over time. The project will also contribute to 
improving coordination and alignment between PAMs implemented a t the national and sub-national levels, in order 
to better protect the forests. T his will result in a paradigm s hift and will be supported after project closure by future 
REDD+ RBPs. It is expected to deliver capacity building among G ADs staff in order to reinforce climate change, 
forestry and land use criteria for future updates to PDOTs and alignment between SENPLADES guidelines and 
REDD+ AP. 
 
 F o r  Component 2 , the GCF contribution aims to overcome financial barriers towa rds sustainable production by 
delivering direct incentives to sm allholder subsistence farmers . Direct incentives will be made through ATPA, which 
has a clear mandate to support reconversion from conventional t o sustainable production in the long term. These 
activities will reinforce the pr oposed project activities, part icularly on the demand-side with traceability processes, 
certification and responsible procurement. The operational and maintenance costs will be covered by the UPAs 
with the support of additional incentives to be designed during  the project to ensure its su stainability. Furthermore, 
support for the inclusion of environmental criteria in existing  credit lines and capacity building to relevant staff will 
institutionalize procedures to grant future credits with favora ble conditions in the long term.   
 
 F o r  Component 3 , during the GCF’s intervention and beyond, the strategy will b e to reduce the incentives’ 
dependency on fiscal funds by linking SBP beneficiaries with ot her productive activities supported by ATPA; this 
strategy will ensure a paradigm  shift towards sustainable produ ction after GCF intervention. Additionally, GCF 
project will support SBP through co nsultancies to define a pote ntial permanent allocation of financial resources that 
will be collected from hydro-pow er users as a ta riff in accorda nce with the National Water  Resource Use Law as a 
first step to institutionalizing SBP as a stronger instrument o f conservation policy and beneficiary of tax-derived 
income. Furthermore, SBP expects to receive additional funds fr om future RBPs and international agencies such 
as KfW and Agence Française de Développement (AFD), among other s, that assure complementary financial 
support to SBP in the long term.  

 F o r  Component 4,  Ecuador intends to use public resources to finance the operati onal costs of the National Forest 
Monitoring System, the Safeguards Information System, MRV, capa city building and the management of measures 
and actions for REDD+. This will ensure the sustainability of t hese monitoring and information systems over time.  
The fund will have continuity under the general financial struc ture of MAE, and it will be replenished by other 
bilateral and multilateral funds. Other funds, such as KFW-REM,  will be channeled through this financial structure. 
Ultimately the GCF contribution seeks to support the accreditat ion of a National Entity in charge of the financial 
mechanism in order to hav e access to future RBPs 
 153. Finally, the project managem ent team will provide capacity  building for MAE and strategic partners officials directly 
responsible for the management of this GCF project as well help  a national institution to become a GCF Accredited Entity 
to receive RBPs. This will not only comply with GCF requirement s regarding project management, monitoring and 
evaluation, but will also lay the foundation for ensuring suffi cient know-how to continue with key actions post-GCF funding.


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 43 of 79 
 
	E
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/progra mme to contribute to the achieve ment of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
Reduced emissions from deforestation: The FREL, adjusted after UNFCCC revision, corresponds to 43,418,126 
tCO 2eq/year. The objective of the REDD+ AP of Ecuador is to support  the national objective of achieving zero net 
deforestation by 2020.  
 154. As per the UNFCCC Warsaw Framework for REDD+, the exact am ount of emission reductions that Ecuador will 
achieve by implementing its REDD+ AP at the national scale, dur ing the lifetime of the GCF project (2017-2021), will be 
known once the BURs with the REDD+ technical annex are submitte d to the UNFCCC, in 2018, 2020 and 2022. These 
results will be compared with the FREL. This information will b e published on the Lima REDD+ Information Hub on the 
REDD+ Web Platform, in accordan ce with UNFCCC decision 9/CP.19.   
 155. The UNFCCC Warsaw framework for REDD+ does not require, no r provide a methodology for, attribution of 
emission reductions to a specific measure or action or donor. F urthermore, attribution of national emission reductions to 
a single measure, a single project or a single funding source c an be flawed because of the risk of displacement associated 
with any sub-national implementation of REDD+. Ecuador avoids t his risk by implementing REDD+ at the national scale, 
instead of through isolated sub-national projects. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced (Mitigation only) Annual  3 MtCO 2e 
Lifetime 15 MtCO 2eq (2016 – 2020)42  
 Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 
(reduced vulnerabilit y or increased 
resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) Total 60,000 direct beneficiaries of the 
transition to sustainable production across 
300,000 ha of grasslands and other 
landscapes. 
 
390,000 indirect beneficiaries43. 
Percentage 
(%)  
15.3% 
Other 
relevant 
indicators  Institutional and regulatory sys tems that improve incentives fo r low-emission planning and 
development and their effective implementation  
 Number and level of effective coordination mechanisms  
 Hectares of land or forests under  improved and effective manag ement that contribute to CO 2 
emission reductions 
Methodology for the estimation of expected tonnes of carbon dio xide equivalent (tCO 2eq) to be reduced from 
deforestation  
 
156. UNFCCC Decision 12/CP.17 defines the forest reference emis sion level/forest reference level (FREL/FRL) for 
REDD+ to be the benchmark for assessing a country’s performance  in implementing REDD+ activities, and should be 
expressed in tonnes of CO 2 equivalent per year. In line with UNFCCC decisions, emission r eductions achieved by the 
																																																													
42 To estimate potential ERs from t he project, deforestation is pr ojected based on the basis of E cuador’s official FREL. Gross 
deforestation is estimated unt il 2044, considering 2 scenarios:  with and without the project. For each scenario, annual emissi ons 
are estimated with an average reference carbon value of 100 t/h a. It is assumed that the project will have an influence on 20%  of 
the REDD+ AP prioritized areas . Hence, annual ERs are estimated  as: 3,099,304 tCO 2eq / year, and cumulative for the period 
(2016-2020) as 15,211,981 tCO 2eq. 
43 Total rural population of the Amazon Region in 155,000 ha cult ivated and 904,000 of grasslands.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 44 of 79 
 
	E
REDD+ AP will be measured against the FREL44 submitted by Ecuador to the UNFCCC and which has undergone the  
planned review process according  to Decision 13/CP19 (see Secti on B).  
 
157. Ecuador uses a stepwise approach for the development of it s FREL in accordance with Decision 12/CP.17, 
paragraph 10. The stepwise approach  allows Ecuador to improve t he FREL by incorporating better data, methodologies 
and additional reservoirs / pools. The FREL includes: (a) activ ity data (taken from the Map of Historic Deforestation); (b) 
emission factors by forest-type (taken from the National Forest  Inventory); and (c) carbon content by forest-type. It also 
includes the construction process of the FREL, including the me thodologies used to calculate the emission factors, the 
annual averages of activity data and the FREL calculation per s e. 
 
158. The deforestation activity data used for the construction of the FREL were drawn from a historical time-series of 
land cover and land-use maps, developed by MAE for 1990, 2000 a nd 2008. The activity data were estimated following 
Approach 3 as described in the IPCC Good Practice Guidelines fo r the LULUCF Sector (IPCC, 2003). This approach 
takes into account geographically-explicit land use and the lan d-use change data for estimating activity data. Following 
this approach, three wall-to-wall maps were generated for the w hole country using remote sensing imagery to represent 
categories of land use for the reference years 1990, 2000 and 2 008. 
 
159. To estimate historical emissions, Ecuador proposes to mult iply the gross deforestation of each forest-type by the 
specific emission factors ident ified in each of the nine land l ayers. The information about the forest carbon stocks for the 
9 types of natural forests were obtained from the results of th e National Forest Inventory. The emission factors also 
assume that the biomass after deforestation is zero. In additio n, 100% of the oxidation of the stored carbon in dead wood 
and the leaf litter is assumed at the time of conversion. These  assumptions are used since the information available on 
the carbon content of land use after deforestation requires fur ther investigation. 
 
160. The stratification by fores t-type, activity data and emiss ion factors is consistent with the stratification used in the 
National Greenhouse Gases Inventory (GHG-I), which will be pres ented in the First Biennial Update Report Update (BUR) 
and the Third National Communica tion on Climate Change of Ecuad or. 
 
161. Ecuador has decided to use the average annual GHG emission s estimated for the period 2000-2008 in the context 
of the FREL proposed for REDD+ pay ments. Complete information o f the FREL submitted to the UNFCCC can be 
downloaded at the following lin k: http://redd.unfccc.int/fact-s heets.html.   
 
162. The estimation of potential emission reductions generated by the REDD+ AP is estimated as follows:  
 
 The annual gross deforestation is  calculated until 2044 for tw o scenarios, with and with out the programme, using 
as inputs the reference level and estimates of deforestation of  the Natural Heritage Monitoring Unit and the 
Secretariat for Climate Change.  
 
 For each scenario, annual emissions are estimated, taking as a  reference the average value of estimated tonnes 
of carbon, from the National F orestry Evaluation (see Annex IIg ) (133 tC/ha): 
 
 
 
 Once deforestation and annual emissions are estimated, emissio n reduction are calculated, considering the 
reference level as a baseline fo r the calculation. This is expr essed as:  
 
ܴܧ௧ൌܮܧܴܨെݏ݊݋݅ݏݏ݅݉ܧ ௧ 
 
Where: ER is the emissions redu ction; and FREL the Reference Le vel  
 
Emissions reduction per each Bien nial Update Report (BUR) impli es:  
																																																													
44 http://redd.unfccc.int/files/submission_frel_ecuador.pdf


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 45 of 79 
 
	E
 
ܴܷܤ	ܴܧൌ෍ ሾܮܧܴܨെݎܽ݁ݕ	ܴܧ ௧ሿ௡
௧ 
 
163. The following discounts are assumed in the estimation of t he emission reductions: i) uncertainty of 4%, based on 
established criteria from the Forest Carbon Partnership Facilit y (FCPF) (see Annex XIIIq) and the analysis undertaken in 
this regard by MAE (included in the REDD+ AP Financial Strategy  Annex IIf); and, ii) in the case of reserves, a 10% 
discount is considered, taking into account that the actions in  the REDD+ AP account for concr ete measures to maintain 
the carbon stocks.   
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed acti vity can catalyse impact beyon d a one-off project/pro gramme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale)  
164. The project will generate a par adigm shift on three levels , as indicated below: 
 
 It will demonstrate that sustainable commodity supply chain in itiatives, domestic policies and finance, and 
international finance for REDD+ can be integrated into a cohere nt package of PAMs, completely in line with the 
objective of a central Government Programme – the Agenda for th e Transformation of Production in the Amazon, 
ATPA, which seeks the transition to sustainable production syst ems through both certification and traceability for 
deforestation-free products. It will provide a model for these types of engagement such that other developing 
countries will seek to work with the GCF to co-finance the impl ementation of their REDD+ National Strategies or 
Action Plans.  
 
 It will create schemes of payment for environmental services a t the local level, in watersheds with HEP facilities 
that will contribute to co-financing the REDD+ AP and the effor ts of reducing deforestation, forest degradation and 
the related GHG emissions, as well as enhancing conservation an d enhancement of carbon stocks.  
 
 It will build confidence in UNF CCC processes by demonstrating the link between Ecuador’s successful 
implementation of its National REDD+ AP and the early achieveme nt of measurable and reportable results, in 
terms of tCO 2e, that can be eligible for REDD+ Results-Based Payments. As su ch, it will provide a model for 
moving from phase 2 towards phase 3 of REDD+45 that can be replicated by the GCF in its engagement with other  
countries. These future REDD+ RBPs for initial results in one R EDD+ activity (deforestation, as per the FREL 
submitted to the UNFCCC) will be re -invested into the REDD+ Act ion Plan to broaden phase 2 investments (both 
in terms of geography and in terms of REDD+ activities), in an iterative manner. Figure 3 below describes this 
paradigm shift theory of change in the context of its alignment  with the UNFCCC decis ions relevant to REDD+. 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Integrating sustainable supply c hain initiatives, domestic poli cies and finance, and international finance for REDD+ 
 
165. The following figure shows how sustainable supply chain in itiatives, domestic policies and finance, and international 
finance for REDD+ have been in tegrated in the project.  
 
  
 
   
																																																													
45 Through decision 1/CP.16, Paragraph 73, the UNFCCC COP “Decide s that the activities undertak en by Parties [...] should be imp lemented in 
phases, beginning with the develop ment of national strategies o r action plans, policies and meas ures, and capacity-building, f ollowed by the 
implementation of national po licies and measures and national s trategies or action plans that c ould involve further capacity-b uilding, technology 
development and transfer and resu lts-based demonstration activi ties, and evolving into results -based actions that should be fu lly measured, 
reported and verified”.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | Page 46 of 79 
 
	E
Figure 3: Theory of change:  Integrated commodities sustainable supply chain initiatives, do mestic policies and 
finance, and international fina nce for REDD+ phases 2 and 3.  
 
 
 
Building confidence in the UNFCCC process 
 
166. The GCF’s PMF for REDD+ RBPs is focused on REDD+ results c hannelled through the UNFCCC process. This is 
critical in order to build confidence that UNFCCC REDD+ results  can make a significant contri bution to climate mitigation 
efforts. What needs to happen bet ween now and 2020 is for: 
 
 Developing countries to gain co nfidence that they can meet the  requirements of the UNFCCC process in order to 
rapidly obtain and receive RBPs. 
 The international community to gain confidence in the quality of results coming through the UNFCCC process 
through REDD+ implementation (i ncluding the Warsaw Framework fo r REDD+). 
 
167. Through the GCF project, Ecuador will contribute to these two objectives; therefor e, the concept also has the 
specific aim of assisting the GCF to meet the expected results as per its Initial Logic Model and PMF for REDD+ RBPs, 
and in developing an approach tha t could be replicated in many other countries currently engaged in REDD+ readiness.
 
168. Theory of change for scalability and replicability of the proposed project into other sectors, institutions and 
geographical areas: The National REDD+ Action Plan is already a n “umbrella framework”, which details all the PAMs to


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 47 of 79 
 
	E
be implemented at the national level to reduce deforestation, a s well as in 7 prioritized sub-national areas. The REDD+ 
AP could potentially be scaled-up to other geographical areas i n Ecuador, depending on availability of adequate and 
predictable support for all phases of REDD+ implementation (spe cifically phases 2 and 3), in order to increase its potential 
impact. The coastal areas of Ecuador, for instance, offer repli cation potential, as the introduct ion of sustainable agricultur al 
practices could help to avoid desertification. A detailed theor y of change is provided in the first section of the 
“Supplementary Responses” annex.  
169. The project’s replicability in other sectors such as trans port and energy is conceptually difficult to assess given that 
these sectors do not currently o ffer a structured framework equ ivalent to REDD+ under the UNFCCC. However, it is 
interesting to note that MAE plans to replicate features of the  REDD+ readiness process, such as the national approach, 
the stakeholder engagement strat egy and the combination of nati onal and local consultations, to work on these sectors 
of energy and transpor t, through the umbrella initiatives of Cl ean Mobility and the National Plan of Energy Efficiency.  
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
170. Knowledge Management (KM) systems and tools will be develo ped, including an online platform that will be part 
of the Unified Environmental Information System (SUIA), to meet  country needs and facilitate the systematization of, and 
accessibility to, knowl edge by decision-make rs, technicians, be neficiaries, donors and other relevant stakeholders.  
 
171. Monitoring and evaluation plan and a plan for sharing less ons-learned: Monitoring and evaluation will be the 
responsibility of MAGAP and MAE.  A baseline will be constructed  in order to establish an initial point in the implementation 
action. MAGAP and ATPA already have socioeconomic information f rom the areas of intervent ion of the GCF project. 
Other specific indicators will be defined during inception of t he project in order to generate evaluation milestones along 
the project lifetime. 
 
172. Capacity building based on specific measures and actions i s a central focus of Ecuador’s REDD+ AP. Therefore, 
the project will adopt this approach to developing capacities n eeded for each proposed measure for emissions reduction 
from deforestation.   
173. Support to the PDOTs developed by the GADs and Life Plans of Indigenous Territories involves developing local 
capacities to enable stakeholders to effectively integrate guid elines on climate change, reduction of deforestation and 
forest degradation, and the cons ervation and restoration of eco system services in their  territorial management.  
 
174. Regarding ATPA, the project will strengthen capacities on issues related to production systems that will allow for 
greenhouse gas emission reductions in Integrated Farm Managemen t Plans. In addition, the project will also generate 
forums and options for: i) the exchange of experiences on procu rement policies for sustainably-produced raw materials; 
and ii) awareness, traini ng and communication in polices relate d to deforestation-free certified procurements. 
 
175. With respect to SBP, the proj ect will strengthen capacitie s for planning instruments in climate change, reduce 
deforestation and forest degradation, and maintenance and resto ration of ecosystem services.  
 
176. Finally, the project will support the sharing and exchange  of experiences among different countries in the region, 
peer-to-peer learning, and the ex change of best practices and l essons learned from the impl ementation process and the 
different planned components.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creat ion of an enabling environment  
177. The implementation of the National REDD+ AP will require a  permanent inter-sectoral participatory framework. To 
facilitate this process, MAE has  developed a system for the man agement of institutional arrangements between MAE and 
the entities implementing REDD+ AP measures and actions. The sy stem will ensure that stakehol ders involved in REDD+ 
are aware of their roles and r esponsibilities and have the info rmation and knowledge necessary for proper implementation 
of the PAMs described in this proposal. The project will enhanc e inter-institutional coordination fora and options within 
land use, life plans and land-use  zoning frameworks with the ai m of creating conditions for e ffective: i) participation of 
production stakeholders, GADs, indigenous territories and secto rial ministries; and ii) implementation of the proposed 
activities in the vari ous project components.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 48 of 79 
 
	E
178. The project will enhance the different stakeholder partici pation mechanisms established by the REDD+ AP. 
Moreover, the action to support market policy for deforestation -free production will enable participation of public and 
private stakeholders linked to  responsible procurement and cert ification, and the beneficiaries of the production transition 
process. The project proposes concrete actions for sustained in volvement of implementing stakeholders such as SBP 
and GADs in conservation and restoration measures, and also of those stakeholders who are part of the production sector 
and hydroelectric projects. This will ensure that mitigation ac tions for deforestation reduction also result in indirect effec ts 
that contribute to the reduction of emissions through conservat ion, sustainable agriculture and hydroelectric power 
generation.  
 
179. Catalyzing the impact at the national and regional levels by developing and implementing deforestation-free supply 
chains: Ecuador’s strategy is to promote what is known as Solid arity-based Popular Economy  (EPS), which intends to 
create markets tailored to the capacities of the smallholder fa rmer. The EPS seeks to provide links between rural and 
larger urban areas in Ecuador. Su ccessful implementation of the  EPS creates interesting niche s for farmers who cannot 
fully adopt sophisticated technologies or achieve costly certif ications. Further, when small and medium enterprises reach 
advanced stages of industrialization and value-added, the Produ ctivity and Industry Ministry (MIPRO) provides support. 
The catalytic role played by the GCF project will therefore str engthen the enabling environment for the EPS and MIPRO 
SME strategies.  
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
See Section C.1 for a comprehe nsive list of po licies that will be supported by the GCF project. 
    
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and ec onomic co-benefits, includin g gender-sensitive development impact  
180. The GCF project will directly contribute to create an enab ling environment to sustainable development by achieving 
systemic change at the local, national and hopefully internatio nal levels, and by including social, economic and 
environmental co-benefits into t he proposed paradigm shift, suc h as protection of forests, of biodiversity, of the rights and 
indigenous peoples and local communities, including their ances tral and cultural heritage sites, of watersheds, etc. All the 
PAMs prioritized in the REDD+ AP and co-financed by the GCF wil l directly contribute to limit and reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions from LULUCF in the context of promoting sustainab le development.  
 
181. The REDD+ AP places emphasis on the synergies between envi ronmental services and the production and energy 
matrix, particularly as a strategic consideration in guiding th e implementation of funds. C onservation of the Amazon 
rainforest and its related ecosystem services (CO 2, water, biodiversity and scenic beauty) is vital for the long- term 
sustainability of the transformation of energy matrix (reliable  water for hydropower plants) and the production matrix (gains 
in livestock, agriculture, coc oa agroforestry systems and added  value to products, etc.). In this regard, both conservation 
and restoration not only maintain and enhance carbon stocks, bu t also strengthen the potential of the principal 
environmental co-benefits, given that there is a high correlati on between carbon services, biodiversity and water 
regulation in Ecuador46.  
 
182. Water regulation:  In Ecuador, deforestation has a negative effect on electricity generation due to its impact on water 
flow regulation. It also impacts rainfall, resulting in a reduc tion in the amount of water available for hydropower plants and  
in results in less power generation47. Changes in temporal river loads change hydroelectric generati on patterns48, 
especially in ‘run-of-river’ pl ants. The project’s area of infl uence is characterized by a high deforestation threat and the 
presence of important hydroelectric projects (see Section C.1 f or details on conservation and restoration as well as Annex 
IX for the locations of these area s). Thus, the project’s actio ns taken in these landscapes to reduce deforestation and 
emissions due to land-use change will also serve to maintain an d generate ecosystem services related to water flow 
																																																													
46The National Forest Evaluation estimated that the areas with  high carbon stocks have a direct relation with biodiversity and  water regulation.  
47 Kumar, et al. 2011. Hydropower- Special Report of Renewable Energy . http://srren.ipcc-wg3.de/report/IPCC_SRREN_Ch05.pdf   
48 Hamlet et.al 2010. Effects of projected climate change on energy supply and dem and in the Pacific Northwest and Washington State . 
http://www.hydro.washington.edu/pub/hamleaf/promotion/hamlet_CC _2010.pdf


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 49 of 79 
 
	E
regulation, providing a direct benefit to hydroelectric plants.  In economic terms, this benefit represents an average of USD 
15 million for the nex t 30 years (2016-2044)49.  
 
183. Biodiversity:  Ecuador’s Amazon forest is one of the world’s biodiversity hots pots. The project will take action to 
reduce deforestation in the buffer zones of protected area (PAs ) to improve the conservation of biodiversity in these areas 
through reducing pressures on the PAs and reducing fragmentatio n of forest habitat in areas critical for connectivity. 
These PAs represent a surface of  about 272,263 ha currently at risk of deforestation. They are: i) Cayambe Coca 
Ecological Reserve; ii) Cofan-Be rmejo Ecological Reserve; iii) Sumano-Napo-Galeras National Park; iv) Poducarpus 
National Park; v) Sangay National Park; vi) Llanganates Nationa l Park; vii) Colongso Chalupas  Biological Reserve; viii) 
Antisana Ecological Reserva; ix) El Quimi Biological Reserve; x ) El Condor Biological Reserve; xi) El Zarza Wildlife 
Reserve; and xii) Biological Rese rve Cerro Plateado. Estimates of the economic impact of these biodiversity benefits are 
provided in Annex XII. The projec t will comply with UNDP’s Soci al and Environmental Standards, including Standard 1 
on Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Natural Resource M anagement.  
 
184. Poverty: The Economically Act ive Population (EAP) in the E cuadorian Amazon is composed of 361,598 people, of 
whom 140,717 live in urban areas and 220,881 in rural areas50. In the Amazon region, there are 14,116 unemployed 
people (8,141 in urban areas and 5,687 in rural areas) and 72% are between 15 and 34 years old. About 56% of the EAP 
(202,856 people) are employed in the agriculture, hunting and f orestry sector: this sector is a central element of the 
national economy, both for its contribution to GDP and for empl oyment generation. The population characterization of the 
area covered by the project is shown in Annex XIIId, indicating  values to the beneficiaries o f the actions proposed in this 
project. Please refer to Section E.4.2. for calculation of the expected poverty reduction impact of the project. 
 
185. Social needs: The household income benefits of the project  derive from the increase in labour income of the people 
working in agriculture in the selected territories. The adoptio n of best practices generates i ncreases in productivity which 
allow for an immediate increase  in production, thus resulting i n increased labour income benefits. This will happen in the 
first year of the project. Benefit is only given in the first p eriod/year, as the project will work under the assumption of 
indefinite use of the new technology package and, therefore, it  does not represent an increase in salary for the second 
period of the project. A micro-simulation of labour income for individuals who are in the agricultural sector was developed 
by applying a linear relationship between production increase a nd benefits to labour income. The aggregate estimated 
economic benefit in the form of increased household income is U SD 4.6 million.  
 
Table 15: Economic Benefits (flows)51 
  Baseline  
Per capita 
household 
income (total) Per capita 
household 
income with 
change in 
income  Benefits 
(US$) Benefits (%) 
Northern Amazon 1,401,334.8 1,877,816.6 476, 481.8 34.00% 
Central Amazon 867,608.2 1,572,906.5 705, 298.3 81.3% 
Southern Amazon 3,419,585.8 6,331,511.5 2,911, 925.8 85.2% 
Forests and Southern Dry Valley s 3,831,290.8 4, 374,828.8 543,53 8.0 14.2% 
 
186. The effects of having an increased household income per ca pita on poverty are shown as a reduction of 8-19 
percentile points (α = 0) and between 3-11 percentile points on  the poverty gap (α = 1)52. Further information can be found 
in Annex XII, Economic Evaluation.     
 
																																																													
49 See Annex XII Economic Analysis fo r more details on water regu lation benefits and on how this $15m estimate was calculated.  
50 INEC, December 2014  
51 Source: INEC - ENEMDHUR December 2014, Author: Sebastián Burgo s Dávila. 
52 This is calculated using the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke (FGT) indi ces, which are the most common poverty indices. α is a paramete r that 
distinguishes between the alter native FGT indices. When α is eq ual to 0, the measure is the headc ount ratio, a measure of the incidence of 
poverty. Poverty depth is measured  by the poverty gap, which is  obtained with α equal to 1.


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 50 of 79 
 
	E
Table 16: Difference between actual data and simulated poverty53 
 Poverty Poverty Poverty Poverty Poverty Poverty Difference Diff erence Difference 
α = 0 α = 1 α = 2 α = 0 
Simulated α = 1 
Simulated α = 2 
Simulated α = 0  α = 1  α = 2  
Northern Amazon 53.42 26 15.8 45.03 18.55 10.52 -8.39 -7.45 -5.27 
Central Amazon 33.75 16.45 10.32 22.86 10.5 6.3 -10.9 -5.95 -4.02 
Southern Amazon 46.67 21.91 12.89 27.64 10.07 5.05 -19.04 -11.84 -7.84 
Forests and 
Southern Dry Valleys 50.87 24.23 13.92 48.7 20.61 11.1 -2.17 -3.62 -2.82 
 
187. Gender:  In each of the project components, participatory processes and involvement of stakeholders will be 
promoted, among them: civil society and indigenous people with an emphasis on equal participation of men and women, 
and priority groups.54 In practice, this means: a) gr eater participation and involvem ent of women in land-use planning; b) 
facilitating women producer organizations’ access to incentives ; c) involvement of women in capacity building processes 
coherent with their local realities; d) promoting the active pa rticipation of women in dialogue spaces, consultation and 
socialization processes to empower them in decision-making; e) promoting equal participation of men and women in 
access to property rights, land tenure and natural resources; f ) promoting an equitable distribution of the economic 
benefits that might result from t he project between men and wom en. Ecuador has a favourable regulatory framework for 
the inclusion and equal participation of men and women. This ha s led to one of the highest female workforce participation 
rates (55%) in Latin America55. This provides a strong baseline to which the project will con tribute through the application 
of these regulations in its activities, in compliance with Ecua dorean public policies and relevant international treaties. The  
project will comply with UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standa rds, including Principle 2 on Gender Equality and 
Women’s Empowerment. 
 188. Human Rights: The benefits relating to human rights, inclu ding the right of participation in decision making, the 
collective rights on ancestral l ands, the right to self-selecti on and the right to free, prior and informed consultation, are 
detailed in section F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, incl uding Gender Considerations. The project will comply with 
UNDP’s Social and Environmental S tandards, including Principle 1 on Human Rights.  
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country an d population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of countr y and beneficiary groups (Adaptat ion only)  
Not applicable.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
189. Economic growth in Ecuador has directly reduced poverty an d inequality levels and has increased the size of the 
middle class. Between 2006 and 201 4, poverty measured by income  decreased from 37.6% to 22.5%, whilst extreme 
poverty was reduced from 16.9% t o 7.7%. However, the economy re mains over-reliant on the oil sector, demonstrated 
very visibly by the recent sharp decline in oil prices and the appreciation of the US dollar. Reducing this dependency has 
formed part of the national strat egies implemented by the centr al State. Moreover, the target population in the Amazon 
Region has the highest poverty and extreme poverty rates in Ecu ador (47.7% and 21.8% respectively in 2014).  
 
Economic Needs 
190. REDD+ implementation through to 2025 will have an approxim ate cost of USD$ 250 million. With GCF funding, 
16.4% of the REDD+ financial requirement will be covered, and, with complementary funding and co-finance, 63% of the 
total needs will be covered. The allocation of GCF resources to  the REDD+ AP through the pres ent project will trigger the 
start of the REDD+ AP implem entation in Ecuador.  
																																																													
53 Ibid. 
54 According to Ecuador´s Constitu tion, Article 35, it is underst ood that priority attention groups include: elderly people, gir ls, boys and teenagers, 
pregnant women, people with disabilities, detainees and people with catastrophic or high comple xity illnesses. All of them wil l receive priority and 
specialized attention in  public and private scopes. 
55 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.CACT.FE.ZS


---
*Page 53*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 51 of 79 
 
	E
 
191. An economic evaluation56 was performed based on the estimation of the project’s economic  benefits and costs. 
Flows and operational results are projected over a 30-year time frame (i.e. up to 2044). This 30-year timeframe is deemed 
relevant for the GCF project, wh ich seeks a significant and lon g-lasting change in current l and-use patterns as part of 
low-emission development planning for the long-term. The econom ic operational flow results are brought to present value 
with a discount rate of 6%, which is the discount rate commonly  applied to analyse social investment projects in Ecuador. 
The results of the economic evaluation with the project show th at the project is economically profitable, given that the 
ENPV is USD 181.5 million and the EIRR is 55.3%, indicating tha t the project in the current phase of REDD+ in Ecuador 
is desirable for society. Furt her details can be found in the E conomic Evaluation annex (Annex XII).  
 
Social Needs: see informati on provided in Section E.3.  
 
Institutional Needs  
192. The GCF project will develop the capacities of GADs to dev elop land-use plans that include climate change-related 
information and define land-use zoning to optimize reduced emis sions through reduced deforestation and degradation. 
Sectoral institutions at local and national level will have cap acities strengthened through the coordination fora that will be  
set up and through the linking of the planning and budgetary pr ocesses with the updated PDOTs. SENPLADES’ strategic 
involvement in the GCF project will further strengthen this cap acity as it leads the planning and budgeting processes. 
MAGAP will also have capacities strengthened through the specia lized expertise and experience gained in the upscaling 
of sustainable production practices, traceability systems and i mproved understanding of deforestation-free product 
markets. The project will also enable MAE to mainstream climate  change strategies into the core planning of these 
institutions. The initial steps  have been conducted by MAE in t he context of a SENPLADES initiative called: “Visión 
Ecuador 2035”, in which components of climate change were inclu ded in the agenda; however, this will be significantly 
strengthened through the GCF project. 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country ownership o f, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national c limate strategy and coherence w ith existing plans and polic ies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
193. The project is fully aligned with Ecuador’s NDC, National Communication to the UNFCCC, REDD+ Action Plan and 
a suite of domestic policies and strategies – see Section C.1 f or details. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entit ies and executing entities t o deliver  
194. UNDP is one of the world’s largest brokers of climate chan ge grants for developing countries, with a current portfolio 
of US$ 1.34 billion in mitigation and adaptation grant-financed  projects in over 140 countries, supported by co-financing 
of $6.7 billion. The project build s on UNDP’s experience and ex tensive worldwide forest programme which, through a 
range of partnerships, currently  amounts to approximately US $7 50 million. UNDP’s expertise ranges from strengthening 
forest governance (i.e. the ability of public administrations t o sustainably manage forest resources and strengthen 
accountability for decision-maki ng); developing financial syste ms and mechanisms to underpin governance (e.g. financial 
incentives; PES schemes; financia l planning and delivery system s, national REDD+ related PAMs); working with the 
private sector and governments to promote deforestation-free co mmodity supply chains; ensuring the inclusion of 
indigenous peoples and civil society in sector decision-making;  strengthening the livelihoods of forest-dependent 
communities, to ensure they are more sustainable and inclusive;  and strengthening the management of protected areas, 
including indigenous and community conservation areas.  
195. The project also builds on UNDP’s experience as a partner of the UN-REDD Programme and as a delivery partner 
of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF). Within the UN -REDD Programme, UNDP supports, in particular, 
indigenous peoples and forest-dependent communities, and has be en instrumental in supporting countries to develop 
national safeguard systems and gr ievance mechanisms, and develo ping and applying the principle of Free, Prior, 
Informed Consent (FPIC) to REDD+.  UNDP plays a leading role in supporting countries to develop national REDD+ 
strategies and action plans that are inclusive and which respon d to national development priorities as well as the 
requirements of the UNFCCC process.   
 
																																																													
56 See Annex XII for more details of the economic evaluation incl uding considerations s uch as the timeframe, discount rate and o thers.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 52 of 79 
 
	E
196. UNDP already has experience in supporting a number of coun tries to transition into Phase II REDD+ 
implementation. For example, in Viet Nam, UNDP is the lead faci litating agency for the Norway-funded $30 million Phase 
2 UN-REDD Programme. In Indonesia , UNDP provided the platform f or the implementation of t he $30 million first phase 
of Norway’s $1 billion bilateral REDD+ agreement. In the Democr atic Republic of Congo (DRC), UNDP has led the 
establishment of the National REDD+ Fund, including the develop ment of its investment framework. UNDP is now 
advising a number of other countri es on the establishment of na tional entities to receive REDD+ RBPs, including Peru, 
Ecuador, Nepal and Cambodia. UNDP has a team of 35 REDD+ expert s supporting more than 40 countries, in regional 
teams in Panama, Nairobi and Bang kok, backstopped by global tec hnical advisors in New York and Geneva. The team 
has excellent working relations wit h key REDD+ donors, such as Norway’s International Climate and Forests Initiative 
team, and is recognized as providing high-quality, trusted tech nical advice to many of the most rapidly advancing REDD+ 
countries in the world. 
 197. The project complements the existing UNDP portfolio in Ecu ador and has a direct bearing on the 2015-2018 United 
Nations Development Assistance Framework
57 (UNDAF) objective of environm ental sustainability, resilience and risk 
management: Outcome 4: “By 2018, support has been provided to s trengthening institutional and citizen capacities to 
promote the rights of nature, cr eate conditions for sustainable , low-emission development, and improve the resilience 
and risk management faci ng the impacts”. 
 
198. The UNDP Ecuador Country Offi ce was established in 1965. T he Environment and Energy Cluster employs three 
staff, two UN Volunteers, and two contract service holders, and  manages a USD 34 million portfolio. UNDP has excellent 
high-level and operational-level relations with Government coun terparts and assisted the Government in developing the 
NCCS and National Climate Change Plan, as well as the UNFCCC Na tional Communications, the NAP and various 
climate change mitigation projects elaborated with the support of UNDP. In addition, the proj ect will receive specialized 
support from Regional Technical Ad visors in the UNDP Regional S ervice Centre in Panama and UNDP Headquarters in 
New York. 
 
Capacity of MAE as executing entity 
199. The Ministry of Environment of Ecuador (MAE) is the nation al environment authority in charge of designing 
environmental policies and coordinating strategies, projects an d projects for the conservat ion of ecosystems and the 
sustainable use of natural res ources. It proposes and defines t he rules to ensure adequate environmental quality, with 
development based on conservation and an appropriate use of bio diversity and resources that belong to the country. 
MAE houses the UNFCCC Focal  Point and the GCF NDA.  
 
200. In 2009, Ecuador established the Under-Secretariat of Clim ate Change under the MAE National Authority for 
REDD+, which is in charge of l eading mitigation and adaptation actions in the country. Its  roles and responsibilities 
include: 1) to lead and coordinate the Policies, Strategies and  Regulations concerning climate change; and 2) to 
coordinate State policy on clim ate change adaptation and mitiga tion. 
 
201. MAE is managing a USD 63 million portfolio with an executi on rate of 72% through to September 2015 (See Annex 
XIIIc). The GCF project will build on MAE’s experience in susta inable forest management and sustainable land use 
programmes that currently am ount to USD 49 million. MAE’s exper ience includes the development of the REDD+ AP; the 
development of the FREL endorsed by the UNFCCC; strengthening o f the protected areas system in prioritized zones 
with the corresponding participation of regional and local stak eholders in charge of biodiversity conservation; reduction 
of land degradation and increasi ng climate change adaptation ca pacity and GHG emissions r eduction; and governance 
of issues related to deforestation and the use of land in the A mazon region.  
 
202. In addition to its national portfolio, MAE is currently ex ecuting a number of international projects related to the GCF 
project that collectively amount to USD $257 million. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civ il society organizations and ot her relevant stakeholders  
																																																													
57 http://www.un.org.ec/wp-content /uploads/2015/02/MARCO-DE-COOPER ACION-NACIONES-UNIDAS-p6.pdf


---
*Page 55*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 53 of 79 
 
	E
203. In order to promote and ensure the full and effective part icipation and support of stakeholders during the REDD+ 
readiness process and later on during the implementation of the  REDD+ AP, the Government, through the REDD+ 
National Authority, have been impl ementing a series of compleme ntary actions since 2012.  
 
204. Guidelines on free, prior and informed consent in the cont ext of REDD have been elabora ted through a participative 
process, with guidance from the Office of the United Nations Hi gh Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the 
UN-REDD National Programme in Ec uador (see Annex XIIIp).The con sultation guidelines will be applied when needed, 
and before implementing REDD+ measures and actions in all or pa rt of the territories, lands and resources of indigenous 
peoples, nationalities and communities; Afro-Ecuadoran peoples;  and Montubio people and communes, or when their 
territories, lands and resources are affected or threatened by the implementation of those actions.  
 
205. The National REDD+ AP is the result of extensive consultat ions that started in 2012 when MAE created a REDD+ 
Working Group in recognition of the importance of the participa tion of key national and local stakeholders. Led by MAE, 
the REDD+ Working Group is compo sed of one representative from academia; two from the private sector; two from 
national NGOs; one organisation representing women; one represe nting young people; and, finally, three organisations 
representing indigenous groups.  Additionally, five working grou ps involving officials and experts were formed for specific 
topics and provide advice to the REDD+ Working Group. The degre e of participation was high and the REDD+ Work 
Table provided input, advice and suggestions which set the tech nical, legal and political basis for the National REDD+ 
AP.  
 
206. Training and consultations on REDD+ were carried out in pr iority areas to ensure that a variety of stakeholders 
were aware of the objectives of the National REDD+ AP and could  contribute to its design and future implementation. A 
total of 2,878 people were trained, of whom 976 were women. Man y more were consulted in over 40 workshops carried 
out all around the country. The co nsultations led to the develo pment of the priority PAMs that will be implemented under 
the GCF project, as well as their spatial prioritisation (see m aps in Annex IX). Participants included public officials 
(Regional Autonomous Governments, provincial AME and MAGAP offi cials) and civil society (national and international 
NGOs, universities, and community organisations), as well as re presentatives of indigenous peoples (Kichwa, Shuar, 
Achuar, Saparas, SHIWIAR, Cofan, Siona, etc.). A detailed summa ry of all consultations carried out in the process of 
developing the National Action Plan is provided in Annex XIIIa.  Additionally, a meeting of the REDD+ working group was 
convened on July 6, 2015 to vali date that the GCF project is in deed aligned with the prioriti es outlined in the REDD+ AP 
and for which the extensive cons ultations have taken place. The  minute of this meeting are annexed to the funding 
proposal.  
 
207. The GCF project will be implemented under UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), which is explicitly 
designed to ensure domestic stakeholders and systems are used t o strengthen national ownership, accountability and 
capacity development. The project will comply with UNDP’s Socia l and Environmental Standards, including requirements 
related to stakeholder engagement and free, prior, and informed  consent; as well as Standard  6 on Indigenous Peoples.
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fi nancial soundness of the  proje ct/programme  
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
208. The project promotes cooperation and complementarity with public sector projects that are being implemented or 
are under negotiation, thus creat ing integration. Also, the pro ject will promote public policies  that allow the private sector  
to adopt procurement policies for deforestation-free and enviro nmentally responsible products, thus creating access to 
markets and price differentiation.  
 
209. The project design and budget builds on more than six year s of preparation for REDD+ and sustainable forest 
management. This provided official and validated information an d a comprehensive set of studies that facilitated the 
quantification of the measures a nd actions in this proposal. Th ese studies include, among ot hers, the assessment of the 
drivers and agents of deforestati on; the forest reference level  from deforestation; studies on multiple environmental and 
social benefits; opportunity cos ts of land-use change; and the costing of REDD+ implementation. These have allowed 
Ecuador to design a REDD+ AP with  concrete and costed measures and actions that are ready for implementation.  
 
210. UNDP, as the GCF accredit ed agency, will ensure transparen cy and the proper use of the allocated resources, 
according to the approved document, by using multi-annual and a nnual planning tools defined under the project


---
*Page 56*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 54 of 79 
 
	E
governance structure. In additi on, Ecuador has the legal and in stitutional framework to ensure accountability and 
transparency in the management of funds, based on results, subj ect to planning and complementarity with the mobilized 
co-financing for this initiative, generating savings, optimizin g resources and creating synergies for a sustainable forest 
management.  
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveragi ng and mobilized lo ng-term investm ents (mitigation only)  
211. With the USD 41.17 million investment from the GCF, USD 41 .83 million will be leveraged from a range of 
institutions, including the Na tional Government. This correspon ds to a 1:1 ratio in resource leverage.  
 
212. While not directly leveraged by GCF funding, complementary  financing sources under joint programming are being 
mobilized from the KFW-REM, FIP and the Ministry of Foreign Tra de, and currently stand a t USD 74.76 million. 
 
213. The project will also enable further leverage of investmen t in the long term. In terms of fiscal resources, the NCCS, 
and its associated REDD+ AP, is being executed by MAE, financed  by tax resources from the State’s General Budget. 
Moreover, as part of REDD+ imple mentation the possibility of cr eating an entity that will take over REDD+ management 
at a technical and operational lev el is currently being explore d. Finally, to ensure closur e of the financing gap, Ecuador 
will maintain an active role in international fora that will al low the country to access climat e financing on appropriate term s 
for the country and on a competit ive basis compared with other available financing.  
E.6.3. Financial viability  
214. Economic and financial rate of return, with and without th e GCF support: please refer to Annex XIIb. Taking into 
account the high level of uncertainty related to REDD+ results- based payments (price, volumes of emissions reduction, 
availability of RBP funds, conditi ons of access, etc.), potenti al RBPs as revenues are not considered, and thus a financial 
evaluation is not applicable.   
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
215. Expansion of agriculture and ranching is the main driver o f deforestation in Ecuador. If farmers’ livelihoods are 
improved through produ ctivity, if quality in creases on existing  farmland, and if barriers are cr eated to avoid expansion of 
the agricultural frontier (land zoning, social control, traceab ility, etc.), then farmers will have much less incentive to cle ar 
new land. The project will support a number of agricultural pra ctices through various means (incentives, agricultural 
extension services, support to associations, and access to mark ets). In all cases, the project will ensure that best practices  
are applied. Best practices for cacao production, cattle ranchi ng, recuperation of grasslands, silvo-pastoral and 
agricultural systems are  summarized below:   
 
 Cacao produced using modern techniques integrated within the tr aditional ‘chacra’ system.  Chacra  (the local 
word for a smallholder farm system) combines a number of crops as well as non-timber fores t products (NTFPs). It a 
resilient and diversified production system, but productivity i s low and often fails to provide smallholders with adequate 
income to lift them out of poverty. The best practice is to int egrate cacao into the chacra  system, which will increase 
productivity to produce double or even more, and will provide b etter prospects than monoculture because cacao can 
be complemented by other crops. The introduction of timber shad e trees can also benefit the chacra , growing into a 
significant asset over a lifetime and bringing considerable rev enue from the sale of timber in the long-term.  
 
 Improved traditional cattle ranching practices. Livestock production is usually very inefficient, both in the c ase of 
large and small producers. Many farmers have only one cattle he ad per hectare, and cattle typically compact lands 
and overgraze, significantly reduc ing grassland productivity (i mpeding the regeneration of fresh grass). The best 
practice that will be supported by  the project is to divide the  participating farms into many  (20, 30 or more) small lots 
and circulate the cattle daily, as well as to improve the quali ty of grass with improved varieties and fertilization. In this 
way, cattle will not overgraze and compact land, and will gain weight more rapidly and produce better quality milk. 
Ranchers can sustain up to 4-5 h ead of cattle per hectare with this system.  
 
 Silvo-pastoral systems. The proposed best practice is to transform unproductive cattle producers into much more 
productive timber producers, where cattle revenues provide farm ers with a constant cash-flow while the trees grow. 
Trees Provide shade to the cattle, reduce heat stress, maintain  soil moisture and allow grass to grow faster in some 
instances. In summary, silvo-pasture systems provide the opport unity to simultaneously reduce encroachment by 
raising efficiency on existing fa rms, and also to reforest prod uction landscapes.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 55 of 79 
 
	E
 
 Agroforestry systems : The proposed best practice is for tomate de árbol, granadilla , bananas, plantain, citrus, 
mango, avocado, coffee, cocoa and palm production to be made mo re sustainable by diversification through the use 
of native shade tree species. The shade trees can provide ferti lization in the case of leguminous tree species, such 
as guabo ( Inga edulis )58.  
 
 Recuperation of grassland . Man-made grasslands can be turned into productive silvicultur al or agricultural land for 
timber, palm oil, coffee or cocoa plantations. As grassland wil l often be compacted, the best practice is to use tractors 
to loosen the soil structure bef ore planting crops or trees.  
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF core indicators Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investmen t cost / expected lifetime emiss ion 
reductions (mitigation only)  
(a) Total programme financing US$  84,007,202 
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$  41,172,739 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions 
over time  15.2 MtCO 2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO 2eq (d = a / c) US$ 5.53 / tCO 2eq59 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO 2eq 
removed (e = b / c) US$ 2.71  / tCO 2eq 
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed proj ect/programme and as a 
result of the Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and pri vate sources (mitigation only) 
The project is expected to leverage USD US$ 43m in a five-year period, which will allow the initial 
implementation of the REDD+ National Action Plan in certain are as of the country 
(disaggregation of co-financing i s provided at the beginning of  the funding proposal). Besides, 
the Government of Ecuador is in an advanced stage of negotiatio ns with the REDD Early Movers 
Programme of Germany and Norway as well as the Forest Investmen t Programme and the 
Ministry of Foreign Trade, which bring the total volume of fina nce to be leveraged by the proposed 
project to USD 158.77 m.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. e stimated cost per co-benefit g enerated as a result 
of the project/programme) The project has an ENPV of USD 
181.5 million; an EIRR of 55.3%; 
and a cost/benefit ratio of 5. 
																																																													
 
59 Studies undertaken in Ecuador i ndicate that the estimated cost  per tCO 2 can vary significantly depen ding upon the national development  scenario 
(i.e. basically the financial and economic capacity of the Gove rnment and of the economic stak eholders to implement their resp ective policies and 
plans), the level of ambition of the country to reduce its emis sion from deforestation at the national level, the opportunity costs which are affected by 
external factors, and the transaction and implementation costs.


---
*Page 58*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 56 of 79 
 
	F
  
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
216. The financial analysis for all components can be reviewed in Annex XIIb, tab EVAL FINANC. 
 
217. Justification for a grant: see  information already provide d under Section B.1 
 
218. The project has identified  four economic benefits that hav e been quantified for the economic evaluation:  
 
 Greenhouse gas emission reductions (direct benefit). The value  of emission reductions from deforestation is 
estimated based on potential future revenues associated with RE DD+ results-based payments, valued at a 
conservative international  prices of USD 5 per tCO 2 eq. 
 Water regulation (co-benefit) . The main effects of the project are a change in the amount of p recipitation in 
general and locally, as well as changes to the temporal pattern s of the flows and reduced sedimentation. These 
have numerous positive impacts on hydro-electrical production c apacity which have been estimated.   
 Biodiversity (co-benefit). The project will greatly contribute  to habitat conservation, which is key for biodiversity. 
The value of nature tourism benefits flowing to the project are as was used as a proxy for the value of these 
biodiversity benefits. The geographical area included in the ca lculation are the areas of  project intervention in 
buffer zones around protected ar eas that are at risk of defores tation (17,200 ha). 
 Poverty reduction (co-benefit).  This is mainly achieved throug h increases in agricultural productivity and its 
impact on household income per c apita (see Section E.4.2).  
 
219. The economic evaluation is positive; results show that the  project is economically profitable, since the ENPV is 
USD 181.5 million, the EIRR is 55.3% and the co st/benefit ratio  is of 5. See Annex XII for details. 
 
220. For sensitivity modelling, variations in the total costs a nd the total economic benefits have been combined inversely: 
i.e. where economic benefits are increased by 5%, total economi c costs are reduced by the  same proportion, and this 
exercise is performed with perc entage variations up to 25%. Thi s facilitates comparison of best and worst case scenarios. 
In all scenarios, the economic re sults of the project are posit ive.  
 
Table 17: Economic evaluation sensitivity analysis 
SENSITIVITY ENPV EIRR B/C 
-25% benefits +25%Total cost    114,200,416 30.8%        
3.08  
-20% benefits +20%Total cost    127,665,517 35.0%        
3.42  
-15% benefits +15%Total cost    141,130,618 39.4%        
3.80  
-10% benefits +10%Total cost    154,595,719 44.3%        
4.20  
- 5% benefits + 5% Total  cost    168,060,820 49.6%        
4.65  
- 0% benefits + 0% Total cost    181,525,921 55.3%         5.14  
+ 5% benefits - 5% Total  cost    194,991, 022 61.4%        
5.68  
+10% benefits -10% Total  cost    208,456,123 67.9%        
6.28  
+15% benefits -15% Total  cost    221,921,224 75.0%        
6.95  
+20% benefits -20% Total  cost    235,386,325 82.6%        
7.70  
+25% benefits -25%  Total cost    248,851,426 90.8%          8.5 6


---
*Page 59*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | Page 57 of 79 
 
	F
F.2.  Technical  Evaluation  
221. The REDD+ Action Plan  was developed using a landscape approach that seeks to provide tools for allocating and 
managing land to achieve social, economic, and environmental ob jectives in areas where agriculture and other productive 
land uses compete with environmental goals60. The Plan prioritizes areas of intervention and PAMs according  to the 
following criteria: i) potential to address the drivers and age nts of deforestation and barriers to regeneration; ii) potentia l 
environmental and social benefit s; iii) alignment with developm ent guidelines (PDOTs, Life Plans, national policies and 
programmes); and iv ) potential to fill c onservation gaps.  
 
222. A detailed analysis of defor estation dynamics carried out during the REDD+ readiness pha se identified 14 distinct 
geographical areas which display ed similar (homogeneous) proces ses of deforestation. Seven of these areas were 
prioritized for intervention based on the above-mentioned crite ria. For each of these areas, specific PAMs have been 
prioritized to resp ond to these dynamics . In all cases, the fol lowing PAMs were deemed relevant: i) zoning and land-use 
planning; ii) strengthening forest control (enforcement of fore st laws); iii) transforming pr oduction; and iv) harmonization 
of intra- and inter-se ctoral policies at di fferent levels (nati onal and sub-national).  
 
Figure 5: Integration of incentiv es in project implementation 
 
 
 
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
223. The project will implement priority PAMs identified in the  REDD+ AP. Social and Environmental Safeguards were 
developed for the REDD+ AP in acc ordance with UNFCCC standards and aligned with national and international 
legislation as per the Cancun Agreement, Paragraph 2 of Annex I , Decision 1/CP.16. These sa feguards were considered 
in designing this GCF proposal and will be applied during imple mentation. They are detail ed in Annex IIb. All project 
activities are in line with national environmental regulations relevant to protected areas and natural resource 
management. In addition, UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standa rds will be applied throughout  the project cycle. A 
draft Social and Environmental Screening Procedure is presented  in Annex VI; this it will be revised and will include an 
associated Environmental and So cial Management Framework (ESMF)  for the project. 
 
224. In line with UNFCCC decisions61, Ecuador has a Safeguard Information System (SIS) for REDD+ to  manage 
information on how safeguards ar e addressed and respected, acco rding to the country’s needs and capacities. Reporting 
																																																													
60 For more details on the land scape approach see: Sayer J.A. et al (2013), Ten principles for a landscape appr oach to reconciling agriculture, 
conservation, and other competing land uses.  Proceedings of the National Academ y of Sciences (PNAS) availab le at: http://www.cifor.org/nc/online-
library/browse/view-publication/publication/4136.html    
61 Countries interested in implem enting REDD+ should prepare a sy stem for providing information on how the safeguards are being addressed and 
respected, depending on their res pective national circumstances  and capacities. This system, together with the submission of a  summary of the most 
recent information on how the safeguards have been addressed an d respected, are the items needed for accessing results-based p ayments for 
REDD+ activities. Guidance on how to submit the safeguard infor mation is given in Decisions 2/CP.17 and 12/CP.19.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 58 of 79 
 
	F
on the SIS’s addressing of safeguards is based on implementatio n and monitoring of PAMs by the REDD+ M&A 
Management System and the tools that will be fostered by it for  meeting REDD+ objectives. Likewise, the SIS will be 
linked to other key stakeholder s and institutions for safeguard  reporting by the time of the GCF project. 
 
225. See Section E.5.3 for details  of the extensive stakeholder  engagement and safeguards that underlie the GCF 
project. See Section G.1 for a risk assessment, including envir onmental, social and gender risks. 
 
226. The REDD+ AP and the GCF project include important gender considerations. These are described in Section 3.1 
and include a series of actions to increase women’s participati on, strengthen capacities and promote the effective 
participation of women and youth in  production transformation. The GCF project will strengthen the Ministry of the 
Environment’s support for the implementation of these considera tions and advance gender equality and the 
empowerment of women in Ecuador.  
 
227. Ecuador has signed several international instruments justi fying the relevance of incor porating the gender approach 
into the REDD+ Action Plan (REDD+ AP). It has also incorporated  the principle of equality and non-discrimination set 
forth in these instruments in its internal regulations. One of the most relevant of these is Pri nciple 20 of the Rio Declarati on 
on Environment and Development (1992), which recognizes that wo men play an essential role in the management of the 
environment and development, inter nalized in Ecuad orean law thr ough the Environmental Management Law (1998)62.   
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement  
228. The financial management and procurement of this project w ill be guided by UNDP financi al rules and regulations, 
available here: https://info. undp.org/global/documents/frm/Fina ncial-Rules-and-Regulations_E.pdf. Further guidance is 
outlined in the financial resources management section of the U NDP Programme and Operations Policies and 
Procedures available at https ://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/P ages/introduction.aspx. UNDP has comprehensive 
procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and  Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP). The policies outline  formal procurement standards and guidelines across 
each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all pr ocurements in UNDP.  See here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ cap/Pages/Introdu ction.aspx. 
 
229. The project procurement plan is provided in Annex Vc. 
 230. The project will be implemented following the National Imp lementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/docum ents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx? sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Imple
mentation%20by%20the%20Governmen t%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx&a ction=default&DefaultItemOpen=1  
 
 Under NIM, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to th e implementing partner (executing entity) for 
the implementation of agreed and approved project activities, i n accordance with UNDP standard policies and 
the NIM Guidelines. The implementing partner reports back expen diture via a financial report on quarterly basis 
to UNDP. Scheduled audits are performed during the project cycl e as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the 
basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guid elines. A scheduled audit is used to determine 
whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner were used for the appropriate purpose and in 
accordance with the work plan. A  scheduled audit can consist of  a financial audit or an internal control audit.  
 
 UNDP provides a variety of assu rance activities which will com prise of (but not be limited to): (1) Periodic on-site 
reviews (spot checks)  of the IP’s financial records of cash transfers. These may be performed by qualified UNDP 
staff or third party service providers; (2) Programmatic monitoring  of activities supported by cash transfers, which 
provides evidence regarding the st ate of project implementation  and use of the GCF resources; and (3) 
Scheduled and special audits  (financial or internal control)  of the IP’s financial records and financial management 
systems of internal controls rel ated to the project. All detail s are available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/fr m/Pages/Harmonized-Approach -to-Cash-Transfers.aspx 
 
																																																													
62 http://www.quitoambiente.gob.ec/index.php?option=com_docman&tas k=doc_download&gid=230&Itemid=59&lang=es


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 59 of 79 
 
	G
 UNDP prepares and reports financial statements in full accorda nce with the International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS). Fu ll compliance with IPSAS was ac hieved effective Ja nuary 2012. IPSAS was 
mandated by General Assembly Resolution 60/283 and is considere d best practice in accounting for public sector 
and not-for-profit organizations.  
 The National Implementing Partner will have contractual obliga tions to ensure compliance with UNDP’s financial 
regulations and rules, including procurement policies. Procurem ents performed by the Government implementing 
partner will follow Government procurement rules provided they are assessed as not being inconsistent with 
UNDP procurement rules. Oversi ght will be performed by UNDP.   
 
231. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the impleme nting partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity 
following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Part ners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfers - HACT). All details are available here: https://undg .org/wp-content/uploads/ 2015/02/2014-UNDG-HACT-
Framework-English-FINAL.pdf 
 
232. A Disbursement Schedule tied to specific disbursement peri ods and project milestones is included in Annex Va; 
see also Annex XIIb, tab SCHEDULE.  
G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
233. Given that the project has an explicit focus on forest con servation through best-practice landscape management, 
the risk of adversely affecting conservation values is limited.  However, because of the work with communities and 
indigenous peoples in areas of critical habitats and given the external factors prevalent in the Amazon, the overall project 
risk has been rated as Moderate  and measures have been designed to  ensure risks are kept to a minimum. 
 
234. The design of the project builds on the comprehensive safe guards determined for the National REDD+ AP that 
comply with Warsaw guidance. Furthermore, a commitment to activ e and effective participation by local stakeholders and 
indigenous communities through effective multi-level landscape governance will limit the potential for human rights 
abuses and negative impacts on marginalized communities. The Go vernment of Ecuador and UNDP have a history of 
collaboration in the areas of con servation and sustainable deve lopment, and the project is firml y in line with constitutional 
and national development objectives that mitigate the risks ide ntified, establishing a strong platform for cooperation and 
limited risk. Financial and operational risks have also been id entified and specific mitigation measures incorporated into 
the design accordingly. The following describes the risk factor s and mitigation measures  detailed in Annex VI.
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social a nd environmental and other ri sks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Al so describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description Risk 
category Level of 
impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
The project will be developed in an area where there is a high proportion of 
indigenous populations with important cultural heritage and als o poor rural 
farmers and communities. It aims  to bring together these stakeh olders with 
differing levels of resources and power through a multi-level g overnance 
framework for land use planning and management and also the 
development of financial mechanisms. The project could lead to adverse 
impacts on enjoyment of the human rights of the affected popula tion and 
particularly of marginalized groups because duty-bearers might not have 
the capacity to meet their obligations in the project or becaus e rights-
holders might not have the ca pacity to claim their rights.  Social 
and 
environm
ental  Medium 
(5.1-20% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 60 of 79 
 
	G
Significant progress has been observed in Ecuador in terms of r espect and promotion of human and indigenous rights, as 
illustrated by the recent releas e of a Ministerial Decree 12863 on Free, Prior and Informed Consultation (FPIC). Yet it is 
still unclear if all the rights  holders have a full understandi ng of their rights, and if the Government has the full capacity  
and experience to comply with its obligations. However, the GCF  project represents an excellent opportunity to promote 
human rights principles in Ecuad or and contribute to their impl ementation at the local and nat ional levels. The probability 
of this risk is low as the project will implement priority acti ons that have been identified and agreed upon by multiple 
stakeholders through a participat ory process that defined the R EDD+ AP and in which rights and obligations of duty 
bearers were specifically discuss ed. Nonetheless, specific acti ons have been included to improve the capacities of duty 
bearers and rights holder s. Amongst others, this includes imple menting Ministerial Decree 128 guidelines for FPIC during 
the proposed land planning processes  and, with  specific reference to indigenous  people, project activities in their lands 
will be implemented on a voluntary basis. Where needed, specifi c training of local and national representatives of the 
Government as well as rights holders on their rights and redres s mechanisms will be provided to ensure their 
implementation. Other measures are detailed in Annex VI, as wel l as Sections E.2.2 and E.5.3, and include: (i) supporting 
the continuity of the REDD + m ulti-stakeholder roundtable; (ii)  setting up a system of information on how safeguards are 
addressed and promoted in the cont ext of REDD in the country; ( iii) setting appropriate griev ance procedures/mechanisms 
to provide channels for concerned stakeholders and applying the  UNDP Stakeholder Response Mechanism (SRM), in 
case  no other mechanism exists at the local, regional or national le vel. A comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment will be unde rtaken before potential impacts occur, t o assess the potential impact s further and develop more 
detailed mitigation measures and plans. 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description Risk 
category Level of 
risk Risk Probability  
The project will develop land-use plans to reduce the pressure on forest 
areas and increase protection of key forest fragments in the pr oduction 
landscape. Some of these land-use plans may place restrictions on existing 
and future land uses. Although the project does not envisage ph ysical 
displacement, land-use restrictions may increase the possibilit y of economic 
displacement, especially for poorer and marginalized individual s who may 
not have resources to change cu rrent production practices. Social 
and 
environm
ental  Medium 
(5.1-20% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project includes specific actions to address this risk. Fir st, land-use planning will only take place through participator y 
processes and support will be give n for the inclusion of repres entatives of marginalized groups. Second, financial 
mechanisms will be set up through the project to support the tr ansition to new land uses to compensate opportunity costs 
during the conversion stage, ther eby reducing any adverse econo mic displacement. This includes supporting incentive 
payments in the short-term and strengthening supply chains of d eforestation-free produce to increase income in the 
medium-term. These mechanisms target different groups of stakeh olders, including small-scale farmers and communities. 
In addition, SBP will be strengthened by the project. This is a n existing incentive that provi des resources to communities 
and indigenous people, many of whom are amongst the poorest and  most vulnerable in society. A comprehensive 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will be undertaken b efore potential impacts occur, to assess the potential 
impacts further and develop more d etailed mitigation measures a nd plans. 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description Risk 
category Level of 
risk Risk Probability  
The project activities will take p lace within or adjacent to cr itical habitats 
and/or environmentally sensitive areas, including legally prote cted areas 
and indigenous people’s lands. It will support land-use plannin g in these 
areas, sustainable harvesting of forest and reforestation, as w ell as 
planning, regulation and enforcem ent in other areas where, to a  l a r g e  
extent, economic activity such a s farming, harvesting and grazi ng has 
expanded with little control. Unl ess this takes into account su stainable 
practices and harvesting limits as well as climate-resilient in terventions, this Social 
and 
environm
ental  Medium 
(5.1-20% 
of project 
value)  Low 
																																																													
63 http://www.pnc-onureddecuador.org/biblioteca-virtual-onuredd/po liticas-e-instrumentos-para-la-i mplementacion-de-redd/99-acuerd o-
ministerial-128.html


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 61 of 79 
 
	G
may adversely affect conservation values of these areas and/or increase 
vulnerability to CC of producti on sectors and local communities . 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The focus of the project is precisely on maintaining areas of h igh conservation value forest  and project components are 
designed specifically to address causes and drivers of deforest ation and forest degradation to avoid adverse impacts on 
conservation values and mitigate climate change impacts. The pr oject will generate changes in the forms of production in 
non-forest areas adjacent to Protected Areas and indigenous lan ds to ensure they are free from deforestation. The 
different production models and critical areas were identified in the REDD+ Action Plan based on a large number of 
detailed feasibility studies, available as part of Annex II, an d include geographically-explicit identification of required 
actions to reduce deforestation across the landscape in each pr ovince and a detailed analysis of the costs and benefits 
of implementing these actions. M aps based on th ese feasibility studies are provided in Annex  IX. A safeguards and MRV 
system for REDD+ will be implement ed to guide land use in these  selected landscapes to those activities and practices 
that do not harm forests and their ecosystem goods and services . This includes the definition of sustainable harvesting 
and management, drawing from the best practices outlined in Sec tion E.6.2. A second measure will be to ensure that 
access to credit and availability of a range of fiscal and econ omic incentives for sustainabl e climate-resilient production 
follow the recommendations of the REDD+ AP and are monitored by  the safeguards. A third m easure will be to develop 
market mechanisms focused on the demand-side for deforestation- free products to contribute to this paradigm shift 
towards sustainable deforestation-free production. A comprehens ive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will 
be undertaken before potential impacts occur, to assess the pot ential impacts further and develop more detailed mitigation 
measures and plans. 
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description Risk 
category Level of 
risk Risk Probability  
Operational Risk : The project depends on actions of multiple stakeholders, 
ranging from different national line ministries, local governme nts and 
agricultural producers and communities. Sub-optimal coordinatio n, 
duplication and overlap of responsibilities between and within the different 
levels may undermine implementation.  Technical 
and 
operation
al Medium 
(5.1-20% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project has been designed to address this risk. Component 1  includes the strengthening of inter-institutional 
coordination mechanisms. Land-use planning will be undertaken t hrough participatory proces ses and will specifically 
address overlapping responsibilities and roles. Furthermore, to  ensure delivery of project res ources the project will include 
a focus on the scale-up of exist ing finance instruments – for e xample, SBP and MAGAP – with operational and clear 
responsibilities support to farmers. Also, inter-institutional agreements for coordination betw een participating institutions 
will be established, as outlined in Section C.3, as well as set ting-up dialogue and decision-making mechanisms, and 
engaging key stakeholders at all levels (see Section E.5.3 for more details).  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description Risk 
category Level of 
risk Risk Probability  
Financial Risk: This is not a d irect risk for the project; howe ver, uncertainties 
with regard to future REDD+ results-based payments is a potenti al risk for 
the full implementation of the National REDD+ AP  Financial  Low (<5% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The GCF and co-finance investments in financial instruments, to gether with the provision of know-how to producers for 
sustainable production and the enforcement of land-use zoning, will trigger changes in land uses. The financial risk 
associated with this is low. Ho wever, the sustainability of the  REDD+ National Action Plan in the future rests on triggering 
the RBPs envisaged under the UNFC CC REDD+ process. If RBPs fail  to materialise, the financial sustainability of the 
Action Plan will be at risk. Nonetheless, the project will mini mize these risks through the market transformation and the 
introduction of REDD+ concepts into national financial incentiv es and measures, thus providing financial sustainability to 
at least some of the PAMs enacted. Furthermore, as indicated in  Section E.2.1, the GCF projec t will contribute to building 
confidence in the UNFCC REDD+ process, not only further reducin g this risk but also assisting the GCF to meet the 
expected results as per its Initial Logic Model and PMF for RED D and RBPs. Nonetheless, UNDP will closely monitor the


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 62 of 79 
 
	G
progress relating to RBPs in the international context and inco rporate relevant measures int o the project strategy and 
implementation as needed.   
Selected Risk Factor 6 P otential risks associated with land tenure in the project area  
Description Risk 
category Level of 
risk Risk Probability  
Potential risks associated with  land tenure in the project area . Social and 
legal Low (<5% 
of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Ecuador has a new land law that ensures the rights of farmers a nd indigenous population. Ecuador has one of the highest 
rates of indigenous land titling in the region. However, some o f the UPAs still need titling updates since part of, or the 
entire, property are overlapping with other land uses or other properties. To some extent, the Government has provided 
technical capacities to overcome this barrier, but financial re sources are still needed to complete the land allocation and 
regulation at the national level. In the case of the targeted c ommunities, ATPA has developed a component named 
“Proyecto Plan Tierra” which is executed by the Under-Secretari at of Land Regulation but this is still in its very early stage s 
and support is expected  from the GCF project to move it forward . 
Other Potential Risks on the Horizon 
 High rate of rotation of offi cials within the Government. 
 Re-definition of Government prior ities due to strategic initia tives in the Amazon (mining, oil extraction and/or 
hydroelectric projects). 
 Unpredicted climate change impact s and/or natural disasters ca n occur (e.g. ENSO, volcanic eruptions, 
droughts, etc.).


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 63 of 79 
 
	H
H.1.  Logic Framework.    
Please specify the logic framewor k in accordance with the GCF’s  Performance Measurement Framework under the Results Management  
Framework. 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectiv es and Impacts at the Fund level64 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-emission 
sustainable development 
pathways The project will engender a shift to a low-emission sustainable  development pathway by addressing one of the main emission sou rces of greenhouse 
gas emissions in Ecuador – that from deforestation and forest d egradation. The project will develop a set of financial and mar ket instruments for 
sustainable use of land through supply chain initiatives, domes tic policies and finance. These measures are priorities outline d in the National REDD+ 
AP for 2016-2020.  
Expected Result Indicator Means of Verification (MoV) Baseline Target
Assumptions Mid-term  
(if applicable)Final  
Fund-level impacts 
M4.0 Reduced emissions 
from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and 
through sustainable 
forest management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest  
carbon stocks Emission 
reduction (tCO 2e) 
as a result of 
REDD+ AP 
 
Cost per tCO 2e  BUR 
 
REDD+ information hub. 
 
Mid-term and final evaluation reports to have 
dedicated sections on CO 2 emission 
reductions 
 
Forest Reference Emi ssions Level (FREL) 
submitted to UNFCCC 43.4 million 
tCO 2e 
emissions 
per year.  
 
 
 N/A 15 million tCO 2eq 
(cumulative) 
emissions 
reduced between 
2016-2020 
 
USD 5.53 
average per 
tCO 2e  Success factors (or 
risks): 
 Gross deforestation 
reduction is 
maintained 
 
 
Hypotheses:  
  If the reduction in 
gross deforestation 
that has been 
observed in recent 
years is reversed, 
then results may be 
smaller than 
anticipated 
 
 
																																																													
64 Information on the Fund’s expec ted results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measur ement Frameworks available at  the following link (Please note that some 
indicators are under refinement) : http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operation s/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 64 of 79 
 
	H
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Prog ramme level 
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target 
Assumptions  Mid-term 
(if 
applicab
le)  Final (2020) 
Project / 
programme 
outcomes Outcomes that contribute to outcomes 
M5.0 
Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory 
systems 5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for low-
emission planning and 
development and their 
effective implementation  
 
5.2 Number and level of 
effective coordination 
mechanisms PDOTs 
Life Plans 
Ministerial 
Agreement  PDOTs include some environmental 
information but do not include actions for 
GHG emissions reduction.  
 
Life Plans include environmental 
information, but no t actions for GHG 
emissions reduction.  
 
One institutionalized mechanism for a 
national dialogue on climate change:  Inter-
institutional Committ ee on Climate Change 
(CICC).  N/A At least 4 land-use 
planning instruments 
(PDOT, life plans) linked 
to land-use zoning and 
climate change mitigation 
objectives.  
 
At least 2 national 
mechanisms 
institutionalized and 
working (CICC and one 
related to deforestation-
free commodities). Success factors 
(or risks): 
 Continued 
political will from 
the institutions 
and 
stakeholders 
involved.  
 
Hypotheses: 
  Lack of political 
will may slow 
the 
development or 
impede the 
approval or 
implementation 
of land-use 
plans.  
M9.0 Improved 
management of 
land and forest 9.1 Hectares of land or 
forests under improved and 
effective management that 
contributes to CO 2 emission 
reductions Socio-Bosque 
Programme 
(SBP)  
Agenda for 
Transforming 
Production in 
the Amazon 
(ATPA) 
MRV-REDD+ 
(NFMS) SBP has 1.4 million ha under conservation. 
  
4.1 million ha for forest sustainable 
management.  
 
SBP has 102,000 ha un der restoration 
programmes.  N/A 140,000 additional 
hectares for 
conservation.  
   
140,000 additional 
hectares for sustainable 
forest management. 
  
At least 15,000 additional 
hectares for restoration 
programmes Success factors 
(or risks): 
 
 Continued 
political will from 
the institutions 
and 
stakeholders 
involved. 
 
 N e w  
investments in 
strategic 
projects are


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 65 of 79 
 
	H
aligned with the 
PDOTs and Life 
Plans in the 
intervention 
areas.   
 
Hypotheses: 
 
 Lack of political 
will may slow 
the 
development or 
impede the 
approval or 
implementation 
of land-use 
plans. 
 
 If strategic 
public and 
private 
investments are 
not aligned with 
PDOTs and life 
plans, then 
these 
instruments will 
lose credibility 
and 
effectiveness.  
 
Project / 
programme 
components Outputs that contribute to components 
Component 1: 
Investment in 
enabling policies 
to reduce the 
drivers of 
deforestation and 
its associated 
emissions.      Number of strengthened 
land-use planning 
instruments and life plans 
that have included climate 
change mitigation policies 
and actions.   
 
At a national level, 
“Contents and Processes 
Guide for the formulation,  National 
Territorial 
Strategy  
 P D O T s   
 Life Plans  
 Integrated 
Farm 
Manageme
nt Plans   At a national leve l, the “Contents and 
Processes Guide fo r the formulation 
development and land-use plans in 
provinces, cantons and parishes” does 
not include CC guidelines: 0 
 
 Provincial PDOTs: 0 
 Cantonal PDOTs: 0 
 Life Plans: 0  
 N/A  At a national level, the 
“Contents and 
Processes Guide for the 
formulation 
development and land-
use plans in provinces, 
cantons and parishes” 
will include CC 
guidelines.  
 Success factors 
(or risks): 
 Political will 
from the highest 
authorities of 
the involved 
institutions and 
stakeholders.


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 66 of 79 
 
	H
development and land-use plans in provinces, cantons 
and parishes” 
 Provincial PDOT 
 Cantonal PDOT  
 Life Plans  
 
Number of legal 
coordination instruments at 
a national and territorial 
level for REDD+.  Ministerial 
Agreement 
No. 137-
2014 of 
MAE 
establishes 
CC criteria 
to be 
included in 
the PDOTs.  
There are legal coordi nation instruments at 
a national and territori al level, but not for 
REDD+.  Provincial PDOTs: 6 
 
 Cantonal PDOTs: 12 
 
 Life Plans: 5 
 
 At least 5 legal 
coordination 
instruments at a 
national and territorial 
level for REDD+.  
 
 At least 6 inter-
institutional agreements 
institutionalized and 
working at a national 
and territorial level.  GADs and 
communities 
update their 
PDOTs and Life 
Plans.   
 
Hypotheses 
 
 Lack of political 
will may slow 
the 
development or 
impede the 
approval or 
implementation 
of land-use 
plans 
 
 If PDOTs and 
life plans are not 
update as 
planned, there 
will be no 
opportunity to 
include CC 
criteria. 
Component 2: 
Implementation of 
financial and 
economic 
incentives towards 
the transition to 
sustainable 
production 
systems in non- 
forest areas.   Area (ha) transformed to 
sustainable production 
systems in deforested 
areas. 
 
Number of products with 
deforestation-free 
certification and 
traceability.  
 
Existence of a national 
service for contracts 
(SERCOP) resolution that 
includes and prioritizes the 
procurement of 
deforestation-free products.  Integrated Farm 
Management 
Plans reported 
in the MAGAP.  
 
Land-use 
statistics in the 
agricultural 
sector –National 
Institute of 
Statistics and 
Census (INEC).  
 
Responsible 
procurement 
policies.   Grassland: 
 Northern Amaz on: 20,890 ha. 
 Central Amazon: 4,105 ha. 
 Southern Amazon: 82,374 ha.  
 Southern Dry Forests and Valleys: 4,273 
ha. 
 
Organic Coffee certificate. 
 
SECOP resolution does not exist. 
 
  
N/A At least 57,430 ha 
converted to sustainable 
production systems in 
the project’s prioritized 
areas.   
 
At least 4 products will 
have deforestation-free 
certification.  
 
Existence of a SERCOP 
resolution: “purchase 
volumes will be 
measured to know the 
impact of this measure”. 
 
60,000 direct 
beneficiaries have Succes factors 
(or risks) 
 Producers 
maintain their 
commitment to 
the 
transformation 
to sustainable 
production.  
 
 Will from private 
businesses to 
commit to 
responsible 
purchasing.   
 
Hypotheses


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 67 of 79 
 
	H
Number of beneficiaries transiting successfully to 
sustainable production 
systems in deforested 
areas.  Environmental 
criteria for the 
Marca País 
Empresas 
programme with 
RSPO 
certification. 
  
SERCOP 
Resolution  transitioned to 
sustainable production   Given that 
participation is 
voluntary, if 
producers do not 
participate or 
abandon their 
commitment prior 
to consolidating 
the transition, 
then gains will be 
limited or 
impermanent. 
 
  If private 
companies do 
not commit to 
responsible 
purchasing, then 
there will be no 
demand-side 
incentives for 
producers and 
improved 
practices will 
remain highly 
dependent on 
Government 
incentives and 
policies.  
Component 3: 
Financial and non-
financial 
mechanisms for 
restoration, 
conservation and 
connectivity  Number of hectares under 
conservation incentives in 
priority areas with high 
threat of deforestation and 
potential to generate social 
and environmental co-
benefits.  
 
Number of hectares under restoration incentives in 
priority areas with high 
threat of deforestation and 
potential to generate water 
regulation co-benefits.  SBP registration 
and investment 
plans. 
 
Forest National 
Monitoring 
System reports.  
 
Registration in 
REDD+ 
Measures and 
Actions System. 
 
Water Funds 
registration.  SBP has 1.4 million ha under conservation. 
 
4.1 million ha for sustainable forest 
management. 
 
SBP has 120,000 ha un der restoration 
agreements.  N/A Additional 34,000 ha for 
conservation. 
 
140,000 additional ha for 
sustainable forest 
management.  
 
At least 15,000 additional 
ha for restoration 
programmes.  Succes factors 
(or risks) 
 
 There is 
demand from 
forest owners to 
access 
conservation, 
sustainable 
forest 
management 
and restoration 
programmes. 
 
Hypotheses:


---
*Page 70*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 68 of 79 
 
	H
  Given the 
voluntary nature 
of the 
programmes, if 
there is low 
demand to enrol, 
the results will be 
lower than 
expected.  
 
Component 4: 
Implementation of 
enabling 
instruments to 
reduce the drivers 
of deforestation 
and its associated 
emissions. Number of coordination 
mechanisms for managing 
instruments that include 
land-use planning and 
zoning guidelines in GADs 
and indigenous territories.   Environmental 
Information 
System-SUIA.  
 
 National Forest 
Monitoring 
System 
(SNMF).  
 
 Safeguards 
Information 
System (SIS).   SNMF is operati onal but not yet 
institutionalized.   
 
 SIS conceptualized and methodologically 
designed.  
  
 FREL from deforestation constructed and 
presented to the UNFCCC for the 
technical evaluation.  
 
 A technical REDD+ Annex to the BUR is 
being developed.   N/A  SNMF operational and 
institutionalized.  
 
 Information summary 
about corresponding 
safeguards presented to 
the Convention. 
 
 FREL and emission 
reduction results 
evaluated by the 
Convention and 
published in the 
Information Hub. Success factors  
(or risks) 
 Resource 
availability for 
REDD+ RBPs 
in compliance 
with the 
Warsaw 
Framework for 
REDD+. 
 
Hypotheses: 
  If RBPs for 
REDD+ do not 
materialize, the 
implementation 
of the Warsaw 
Framework 
requirements will 
no longer have a 
purpose. 
Outputs  Description Activities  Description 
1.1 PDOTs and 
Life Plans 
updated and 
implementation 
with CC criteria 
and actions. This output will s upport the update and 
implementation of PDOTs (provincial and 
municipal) and Life Plans in indigenous 
territories, to be presen ted in 2019; and to 
land-use zonin g at a sub-national level to 
strengthen forest areas that should not be 
used for agricultural expansion.  
 
In the update and impl ementation of PDOTs, 
Life Plans and Land-use zoning, equal gender 
participation will be pr omoted, as well as 1.1.1 Financial resources fo r technical assistance in 
updating and implementing land-use planning 
instruments.  Funding for integrating CC criteria in PDOTs 
and Life Plans; this  includes: CC and 
deforestation informati on; establishment of 
REDD+ measures and actions; inclusion of 
REDD+ performance indicators in PDOTs; 
support for the regulari zation of land tenure.  
 
23 consultancies are ex pected: 12 municipal 
PDOTs; 6 provincial PD OTs and 5 Life Plans.


---
*Page 71*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 69 of 79 
 
	H
respect for indigen ous peoples’ and 
communities’ rights.  
1.2. Local 
capacity building 
for supervision of 
land-use planning 
and zoning. In this output monitoring processes for PDOTs 
and land-use zoning will be promoted, 
involving stakeholders with particular 
emphasis on women and priority groups’ 
participation.  
 
Additionally, capacity building actions to 
second and third degree indigenous people’s 
organizations and nationalities will be 
implemented, to supervise and guide the 
implementation of Life Plans.  
 
The successful implementation of land-use 
zoning will be particularly important in areas 
where there is an expans ion in the production 
of commodities. It will al so ensure that REDD+ 
measures and actions result in emissions 
reductions.  1.2.1 Staff and cons ultants; maps; sta ff mobilization to 
develop PDOTs and Life Plans. 
 
1.2.2 National and territorial workshops within the MAE 
and MAGAP instituti onal framework.   Different types of stakeholders need training: 
public officials for t he development of PDOTs; 
indigenous community leaders and 
representatives for Life Plans (workshops, 
mobilization, training ma terial, instructors, 
equipment, etc.). 
 
5 technicians are expec ted to be hired and a 
total of 4 workshops p er year, of five days 
each for approximately 20 people, will be 
implemented.  
1.3 Strengthening 
forest control This output will contribute to the 
implementation of the social forest and wildlife 
control approach; it will involve all stakeholders 
in the surveillance chain as co-responsible 
subjects in forest sustainable management.   
By implementing social forest and wildlife 
control, the risk of leak age from activities 
related to deforestation will be reduced.  1.3.1 Technical assist ance in forest control.  
 
1.3.2 Vehicles and equi pment for supervision and 
monitoring (GPS, systems, vehicles, among others). 
 
1.3.3 Infrastructure for integr ated forest control centres.  Funds will be earmarked for technical 
assistance for the involvement of 
stakeholders in the forest control chain. A 
consultancy for the design of social forest 
control will be hired.  
 
Minimum equipment will be given to 
strengthen forest control. 2 vehicles will be 
acquired for each one of the four areas of 
intervention (ZHPD), as well as other 
equipment such as GPS.  
1.4 Formal Inter-
Institutional 
Coordination 
Structures within 
the framework of 
land-use plans, 
life plans and 
land-use zoning. With this output, the development of inter-
sectoral, inter-institutional and multi-level 
coordination systems wi ll be supported, for the 
provision of coordinated national sectoral 
programmes in accordance with land-use 
zoning.   
 
Regarding inter-institutional coordination for 
Life Plans in indigenous communities and 
nationalities, existi ng internal governance 
mechanisms will be respected.  
 1.4.1 Staff for the promotion and moni toring of multi-
level inter-institutional agreements. 
 
1.4.2 Coordination workshops  within formal institution 
structures.  One technician for each of the inter-
institutional coordinat ion platforms will be 
hired (there are expecte d to be 3 platforms). 
 
1 technician per each province to facilitate the 
inter-institutional a nd inter-sectoral 
coordination (6 provinces) and 1 technician to 
provide national oversight. 
 
4 workshops of the inter-institutional 
platforms will be funded ; it is expected that 
these platforms will meet 3 times a year.


---
*Page 72*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 70 of 79 
 
	H
Inter-institutional coordi nation formal structures 
will be accompanied by other interested civil 
society organizations.  4 meetings of regional platforms will be 
funded, to be held 3 times a year.  
2.1 Provision of  incentives for the 
sustainable 
production 
transition period.   This output corresponds  to direct payments to 
producers to compensate for loss of income 
during the transformation process to 
sustainable production, so that the practices 
associated with the conversion are not 
abandoned and  there is a commitment to 
maintain such practices over time.  
 
Potential benefic iaries of this activity will be 
individuals and community-based 
organizations associated with the Ministry of 
Social Development. Acce ss by women’s and 
indigenous people organizations to this 
incentive will be encouraged.  
 
Moreover, this incentive  is conditional on the 
MAGAP Integrated Farm Management Plan, 
and compliance with the requirements for land-
use planning and zoning, including criteria for 
good environmental practices.  2.1.1 Financial resources  for direct payments. Approximately USD 155 per converted 
hectare, for an approximat e total of 57,430 
hectares.  
2.2 Promote the 
coordination and 
implementation of 
existing tax 
incentives that will 
allow for the 
transition to 
sustainable 
production 
systems. In this output, the applic ation of current tax 
incentives in favour of the environment or that 
will allow for the transition to sustainable 
production systems will be promoted.  
 
This will be supported by an analysis of 
existing incentives and their alignment with 
REDD+, to reduce trans action costs and 
facilitate their application in order to change 
behaviours of economic agents or to redirect 
production towards more sustainable systems. 
 
In addition, this out put will support the 
dissemination and awar eness of these tax 
incentives to potential beneficiaries.  
 
Finally, staff of the Fiscal Studies Centre will 
have their capacities strengthened and 
sensitized on issues  of green taxation.  2.2.1 Staff and c onsultants to assess and define the 
alignment of tax exemptio ns with REDD+ and the 
design of a manual for the im plementation of incentives 
aligned with REDD+.  
 
2.2.2 Resources for personnel  mobilization, information 
generation, to facilitate di scussion and awareness-
raising amongst the beneficiaries.  
 
2.2.3 Acquisition of specialized  literature on green tax. Consultancies for assessing the alignment of 
current tax incentives  with REDD+ will be 
funded. These consultancies will also 
determine the applicati on of these taxes in 
order to influence - or strengthen - the 
inclusion of a CC mitigation element in such 
incentives.  
 
Moreover, capacity building in the Fiscal 
Studies Centre on issues of green taxation for 
decision making will be funded.  
 
3 studies on the impact o f tax incentives will 
be conducted (Income Tax, Value Added Tax 
and Rural Lands Tax). 
 
3 workshops on the analysis and 
dissemination of results will be conducted for 
50 people, lasting one day each.


---
*Page 73*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 71 of 79 
 
	H
200 books on CC finance and green taxation 
will be bought for the Fi scal Studies Centre of 
the SRI.  
2.3 Support the 
redesign of 
existing public 
credit lines with 
favourable 
financial 
conditions for 
sustainable 
production. This output involves support institutions to 
redesign public credit lines to reduce the risk 
associated with the transition to sustainable 
production. In this context, it is intended that 
BanEcuador and CFN remove barriers to 
provide credits for t he agricultural sector 
contribute to the trans ition to sustainable 
production systems and to improve 
productivity, in order to reduce deforestation in 
the country and its associated emissions. The 
output will support st udies on the impact of 
existing credit lines , to include CC-related 
criteria.  
 2.3.1 Redesign of e xisting lines of c redit for productive 
transformation and to intro duce REDD + criteria into 
existing credit lines 
 
2.3.2 Capacity building to  financial institutions on 
technical criteria for estab lishing new credit lines that 
promotes sustainable pr oduction practices and 
monitoring    
 
2.3.3 Promotion and dissemina tion of designed public 
credit lines.  
 
2.3.4 Strengthen staff c apacities in MAGAP for 
technical assistance in the submission of projects.  6 consultants hired  to design and modify 
credit lines.  
 
At least four documents on financial 
instruments (incentives and credit lines) will 
be drafted, printed and disseminated as 
communication materials for small-scale 
farmers.  
 
1 training workshop per year for at least 50 
officials of MAGAP will  be funded, so they 
can provide technical assistance in the 
presentation of projects to be financed by the 
CFN.  
 
Training workshops to officials from financial 
institutions (3) to provide technical assistance 
on criteria for granting cr edits for sustainabkle 
production and monitoring 
2.4 Responsible 
public and private 
procurement for 
deforestation-free 
production This output aims to inc rease the number of 
public and private buyers in Ecuador who are 
committed to the sustainable supply of raw 
materials.   
Spaces for the exchange of deforestation-free 
commodity procurement policies will be 
financed, both in the public and private 
sectors, to promote  the inclus ion of 
responsible purchasing criteria for certified 
deforestation-free products in procurement 
processes.  
 
Similarly, there will be a close work with 
SERCOP to incorporate lists of deforestation-
free products into public p rocurement policies.  2.4.1 Hiring local an d international cons ultants, experts 
in procurement po licy to provide goods and services for 
sustainable production.   
 
2.4.2 Materials and awareness-raising activities for 
training and communication of procurement policies of 
certified deforestation-free products.  4 consultancies will be hired for the following: 
regulatory framework of deforestation-free 
public procurement policies for timber, cocoa 
and livestock.  
 
There will be 4 workshops, one day each for 
50 people, for the diss emination of public 
policies for responsible purchasing the public 
and private sector.  
2.5 Certification 
and traceability of 
deforestation-free 
products. This output seeks to pro mote certification and 
traceability in the supply chain to enable 
national and internationa l buyers to identify the 
producers of deforestation-free goods. This will 
result in price differentiation.  
 2.5.1. Consultancies for market studies (supply and 
demand).  
 
2.5.2 Consultancies for including standards for 
certification and the desi gn of traceability processes.  
 Activities will be financed under the project 
Marca Pais, which is executed by the Foreign 
Trade Ministry, for t he certification and 
traceability of these prod ucts (cocoa, coffee 
and palm).


---
*Page 74*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 72 of 79 
 
	H
In addition, there will be development of national standards associated with Marca Pais 
for coffee, cocoa and palm oil (external 
demand). Agricultural products will have a 
national standard for the supply of 
deforestation-free products in the Integrated 
Farm Management Plan (domestic demand). 
  
Correspondingly, public-private alliances will 
be facilitated for t he establishment of 
deforestation-free raw materials platforms.  
 
Finally, this output will support studies on 
sectoral supply and demand, linked to 
agroforestry systems (coffee, cocoa, milk, timber and non-timber forest products). 
Strategies for brandi ng promotion will be 
developed.  2.5.3 Consultancies fo r branding strategies. 
   
2.5.4 International promotion of Marca País (cocoa, 
coffee and palm). 
 
2.5.5 Consultancies for analysing the willingness to pay 
in the agricultural sector for a minimal differential price.  
 
2.5.6 Infrastructure for co coa collection centres.  Activities under the AT PA framework will be 
financed for certification and traceability of 
agricultural products.  
 
2 consultancies will be hired for the 
development of studies and analysis on 
sectoral supply and demand for 
deforestation-free products (coffee and palm). 
 
2 consultancies will be hired for developing a 
promotion strategy and a sectoral brand 
(cocoa, coffee and palm). 
 
1 consultancy will be hired for the 
international promotion of products (coffee 
and RSPO palm).  
 
5 consultancies will be hired for the 
development of studies on the willingness to 
pay for deforestation-fr ee products (coffee, 
cocoa, milk, timber and  non-timber forest 
products).  
3.1 Strengthen 
conservation, 
restoration and 
forest 
management 
processes driven 
through the Socio 
Bosque 
Programme. This output will str engthen the processes 
driven by the SBP within the project 
intervention area, prioritizing SNAP buffer 
zones.  
 
Both conservation and restoration of 
ecosystem services form part of Life Plans and 
Integrated Farm Management Plans, which in 
turn are instruments that enable the transition 
to sustainable production systems. These 
ecosystem services wil l generate fundamental 
co-benefits to drive agroforestry systems and 
sustainable forest manag ement, such as water 
regulation, food supplies and various products 
from biodiversity, so il conservation, among 
others.  3.1.1 Financial resources fo r conservation incentives 
through the SBP.  
 
3.1.2 Delivery of incentives fo r restoration through the 
SBP.  
 
3.1.3 Technical assist ance to strengthen the 
implementation of the new fore stry law in the process of 
farm management within priority areas, including SBP 
land.  
 
3.1.4 Studies of physical and mechanical properties of 
wood in order to encourage the use of non-commercial 
species in forests. Conservation incentives will be supported 
with USD 30 per hectare for approximately 
13,600 hectares.  
 
Restoration incentives w ill be supported with 
USD 272 per hectare for approximately 
18,000 hectares.  
   
5 technicians will be hired to strengthen the 
SBP forest management processes.  
 
1 consultancy will be h ired for the study of 
physical and mechanical properties of wood 
species in forests.  
3.2 Support 
financial 
mechanisms for 
integrated water 
resource 
management 
(IWRM) in the This output involves strengthening existing 
financial schemes that promote integrated 
water resource management in upper 
watersheds located in th e eastern foothills of 
the Andes, in the P aute basin and Loja 
province.  
 3.2.1 Studies on consumer a nd producer surplus for 
determining economic contributions from hydroelectric 
plants, mining and water consumers.  
 
3.2.2 Financial resources  for grant funds for IWRM in 
the prioritized basins.  
  6 consultancies will be hired to develop 
studies on willingness to pay for determining 
economic contributions in water tariffs. It is 
estimated that there will be 2 studies per 
Water Fund.


---
*Page 75*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 73 of 79 
 
	H
basins located within prioritized 
areas. This output will also support assessments of 
economic benefit s and consumer and 
producer surplus for determining the economic 
contributions from hydroelectric plants, mining 
and water users.  
 
Additionally, it will support the definition of an 
integration strategy for financial mechanisms 
articulated to such economic contributions.  
 
In addition, grant funds  for conservation and 
maintenance of upper watersheds in priority 
areas will be disbursed.  3.2.3 Integration strategy  for financial mechanisms 
coupled to economic contributions to IWRM.  A contribution of USD  280,000 per year to 
implement policies and measures that 
contribute to the im plementation of the 
REDD+ AP under the 3 Water Funds.  
 
1 consultancy will be h ired for developing an 
integration strategy for financial mechanisms.  
4.1   Support to 
the 
implementation of 
the Warsaw 
Framework for 
REDD+ and other 
operational 
processes. This output includes investment for an 
integrated informati on system for REDD+ 
implementation, including the national forest 
monitoring system, GHG inventory system, 
safeguards information system and measures 
and actions for REDD+ management system.  
 
Regarding SIS specifical ly, its inclu sion in the 
MAE platform will be for sharing transparent 
information on the approach to safeguards in 
REDD+, including dis pute resolution.   4.1.1 Support to t he implementation of the National 
Forest Monitoring System.  
 
4.1.2 Support to the impl ementation of the REDD+ 
safeguards informa tion system.   Estimated transaction cost of $0.5 per 
tCO 2eq in the project. This will cover the 
hiring of different cons ultancies, information 
systems, etc. to support the implementation 
of the National Forest Monitoring System and 
SIS implementation.  
 
The hiring of 1 coordinator and 8 technicians 
to monitor the traceability system.  
 
Coordinator: Will manage communication 
between the National Forest Directorate and 
SUIA to ensure the im plementation of the 
traceability system and will manage field 
personnel for traceability on the field. 
 
Technicians (8) and IT Technicians (2): To 
support in the programming and development 
of traceability software and its maintenance 
 
Forestry technicians (6): Supervision for the 
correct use of fo restry resources; Control of 
illegal logging; Scheduled and random audits 
to individuals or programmes involved in 
wood production. 
4.2 
Operationalization 
of the financial 
architecture of the 
REDD+ AP. This output will support the operation of the 
REDD+ AP financial mechanism. Additionally, 
it includes support for p iloting the distribution 
of funds through differ ent funding windows and 
different entities involv ed in the implementation 
of the REDD+ AP, such as MAGAP, the 
GADs, the PSB and the Water Funds. 4.2.1 Technical staff for operationalization of the Fund 
for piloting the distributi on of funds through different 
funding windows and differen t entities involved in the 
implementation of the REDD+ AP. 
  Estimated transaction cost of $0.5 per 
tCO 2eq in the project. This will cover 	
Financial specialists for  the operationalization 
of the Fund: 1 Senior Coordinator and 8 
technical financial specialists (1 per 
actor/sector) for the duration of the project.


---
*Page 76*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | Page 74 of 79 
 
	
 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
235. Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken  in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan  
236. The M&E Plan will be conducted in accordance with UNDP and  GCF procedures by the project team and the 
UNDP Country Office (UNDP CO). The Logical Framework Matrix pro vides impact and outcome indicators for project 
implementation, along with their corresponding means of verific ation. The M&E plan includes: an inception report, project 
implementation reviews, a mid-term review and final evaluation,  etc. The following sections outline the principal 
components of this pl an. The project's M&E plan will be present ed and finalized at the projec t's Inception Meeting 
following a collective fine-tuni ng of indicators, means of veri fication, and the full definition of project staff M&E 
responsibilities.  
 
Project start 237. A Project Inception Workshop will be held within the first  2 months of project start, involving those with assigned 
roles in the project organization structure, the UNDP Country O ffice and, where appropriate/feasible, UNDP regional 
technical policy and technical advisors as well as other stakeh olders. The Inception Works hop is crucial to building 
ownership of the project results and to plan the first year ann ual work plan. The Inception Wo rkshop will address a number 
of key issues including:  
 
 To assist all partners to full y understand and take ownership of the project.  
 To detail the roles, support services and complementary respon sibilities of UNDP Country Office (CO) and 
Regional staff vis à v is the project team.   
 Discussion on the roles, functi ons and responsi bilities within  the project’s decision-making structures, including 
reporting and communication lines , and conflict resolution mech anisms.   
 Based on the project results framework, finalization of the fi rst annual work plan. Review and agree on the 
indicators, targets and their m eans of verification, and rechec k assumptions and risks.   
 Provision of a detailed overview of reporting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) requirements. The M&E work 
plan and budget will be ag reed and scheduled.  
 Discussion of financial reporti ng procedures and obligations, and arrangements for annual audit. 
 Planning and scheduling of project Board meetings. Roles and r esponsibilities of all project organization 
structures will be clarified a nd meetings planned. The first pr oject Board meeting will be held within the first 12 
months following the inception workshop. 
 An Inception Workshop Report w ill be a key reference document and will be prepared and shared with 
participants to formalize various agreements and plans decided during the meeting.   
 
Annual Project Report  
238. This key report is prepared by the Project Technical Advis ors, consolidated by the Project Manager and approved 
by the Project Board to monitor  progress made since project sta rt and, in particular, for the previous reporting period.  
 
239. The APR includes, but is no t limited to, reporting on the following:  
 Progress made toward project objective and project outcomes – each with indicators, baseline data and end-
of-project targets (cumulative).   

 Project outputs delivered p er project component (annual). 
 Lessons learned/good practices 
 Annual Work Plan and other expenditure reports 
 Risk and adaptive management 
 
240. The Project Manager will ensure that the indicators includ ed in the project results framework are monitored annually 
well in advance of the Project Implementation Report (PIR) subm ission deadline and will objecti vely report progress. The 
annual PIR will be shared with the Project Board and other stak eholders. The UNDP CO will coordinate the input of the 
National Designed Authority and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the prev ious year’s PIR will be used


---
*Page 77*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | Page 75 of 79 
 
	
																																																													
65 http://www.pnc-onureddecuador.org/pnc-onuredd/resultado-1-siste ma-nacional-de-informacion- y-monitoreo-forestal.html  to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PI R, along with the terminal evaluation report and 
corresponding managemen t response, will serv e as the final proj ect report package. 
 
Periodic Monitoring through site visits 
241. The UNDP Country Office will c onduct visits to project sit es based on the agreed schedule in the project’s Inception 
Report/Annual Work Plan to assess first hand project progress. Other members of the Project Board may also join these 
visits. A Field Visi t Report will be prepar ed by the CO  and UND P Regional Office and will be circulated no less than one 
month after the visit to the project team and Project Board mem bers. In addition, MAE will con duct visits to project sites 
periodically and field visi t reports will be prepared.  
 
Mid-term of project cycle 
242. The project will undergo an independent mid-term review at  the mid-point of project implementation. The mid-term 
review will determine progress bei ng made towards the achieveme nt of outcomes and will ident ify course correction if 
needed. It will focus on the effectiveness, efficiency and time liness of project implement ation; will highlight issues 
requiring decisions and actions ; and will present initial lesso ns learned about project design, implementation and 
management. Findings of this review will be incorporated as rec ommendations for enhanced implementation during the 
final half of the project’s te rm. The final MTR report will be available in English. 
 
End of Project 
243. An independent Final  Evaluation will take place three mont hs prior to the closure of the project, undertaken in 
accordance with UNDP and GCF gui dance. The final evaluation wil l focus on the delivery of the project’s results as initially 
planned (and as corrected after the mid-term review, if any suc h correction took place). The final evaluation will look at 
impact and sustainability of res ults, including the contributio n to capacity development and the achievement of global 
environmental benefits.  
 
244. The Final Evaluation will also provide recommendations for  follow-up activities and requires a management 
response. The final report will be cleared by the UNDP CO and t he UNDP Regional Technical Advisor, and will be 
approved by the Project Board. The UNDP CO will include the pla nned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP CO 
evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the m anagement response to the public 
UNDP Evaluation Reso urce Centre and the MAE Evaluation Office o f Projects and Projects.   
 
245. During the final three months, the project team will prepa re the Project Terminal Report. This comprehensive report 
will summarize the results achiev ed (objectives, outcomes, outp uts), lessons learned, problems met and areas where 
results may not have been achieved.  It will also lay out recomm endations for any further steps that may need to be taken 
to ensure sustainability and rep licability of the project’s res ults. 
 
246. The UNDP CO will support the Project Manager as needed, in cluding through annual supervision missions. The 
UNDP CO is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M& E requirements as outlined in the UNDP POPP. 
Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and trouble shooting support will be provided by the UNDP 
Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups  and stakeholders, including the National Designed 
Authority, will be involved as muc h as possible in project-leve l M&E. The UNDP CO will retain all M&E records for this 
project for up to seven years a fter project financial closure i n order to support ex- post evaluations.  
 
247. The National Forest Monitoring System (SNMF)65 is an important part of the Directorate of Natural Heritage 
Monitoring (DMPN) structure, as  it is a robust and transparent system that provides information for the design and 
implementation of land-use management policies, forest governan ce and natural resource management. In the context 
of REDD+ activities, the SNMF w ill allow the monitoring and rep orting of such activities, incorporating monitoring and 
MRV processes. Its main function is to have periodic informatio n on results achieved thro ugh national measures and 
actions, linked to conservation,  sustainable forest management and restoration, for strengthe ning forest governance, as 
well as provided measurable, reportable and verifiable data for  international estimations and reports on forest emissions 
and absorptions.


---
*Page 78*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDI NG PROPOSAL | Page 76 of 79 
 
	
 
 
 
    
 
     
 
    
																																																													
66 The BUR, including the GHG in ventory, will be presented by Ecu ador in December 2015 to the UNFCCC. 248. Under the management of MAE, through the Under-Secretariat  of Climate Change, the SNMF will be linked to the 
national GHG inventory system (SINGEI) and the BUR (Biennial Up date Report) for reporting emissions to the UNFCCC, 
possibly at the end of 201566. 
 
Figure 6:  MRV at nati onal and local level 
 
Source:  Plan de Acción REDD+. PNC ONU REDD+ Ecuador. MAE.


---
*Page 79*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 77 of 79 
 
	I
 
 
File Name Description 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex I Annex I NDA No Objection Letter 
File name: FP-UNDP -241115-5768-Annex IIa Annex IIa Feasibility Study 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex IIb Part 1  
 Annex IIb Part 1 Feasibility Study: Safeguards Information 
System for REDD+  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex IIb Part 2  
 Annex IIb Part 2 Feasibility Study: Safeguards Information 
System for REDD+ 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex IIb Part 3  
 Annex IIb Part 3 Feasibility Study: Safeguards Information 
System for REDD+ 
File name: FP-UNDP -241115-5768- Annex IIc  Annex IIc Feasibility Study: National REDD+ Action Plan 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex IId Part 1  Annex IId Part 1 Feasibility Study : Opportunity Cost Analysis and 
potential income flows from REDD+ 
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex IId Part 2 Annex IId Part 2 Feasibility Study : Cost-Benefit Analysis REDD+ 
Ecuador  
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex IId Part 3 Annex IId Part 3 Feasibility St udy: Estimation of opportunity 
costs.  
File name: FP-UNDP -241115-5768-Annex IIe  Annex IIe Feasibility Study: Ecuador prioritized REDD+ areas 
File name: FP-UNDP -241115-5768-Annex IIf  
 Annex IIf Feasibility Study: Nation al REDD+ Action Plan Finance 
Strategy 
File name: FP-UNDP -241115-5768-Annex IIg Annex IIg Feasibility Study: National Forestry Evaluation 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex IV Annex IV Confirmation letters 
File name: FP-UNDP-280716-5768-Annex Va Annex Va Term Sheet 
File name: FP-UNDP-280716-5768-Annex Vb Annex Vb Total Budget and Workplan 
File name: FP-UNDP-090916-5768-Annex Vc Annex Vc Procurement Plan 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex VI Annex VI Environmental and Soci al Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
File name: FP-UNDP-090916-5768-Annex VIb Annex VIb Environmental and Social Management Framework 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex VII Annex VII Appraisal report  (LPAC and Due Diligence) 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex VIII Annex VIII Evaluation report  of the baseline project 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex IX Annex IX Map 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex X Annex X Timetable of project implementation  I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☒ NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ Feasibility Study 
☒ Integrated Financial Model that p rovides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing c ommitment (If applicable) 
☒ Project/Programme Confirmation/ Term Sheet (including cost/budg et breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) –  see 
the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact A ssessment (ESIA) or Environme ntal and Social Management Plan  
 (If applicable) 
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☒ Evaluation Report of the baseline project ( If applicable) 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation


---
*Page 80*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 78 of 79 
 
	I
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex XI Annex XI Project confirmation  
File name: FP-UNDP-290716-5768-Annex XII Annex XII Economic Analysis  
File name: FP-UNDP-090916-5768-Annex XIIb Annex XIIb Economic Analysis 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIa Annex XIIIa Additional Backgroun d Information: Summary of 
consultations carried out in the context of the development of the 
National Action Plan 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIb 
 Annex XIIIb Additional Backgr ound Information: Forest 
Reference Emission Level revised by the UNFCCC  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIc Annex XIIIc Additional Backgroun d Information: MAE Project 
Portfolio 2015  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIId Annex XIIId Additional Backgr ound Information: Population 
Characterization for the Project  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIe Annex XIIIe Additional Backgroun d Information: Surface area 
under agricultural production  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIf Annex XIIIf Additional Background Information: Granted credit by 
the financial system to the agricultural sector in the Amazon-
2013  
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex XIIIg Part 1 Annex XIIIg Part 1 Addition al Background Information: 
Investment Catalogue for Strategic Projects  
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex XIIIg Part 2 Annex XIIIg Part 2 Addition al Background Information: 
Investment Catalogue for Strategic Projects 
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex XIIIg Part 3 Annex XIIIg Part 3 Addition al Background Information: 
Investment Catalogue for Strategic Projects 
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex XIIIg Part 4 Annex XIIIg Part 4 Addition al Background Information: 
Investment Catalogue for Strategic Projects 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIh Annex XIIIh Additional Backgroun d Information: Standard Basic 
Assistance Agreement   
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIi Annex XIIIi Additional Backgr ound Information: Country 
Programme Action Plan   
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768- Annex XIIIj Annex XIIIj Additional Backgroun d Information: Acronyms   
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768- Annex XIIIk Annex XIIIk Additional Background Information:  Electrification 
Master Plan 2013-2022
File name: FP-UNDP-241115- 5768-Annex XIII(l) Part 1 Annex XIII (l) Part 1 Additional Background Information:  
Ecuador Energy Balance  
File name: FP-UNDP-241115- 5768-Annex XIII(l) Part 2 Annex XIII (l) Part 2 Additional Background Information:  
Ecuador Energy Balance  
File name: FP-UNDP-241115- 5768-Annex XIII(l) Part 3 Annex XIII (l) Part 3 Additional Background Information:  
Ecuador Energy Balance  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIm Annex XIIIm Additional Backgr ound Information: National 
Biodiversity Strategy  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIn Annex XIIIn Additional Background Information: National 
Restoration Plan  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIo Annex XIIIo Additional Background Information: The Natural 
Heritage Governance Policy for the Good Living Society 2013-
2017  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768- Annex XIIIp Annex XIIIp Additional Background Information: Natural Heritage 
Governance Policy for the Good Living Society 2013-2017 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIq Annex XIIIq Additional Background Information: National 
Consultation Guide for REDD+  
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex XIIIr Part 1 Annex XIIIr Part 1 Additional Ba ckground Information:  National 
Strategy for the Transformation of the Productive Matrix


---
*Page 81*
---

 
ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | Page 79 of 79 
 
	I
File name: FP-UNDP-241 115-5768-Annex XIIIr Part 2 Annex XIIIr Part 2 Additional Ba ckground Information:  National 
Strategy for the Transformati on of the Productive Matrix 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIs Annex XIIIs Additional Backgroun d Information: REDD+ Working 
Group Guidelines  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 41115-5768-Annex XIIIt Annex XIIIt Additional Background Information: Forest and 
Gender - diagnostic for REDD+  
File name: FP-UNDP-2 00616-5768-Annex XIIIu Annex XIIIu Summary of the F easibility Studies Conducted for 
Component 2 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 00616-5768-Annex XIIIv Annex XIIIv Market A nalysis: Main Agricultural Activities for 
Smallholders’ Income Generation 
File name: FP-UNDP-2 80716-5768-Annex XIIIw Annex XIIIw Justification of no On-Granting 
File name: FP-UNDP-0 90916-5768-Annex XIIIx Annex XIIIx Minutes of the meeti ng of the REDD Platform on the 
GCF proposal 
File name: FP-UNDP-280716-5768-Annex XIVa Annex XIVa Response Matrix  
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex XIVb Annex XIVb Additional Backgro und Information: Supplementary 
Responses to GCF Review Comments 
File name: FP-UNDP-241115-5768-Annex XV Annex XV Additional Background Information: Market overview


---
*Page 84*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.02 	
Environmental 	and	social	report(s)	 disclosure 	
Basic	project/programme 	information 	
Project/programme 	title	 Priming Financial and Land-Use Planning Instruments to Reduce 
Emissions from Deforestation 	
Accredited 	entity	 United Nations Development Programme - UNDP 	
Environmental 	and	social	
safeguards 	(ESS)	category 	Category	B	
Environmental 	and	Social	Impact	Assessment 	(ESIA)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	2016‐09‐12	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	English	and	Spanish	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://www.ec.undp.org/content/e cuador/es/home/operations/proje cts/environment_and_e
nergy/propuesta‐de‐fortalecimiento‐de‐los‐instrumentos‐financie ros‐y‐d.html 	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
Environmental 	and	Social	Impact	Assessment 	(ESMP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	2016‐09‐12	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	English	and	Spanish	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://www.ec.undp.org/content/e cuador/es/home/operations/proje cts/environment_and_e
nergy/propuesta‐de‐fortalecimiento‐de‐los‐instrumentos‐financie ros‐y‐d.html 	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
Resettlement 	Action	Plan	(RAP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
Any	other	relevant 	ESS	reports	and/or	disclosures 	(if	applicable)


---
*Page 85*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.02 	
Description	of	
report/disclos
ure	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	of	
disclosure	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
__
______