=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/CreationDate: D:20160921122404+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20160927140845+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Consideration	of	funding	
proposals	–	Addendum	I	
Funding	proposal	package	for	FP018GCF/B.14/07/Add.01 
27	September	2016 	Meeting	of	the	Board	
12	–	14	October	2016	
Songdo,	Incheon,	Republic	of	Korea	
Provisional	agenda	item	11(f) 	
Summary		
This	addendum	contains	the	following	three	parts:	
a)A	funding	proposal	titled	“Scaling‐up	of	Glacial	Lake	Outburst	 Flood	(GLOF)	risk
reduction	in	Northern	Pakistan”	submitted	by	UNDP ;
b)A	no‐objecti
on	letter	issued	by	the	national	designated	authori ty	or	focal	point; 	and
c)Envi
ronmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure.
The	documents	are	presented	as	submitted	by	the	accredited	enti ty,	and	national	designated	
authority	or	focal	point,	respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.14/07/Add.01 	
Page	b	
Table	of	Contents 	
Funding	proposal	submitted	 by	the	ac credited	entity	
No‐objection	letter	issued	by	th e	national	designated	authorit y	or	focal	point	
Environmental	and	social	report(s)	disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

	
Project/Programme Title: Scaling-up of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) risk 
reduction in Northern Pakistan 
Country/Region: Pakistan 
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme 
Date of Submission: 01/08/2015 
Date of Resubmission: 07/12/2015; 13/07/2016


---
*Page 4*
---

	
							
	
Contents 
 
 
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAIN ST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AN D MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H RESULTS MONITORIN G AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template   
 Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accre dited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, a ccredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information . Accredited entities can either  directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary info rmation in the proposal with c ross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name c onvention for the file name: 
FP-UNDP-310715-5660


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 54 
 
	
	A
A.1.  Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / p rogramme title Scaling-up of Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) risk 
reduction in Northern Pakistan 
A.1.2. Project or programme Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     Pakistan 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) Ministry of Climate Change,  
Mr. Arif Ahmed Khan 
3rd Floor, LG & RD Complex 
G-5/2, Islamabad Phone: + (92-51) 9224579, 9204126 
Fax: + (92-51) 9204126 
Email: secretary@moenv.gov.pk 
A.1.5. Accredited entity UNDP 
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☐  Direct ☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary Executing Entity: Ministry of Climate Change 
 
Other Executing Beneficiaries : Ministry of Kashmir and 
Northern Areas, Provincial Planning and Development 
Departments of Khyber Pak htunkhwa (KP) and Gilgit-
Baltistan 
 # (total) of beneficiaries: 29 million 
 
A.1.7. Project size catego ry (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☐  Mitigation ☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
          Date of resubmission 01/08/2015 
07/12/2015 
29/03/2016 
13/07/2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details Contact person, position Reis Lopez Rello, Regional Technical Specialist - Adaptation 
Organization UNDP 
Email address reis.lopez.rello@undp.org   
Telephone number +66 92248 7752 
Mailing address 76 Rajadamnern Nok Ave, United Nations Service Building, 
Bangkok 10200 
 
A.1.11. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapi d bus system, etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-ef ficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, et c.)


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 54 
 
	
	A
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and ma nagement, agroforestry, agricul tural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate ch ange – diversification of supply sources and supply chain manag ement, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, e fficient irrigation systems, et c.) 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 ☐ 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. The melting of the Hindu Kush , Karakoram, and Himalayan glac iers in Northern Pakistan du e to rising temperatures 
has created 3,044 glacial lakes in the federally-administered t erritory of Gilgit-Baltistan (GB) and the province of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa (KP). It is estimated that 33 of these glacial lake s are hazardous and likely to result in glacial lake outburst 
floods (GLOFs)1. Such outbursts have occurred in the past and when they do, mi llions of cubic metres of water and 
debris is released in a few hours, resulting in the loss of liv es, destruction of property and infrastructure, and severe 
damage to livelihoods in some of the most remote areas of Pakis tan. Currently 7,101,000 peopl e remain at risk in GB 
and KP. Most recently, in July 2015, over 280,000 people in GB and KP were affected, a combination of heavy rains and 
GLOFs. 
 2. At present, the country faces a critical gap in technical an d technological capacity to monitor the status of glaciers 
through hydrological monitoring and forecasting. Current early warning systems (EWS) do not have the capacity to 
support the management of risks posed by rising water levels in  the lakes, including failure to issue early warnings to 
communities. The design and implementation of medium- and long- term disaster management policies and risk 
reduction and prepare dness plans are als o not fully geared to d eal with the specifics of GLOF threats.  
 
3. The Government of Pakistan has recognized the threat from GL OFs in its National Climate Change Policy and in its 
National Determined Contribution to monitor changes in glacier volumes and related GLOFs. The Government of 
Pakistan is seeking GCF resources to upscale ongoing initiative s on early warning systems and small, locally-sourced 
infrastructure to protect communities from GLOF risks. The inte rventions proposed for scale up by this project will be 
based on activities implemented in two districts on a trial bas is that have proven to be impactful. In particular, 
engineering structures (i.e. gabion walls) have been constructe d; automatic weather stations, rain gauge and discharge 
equipment were installed to support rural communities to avoid human and material losses from GLOF events. The 
proposed GCF project will expand co verage to twelve districts i n the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Gilgit-Baltistan provinces. 
The proposed project will strengthen the technical capacity of sub-national decision makers to integrate climate change 
and disaster risk management into medium- and long-term develop ment planning processes. 
 
4. As the project is focused on delivering a public good, the G overnment of Pakistan is requesting 100% 
concessionality (i.e. grant) from the GCF. Currently, 58.7 mill ion people in Pakistan are living in poverty, with 46 per cent 
of the rural population and 18 per cent of urban households bel ow the poverty line. In Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the poverty 
rate is 22% and in Gilgit Baltistan, 26.7%. To be able to stren gthen capacities of vulnerable communities to address the 
GLOF issue urgently in the scale that is needed, the Government  of Pakistan needs financial support from international 
donors. Flood hazards are already greater than what national pu blic finance can manage. During the project preparation 
phase, stakeholders including civil society in the targeted dis tricts were fully consulted and the NDA has issued a Letter 
of No Objection. 
	
																																																													
1 http://www.glof.pk/index.php/video-gallery/video/a-journey-thro ugh-glaciers


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 54 
 
	
	A
	
A.3.  Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) Date: 6 May 2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) TBD [date of agreement on t he FAA between UNDP and GCF] 
Estimated implementation start and end date Start: 01/03/2017 
End:  28/02/2022 
Project/programme lifespan Benefit stream: 15 years  
Project Implementation lifespan: 5 years


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING/ COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 54 
	
	B
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Program me 
5. The Government of Pakistan is  requesting full concessionalit y of GCF resources to carry out the proposed 
interventions. Without grant res ources, the proposed interventi ons would not be financed. First, with a debt of about 
62% of its GDP (IMF, 2015), Pakistan is among the most indebted  countries in the world. This very high level of 
indebtedness makes it difficult for the government to borrow to  invest in climate change adaptation. However, the need 
for investment to adapt to the increased occurrence of GLOFs in  Pakistan is made manifestly obvious following the 
impacts of the previous floods and the lack of preparedness of the affected populations to these events. Second, the 
project targets highly vulnerable rural populations in remote a reas in Northern Pakistan that are prone to GLOF risks, 
more than half of whom are women and dependent on subsistence a griculture. Given the small size in population, 
socio-economic standards and remote location of these communiti es threatened by GLOF risks, there is no incentive 
for Pakistan’s private sector to invest in these types of inter ventions. The key constraints to private sector development 
in Pakistan are weak regulatory structures, poor property right s protection and contract enfor cement, ineffective policy 
and legal framework for private sector investment. Third, the p roposed interventions – including early warning systems 
(EWS), small-scale flood infrastructure, land management and po licies – are by their very nature public goods entailing 
zero cost recovery from the proposed interventions. All the int erventions aim to save lives and support climate-resilient 
livelihoods of vulnerable communities in the country. Fourth, g overnment budgets are stretched and domestic public 
finance is not available at the scale required to effect a long -lasting solution. Other sources of finance, such as the 
Special Climate Change Fund and Adaptation Fund are also not av ailable or easily accessible. Pakistan, therefore, 
needs GCF funding to effect a transformational change towards G LOF risk management and this investment is urgent 
considering the expected increase of GLOF-related disasters. Th e project leverages co-financing of an amount 
US$ 500,000 from the local gov ernment of Gilgit-Baltistan. 
 
6. Scaling up piloted interventi ons initially financed by UNDP/ Adaptation Fund from 2 distr icts to 12 districts is 
Expensive and challenging. The current climate information and early warning system will be updated through the 
acquisition, installation and maintenance of automatic weather stations and river discharge sensors. In addition, the 
public good nature of these interventions means that public fin ancing is justified. However, several key barriers need to 
be overcome. These barriers (See Section C.2) include lack of c apacity and information availability at the community 
level to prepare for and respond to immediate threats from GLOF s, as well as limited resource s, capacity, and logistical 
feasibility in government institu tions to constru ct infrastruct ure required for remote mountain communities to reduce 
exposure and respond to medium- and long-term climate change ri sks. 
 
7. The proposed project leverages co-financing from the Governm ent of Gilgit-Baltistan, from th ree projects, which are 
currently operational under the Annual Development Programme (2 015-2016), which are aligned to the proposed 
project. Government co-finance w ill cover activities aimed at b uilding the capacities of sub-national institutions to 
coordinate, plan and implement CCA measures across sectors and also will cover the expansion of weather 
surveillance and discharge monito ring networks. The proposed pr oject also build on three projects from UNDP that are 
aligned with the proposed project and will coordinate activitie s for capacity building of provincial line and planning 
departments to mainstream climate change considerations into de velopment plans and set adequate long-term 
measures for vulnerable communi ties to cope with GLOF risks.  
  
Component Output Activity Financing (MUS$) Total Cost per output 
Strengthened 
adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to 
Climate risks   
  GCF Co-finance Foreign 
Currency 
(MUS$) Local 
Currency[1] 
(Mil.PKR)  
1. Strengthened sub-
national institutional 
capacities to plan and 
implement climate change 
-resilient development 1.1 Provincial line and 
planning departments have 
technical capacities to 
mainstream climate change 
into development plans   3.250 0.080 3.330 837.932 
 
																																																													
[1] Exchange rate used is as of Jul y 2016 (UN Operational Rates of  Exchange)


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING/ COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 54 
	
	B
pathways 1.2 Sub-national institutions 
coordinate effectively to implement adaptation action 
plans and climate change 
initiatives 4.507 0.170 4.677 
 
2. Community-based EWS 
and long-term measures 
are up-scaled to increase communities’ adaptive 
capacity 
 2.1 Expanded weather 
surveillance and discharge 
measuring networks 15.700 - 15.700 
3,082.256  
2.2 Early warnings are 
effective in protecting 
communities from climate-
induced risks 3.200 0.120 3.320 
 
2.3 Vulnerable communities 
have adequate long-term 
measures in place to address 
GLOF-related risks 8.203 - 8.203  
2.4 Improved financial 
capacity to adapt to GLOFs 
and other climate change-
induced risks 2.100 0.130 2.230  
Total project 
financing   36.960 0.500 37.460 3,920.188  
  
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing (a) = (b) + (c)  37.460 million USD 
($)  
(b) 
Requested 
GCF amount  
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
………………… 
………………… 
 
36.960 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) (  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
  (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
  
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please sp ecify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please not e that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance again st the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  36.960 Options   
(c) Co-Financial 
Instrument Amount Currency Name of 
Institution Tenor Pricing Seniority


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING/ COST INFORMATION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 54 
	
	B
financing 
 Grant 
Grant 
Options  
Options  0.500 
…………… 
…………… 
…………… million USD 
($) 
      
Options  
Options  Government 
of Gilgit - 
Baltistan 
………………………………(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: Not applicable. 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitm ent in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) Financial 
instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing 
Choose an item.  …………………. Options  (  )  years (   ) %  
 
B.3. Financial Market Overview (if applicable)  
Not applicable


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 54 
	
	C
C.1. Strategic Context 
Institutional and Political Context 
8. The Pakistan Framework for Ec onomic Growth (2011) developed by the Ministry of Planning, Development and 
Reforms, highlights the role of climate change in its growth mo del, proposing to “climate-proof economic growth from the 
impacts of climate change, paying particular attention to the a gricultural, water and energy sectors”. Enabling climate-
resilient economic growth requires formulation of a policy sett ing and governmental institutional setup capable of 
delivering these policy objectives. Though Pakistan has underta ken efforts to advance policy and institutions on climate 
change at a broad level, climate change, as a cross-cutting iss ue, must also be addressed across many of the sectoral 
line ministries at both the federal and provincial levels. To t his end, the proposed project will support strengthening the 
sub-national institutional capacities to plan and implement cli mate change and disaster-resilie nt development pathways. 
 
9. A major change in governance took place in 2010 in the form of the 18th Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan, 
which mandated the devolution of 47 federal items to the provin cial level, including “environmental pollution and ecology.” 
Climate change, traditionally c onsidered to be part of the envi ronmental sector, was also devolved. However, the federal 
government, through the Ministry of Environment (now, Ministry of Climate Change [MCC]), has taken the lead on 
implementation of international agreements and treaties related  to the environment and climate change, and therefore 
maintains responsibility for national and international policy and obligations. The split respo nsibilities betwe en the federal  
and provincial governments cont inue to impede institutional cla rity and the adoption of clear working protocols on climate 
change. The proposed project strengthens this framework between  federal and provincial governments by further 
developing the capabilities of loc al-level institutions to inco rporate climate change adapt ation considerations into 
development plans in GB and KP. 
 
10. The re-establishment of the MCC as a ministerial entity in 2015, following its downgrading to  a division in 2013, has 
given climate change federal inst itutional prominence again. Th at said, climate change is st ill not prioritized across all 
sectors. The National Disaster M anagement Authority (NDMA) is a n attached department of the MCC and administratively 
works under the Ministry. This administrative linkage between c limate and disaster management means, better 
coordination in executing the project is in place, where coordi nation can be ensured for all climate change-triggered 
disasters. Moreover, the Minist ry has been managing other clima te change and environmental projects and their capacity 
has been considerably enhanced to implement projects related to  climate change, including GLOF. The proposed project 
will further strengthen the capacity of the Ministry and take a daptation to climate change into livelihood level in the 
selected communities.   
11. The National Climate Change Policy (NCCP), approved by the Cabinet in 2012 and central  to the MCC, focuses on 
adaptation, in light of Pakistan’s high vulnerability to extrem e weather events and other adverse impacts of climate 
change. However, this policy was not presented to Parliament, a nd therefore Parliamentary engagement is missing. A 
particularly relevant aspect of  the NCCP is its recommendation for the development of plans of action by the federal and 
provincial governments and federally-administered regions. The Framework for the Implemen tation of the Climate Change 
Policy is a living document developed as a catalyst for mainstr eaming climate change concerns into decision-making at 
both the federal and provincial l evels. It was expected that th e framework document would be used to prepare detailed 
provincial and local adaptation action plans, but this has not been the case so far. Further, the framework has not been 
used as a guiding document for decision-makers. Rather, sector policies are driving public expenditure on climate change. 
Further, because of the devolution following the 18th Amendment , the provinces have not implemented the federal-led 
NCCP, further complicating the climate change response in Pakis tan. The proposed project, therefore, will facilitate 
climate adaptation policy at the sub-national level by helping the provincial line and planni ng departments to mainstream 
climate change into development plans . 
 CC Policy and Institutional setup in KP province 
12. Following the establishment o f the Provincial Environmental  Protection Agency (EPA) in 201 4, an attached entity of 
the provincial Environment Depart ment, policy formulation on cl imate change in KP is under the purview of the EPA’s 
Climate Change Cell. The Climate Change Cell is mandated with m ainstreaming climate considerations into policies, 
strategies and actions. The KP Integrated Development Strategy and the KP Green Growth Initiative help link the 
environmental impact assessment  (EIA) process and PC-I (develop ment project proposal form ) to climate change. The KP 
Act introduces a decision support process for ‘strategic enviro nment assessments’ (SEAs) for certain areas. While the 
SEAs do not yet specifically mention climate change, the Provin cial Environmental Protection Council notification may be 
used as a vehicle to make climate change explicit in the SEAs.  
 
13. KP’s main policy and institut ional response on climate chan ge includes:


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 54 
	
	C
																																																													
2 http://www.pakistantoday.com.pk /2015/07/06/national/pakistans- glaciers-melting-faster-than-the-worlds/ ‐ The establishment of the provin cial EPA and its Climate Change  Cell in 2014 
‐ The initiation of a process for developing a Provincial Climat e Change Policy 
‐ The announcement of a Greenhouse Gas Initiative (GGI) for KP  
 
14. However, other key sectors, s uch as the agriculture, livest ock and water sectors and acto rs within the provincial 
government are still missing from  the discussions around climat e change action and finance . These sectors must be 
involved in the climate change response for KP.  
	
CC Policy and Institutional setup in GB province 
15. In contrast with the fiscal  federalism in the provinces, GB  is entirely dependent on year ly grants from the federal  
government for development capita l and current expenditures; GB  does not have a revenue base of its own. GB was 
never formally integrated with Pakistan and does not participat e in constitutional political affairs. However, it has been 
administratively controlled by Pakistan since the First Kashmir  War. Administratively, GB has its own administrative 
departments, governed by the GB Council, including those for en vironment, planning and finance. Devolution through the 
18th Amendment does not extend to GB and federally legislated l aws and policies remain valid. Therefore, the NCCP 
remains the overarching policy document to align climate change  activities in GB. In fact, one of the specific 
recommendations in the NCCP is to  conduct GLOF related research  and accordingly developing projects to conserve the 
glaciers of the northern regions, especially in GB. The Governm ent of GB has recognized the need to climate-proof 
investments (particularly infrastructure) and protecting ecosys tem functions form projected climate change impacts. 
However, GB’s national status with its own administrative depar tments will not pose a barrier as the NCCP and its 
implementation will still apply to the territory to form a fram ework for mainstreaming climate change into provincial setup 
also in GB.  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
16. The Government of Pakistan’s long-term preferred solution t o the increasing rate of glacial  melt as a result of climate 
change is to establish efficient and effective mechanisms to en hance the resiliency of vulnerable communities.  In the 
context of the increasing risk of glacial lake outbursts, the o bjective of the proposed project is to empower communities to 
identify and manage the risks asso ciated with GLOFs and other r elated impacts of climate change, strengthen public 
service systems to lower the risk of GLOF related disasters. Th e project will also support th e development o f sustainable 
and climate-resilient livelihood opt ions for communities in the  regions targeted by this project. 
 Baseline Scenario 
17. Pakistan was ranked number  three in the 2014 Global Climate  Risk Index, with over US $2, 4 billion (PPP) in losses 
between 1993-2012 due to climate change with the majority of lo sses caused by floods. The losses caused by the GLOF 
events are extensive and rehabilitation of the flood-affected p eople and reconstruction of damaged infrastructure in Chitral 
district after the GLOF event i n 2015 is estimated to have cost  US$ 100 million. (See “Preliminary damage assessment 
report on July 2015 GLOF and monsoon flooding from Chitral Dist rict, KP” in Annex XV.) 
 
18. Pakistan lies in a geographic  region where temperature incr ease is projected to be higher than the global average. 
One of the major threats identified in Pakistan’s National Clim ate Change Policy (NCCP) is the projected recession of the 
Hindu Kush, Karakoram, and Himalayan glaciers due to global war ming and carbon soot deposits from trans-boundary 
pollution sources. In addition to threatening water inflows int o the Indus River System (IRS),  this is a prominent threat to 
the water sector due to the country’s arid climate and its reli ance on water from glaciers and snowmelt. Glacial melt in the 
Himalayas is expected to increase the flooding of the Indus Riv er and its tributaries over the next two to three decades, 
which will be followed by decreas ed river flows as the glaciers  recede. Two areas in Pakistan’s north, home to the 
country’s Hindu Kush, Karakoram and Himalayan glaciers are part icularly threatened: the administrative territory of Gilgit-
Baltistan (GB) and the province  of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP).  
 
19. The role of GLOFs in the over all intensity of floods in Pak istan is reinforced by the obser vation of the rapidity at which  
Pakistani glaciers are melting compared to any other part of th e world (Pakistan Economic Survey 2014-15). The impacts 
of GLOFs in the 2010 flood especially in the valley of Bindo Go l, as a result of an outburst of the Bindo Gol glacier, 
included “unprecedented devastat ion to human lives, houses, tra nsport networks, irrigation channels and cultivated land”.2 
Another example is the case of Booni Gole Glacier located near Chitral that generated an outbur st flood in July 2010 and 
caused huge erosive damages. Entirely the floods in 2010 caused  1,980 reported deaths and nearly 2,946 people were 
injured. Also, about 1.6 million homes were destroyed, and thou sands of acres of crops and agricultural lands damaged 
(ADB, 2010). Approximately 7,100, 000 people live in the most vu lnerable districts of these tw o provinces. (See Annex XV


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 54 
	
	C
for details on individual distr ict and community risk reports a nd damage assessments fr om past flood events.) 
 
20. There have been significan t investments in GB and KPK to te st and demonstrate risk management approaches to the 
Issue of GLOFs. Government has piloted baseline interventions t o reduce risks from GLOF and other climate-induced 
disasters, as well as to support the natural resource-dependent  livelihoods of mountain communities. Sub-national 
authorities have recognized the vital importance of up scaling these investments and hence the proposed project will build 
on or coordinate with t he following projects:  
 “Reducing Risks and Vulnerabilities from  Glacier Lake Outburst  Floods in Northern Pakistan”: (US $7.6 million 
from Government of Pakistan and the Adaptation Fund, supported by UNDP). The 4-year project has 
implemented measures to reduce  the vulnerability of communities  in Bagrot and Bindogol valleys of GB and KP 
districts. The pilot project was successful in helping the most  vulnerable communities in these districts better 
prepare for GLOF risks through infrastructure enhancement such as gabion walls, diversion walls, bridges, 
assembly points and safe evacuation routes, while also enhancin g the understanding, preparedness and 
response of communities to climate-induced disaster risks (as r eflected in the independent Mid-Term Evaluation, 
Annex VIII). Further, the Pakist an Meteorology Department has s uccessfully installed automatic weather stations, 
rain gauges, and discharge measuring equipment (DME) to support  early warning systems in the target sites. 
Training and provision of equipment have been provided to commu nity-based Disaster Risk Management 
Committees (DRMC) and Village Hazard Watch Groups (VHWG) have b een substantially enhanced and through 
the project, they have access to  new equipment, and disaster re covery supplies. The project is currently 
undergoing a terminal evaluation and will be closed in December  2015. Numerous assessment and vulnerability 
and feasibility studies have been conducted and documented, inc luding: design and cost-estimates of various 
engineering structures; study on GLOF socio-economic impact in Chitral and Gilgit; impact of GLOF on 
biodiversity and ecosystems, among others (Please see Annex II and XIII). The proposed project will provide 
continuity of this intervention by developing a revolving commu nity-based disaster risk management fund paired 
with climate-resilient land-use and water management techniques  to support agro-based livelihoods in GB and 
KP. 
 
 “Water and Sanitation Extension Programme”  (WASEP) is a five-year pro ject, (US $10,000,000 from 
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) Development Bank). The pro ject is supporting more than 350,000 people in 
under-served communities of Gilgit-Baltistan and Chitral with a ccess to potable water and sanitation facilities in 
order to reduce waterborne diseases and improve their overall q uality of life. This project will close in December 
2015. The proposed project builds on the lessons learned from t he water techniques that this project has set in 
place in GB and Chitral. 
 
 UNDP/GEF Mountain and Markets Project  (US $ 7,793,182) through which sub-national governments in GB 
and KP are fostering the production of biodiversity goods and s ervices through community ecosystem-based 
enterprises. The project uses voluntary certification of Non-Ti mber Forest Products (NTFP) as a tool to promote 
biodiversity conservation and strengthen existing conservation efforts with innovative market-based mechanisms. 
It also develops community and institutional capacity for certi fied production of ‘biodive rsity-friendly’ NTFPs in 
northern areas and stimulate market demand for these products, thereby creating new economic incentives for 
conservation. Using the ongoing value-chain assessments and mar keting studies, the proposed project will scale-
up community and market based mechanisms created in its social forestry and community plantation activities.  
The project will close in 2017. The proposed project will build  on the lessons learned from the biodiversity 
conservation and market-based mec hanism activities piloted by t his project. 
 
21. UNDP/GEF Sustainable Land Management (SLM) Phase II (from 2015-2019, U S$ 20,421,000) proje ct focuses on 
creating an enabling environment for SLM and information system s and capacity building for SLM at national and 
provincial levels. The proposed project will build on and overl ap with this project to increase yields while promoting 
sustainable land and pasture m anagement approach by developing water-efficient farming technologies. 
 
22. Finally, the Government of Pakistan has also made some prog ress in incorporating clim ate change in national and 
sub-national planning processes, through several programmes. On e such programme is the UNDP/DIFID “Strengthening 
Governance of Climate Change Finance” (US $ 1 million, 2015-201 6) which allows the Finance Ministry to take steps to 
integrate climate change concer ns into national budgeting and p lanning processes in Pakistan. A “Climate Financing 
Framework” that has emerged from  this exercise is expected to b e used to effectively integrat e climate risks into budgets. 
 
23. Notwithstanding the results  from these pilot projects, the interventions remain fragmented and often times  
un-coordinated. Some shortcomings  are still evident, such as li mited investments in water and sanitation in remote villages


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 54 
	
	C
																																																													
3	The five most important crops in the country are wheat, rice, c otton, sugarcane, and maize. These products are grown predomina ntly by subsistence farmers: 
80% of farmers subsist on small landholdings; 81% of all farms are smaller than five hectares; and only 7% of farms are over 1 0 hectares (World Bank, 2011). 	and efficient mainstreaming of climate information in local and  provincial decision-making processes. A long-term and 
systematized approach to adaptat ion is nascent at the national level through the ongoing work on climate finance and the 
National Adaptation Plan process. Additional resources are need ed to strengthen institutional coordination and to ensure 
that a  “whole of government appr oach” trickles down to the sub -national and local levels to  ensure that climate change 
risks are considered in local development planning. For example , the GLOF project in Bhutan was able to integrate the 
project structure into its exist ing institutional arrangements.  One of the key successes of the project was the efficiency in 
project implementation.   
 
Potential effects of climate change on Pakistan's agriculture 
24. Future temperature rise for Pakistan is estimated to be +1. 4 - 3.7°C  by 2060 according to GCMS models (IPCC 5th 
Assessment Report). In addition, historical data (1902-2002) sh ows that the country's number of hot days and nights per 
year has increased by 20 day s and 23 days respectively 	defined as the temperature ex ceeded on 10% of days or nights 
in current climate of that region and season (World Bank, 2015) . Babar et al. (2015) conducted climate trend analysis 
specifically in the region of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), in North ern Pakistan. In line with World Bank's and IPCC's reports, 
the authors concluded that climate change in KP has been percei ved mainly in the form of increased rainfalls and 
increased mean temperatures. The authors' study shows that KP r ainfall trend, for both the kharif (summer crops e.g. 
maize) and rabi (winte r crops, e.g. wheat) cultivation period, has amplified over the last thir ty years span by 3mm-38mm. 
 
25. Mostly as a result of monsoon rains in July through Septemb er, Pakistan experiences frequent and severe flooding in 
the Indus River Basin where millions live on low-lying lands. A ccording to IPCC projections, climate change can be 
expected to impact the effects of this phenomenon (Hijioka et a l., 2014). In 2010, an unprecedented rainfall inundated 
approximately one-fifth of the nation’s land and affected an es timated 21 million Pakistanis (World Bank, 2011). Nine of 
the 25 heaviest rains ever recorded in Pakistan occurred betwee n July and August of that year (World Bank, 2011). 
Floods in Pakistan have caused loss of life, inundated fertile land, killed livestock, destroyed standing crops, and reduced 
or eliminated yields. 
 
26. In the other hand, in 1999-2002 Pakistan experienced a nati onwide drought that revealed th e limitation/vulnerabilities 
of the Indus River Basin irrigation system, as the total flows of water in major rivers declined roughly 34% below the 
monthly norm (World Bank, 2011). People faced severe water shor tages and major crop yields declined 10% (World Bank, 
2011). Changing the seasonal distribution of rainfall, coupled with rising temperatures, is likely to increase evaporation 
and reduce water availability in drought-prone regions (World B ank, 2011). 
 27. The IPCC concludes that a s hift in climate variations will have a resounding effect in countries heavily dependent on 
agricultural production (Hijioka et al., 2014). This appears th en will be the case for Pakistan which is largely  an agro-based  
economy. Agriculture in Pakistan contributes to 21% of the tota l GDP and 70% of the total population draw their livelihood 
from various agricultural activities
3 (Asif & Islam-ul-Haque, 2014). In the northern state of KP, fo r example, agriculture 
contributes to 14% of the economy and provides direct and indir ect livelihood to the majority of the rural population (Ikram 
et al., 2014).   
 
28. Recent IPCC reports predicts  that climate change will have a generally negative im pact on crop production in Asia, but 
recognizes diverse possible outcomes (medium confidence: Hijiok a et al., 2014). Reflecting on this uncertainty, both 
positive and negative impacts from Climate Change in Pakistan's  agriculture have been discussed in the literature. 
According to Hussain and Mudasser (2007), warming temperatures could for example make it possible to grow at least 
two crops (wheat and maize) a year in mountainous areas of Paki stan. In the Swat and Chitral districts of the country, 
results of projections have been mixed for wheat crops: project ed temperature increases of 1.5 and 3°C could lead to 
wheat yield declines (by 7% and 24% respectively) in Swat distr ict but to increases (by 14% and 23%) in Chitral district 
(Hussain and Mudasser, 2007). As for rice, warming temperatures  have shown to accelerate this product's process of 
development and to reduce the duration for growth (Wassmann et al. 2009a, 2009b in Hijioka et al., 2014). Nevertheless, 
Wassmann et al. (2009a, 2009b in Hijioka et al., 2014) conclude d that, in terms of risks of increasing heat stress, 
Pakistan's current tem peratures are already  approaching critica l levels during the suscepti ble stages of the rice plant.  
 
29. Specifically in the regions of Northern Pakistan, Babar et al. (2015) analyzed the potential impacts of climate change 
In agriculture of the region. The authors found that the KP mea n temperature in rabi season (winter crops) was displaying 
an increased trend of +1-1.2 degree centigrade; whereas the kha rif (summer crops) mean temperature was screening a


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 54 
	
	C
falling trend of -0.3 degree centigrade. Even if the authors' d isaggregated regional analysis found that agriculture of the 
Northern and Central parts of KB may benefit from climate chang e, they reached the conclusion that the overall climate 
change impact is negative as it puts severe stress in the south ern part of the province (that constitutes the larger area for 
crop cultivation and production), which is already short in wat er supply (Babar et al., 2015). For the authors, the changes 
in climate have led to variation in crop strewing and reaping p atterns, early crop development, low crop productivity, low 
nutritional food and intensified weed and pest outbreaks. 
 Importance of scaling up irrigated agriculture 
30. The improvement in the usage of water resources for irrigat ion constitute a key to strengthening the agricultural sector 
and food security of northern Pakistan. Irrigation agriculture in northern Pakistan is underdeveloped and rain-fed 
agriculture remains a common practice. For example, out of the total 2.7 million hector cultivable area in KP, 49% of the 
area entails the rain-fed region, which makes it especially sen sitive to climate change (Babar et al., 2015, Ratnakumar et 
al., 2011), including drought  periods and variability in rainf alls (Kawasaki, 2012; Baba et al.. 2015). Central KP, for 
example, is so dependent on rain  that studies have shown that t he variable of average rainfall can have a remarkably  
positive impact on the crop production; i.e. 1 mm increase in r ainfall will leads to increase crop productivity by 212 tones 
(Babar et al., 2015).  
 31. For this reason, irrigation ag riculture systems that bring the required water at the right ti me, accompanied with efficien t 
irrigation led technological interventions can be key for mitig ating the negative effectives of climate change in agriculture 
and maximizing the potential positive ones. Strong irrigation s ystems can also become a driver for increased productivity 
enhancement in agriculture sector of the region (Asif & Islam-u l-Haque, 2014). Data gathered at the Barmiyan province on 
wheat plantations shows for example that the agricultural outpu t in irrigated agriculture can be twice or three times larger 
than in rain-fed ones (Kawasaki, 2012) . Furthermore, irrigatio n areas have proved to maintain some levels of productivity 
during times of drought, while ot her areas suffered from a deva stating damage (Kawasaki, 2012).   
 
Key Barriers addressed by the project 
32. A holistic solution to the is sue of decreasing GLOF risks r equires a number of barriers to be overcome. The devolution 
process in the country poses som e significant challenges for th e institutional setup for climat e change in Pakistan. There is 
no formal mechanism through which the Pakistan Environment Prot ection Act (PEPA) (at the federal level) is linked with 
the provincial EPAs. There is als o no coordination mechanism be tween federal and provincial  EPAs to ensure effective 
implementation of policy instruments and for mainstreaming clim ate change at the planning stage. In addition, disaster 
management and reduction require collaborative working between the federal and provincial levels. The National Disaster 
Risk Reduction Policy states that “DRR is first and foremost a provincial and district level subject… Provincial, district and  
municipal governments, together w ith civil society groups are b est placed to promote and support risk-reduction behavior 
among vulnerable communities.” Collaboration in this and other areas where climate change is relevant (such as 
agriculture and water resources) needs to occur in order to tak e a harmonized approach to addressing climate change. In 
other words, policy making on climate change and the implementa tion of international agreements and conventions is 
considered to be assigned to the Federal Government, while impl ementation is located at the provincial level. A 
disconnect between intent and implementation arises because the re is no effective mechanism for the transfer of climate 
policy to the implementation level. 
 
33. The objective of the proposed project is to support rural c ommunities to avoid human and material losses from GLOF 
events in vulnerable areas. A long-term solution is hindered by  the following socio-economic, political and institutional 
barriers:   
 Institutional capacity and coordination at the sub-national le vel, and across relevant agencies to address the risks 
from GLOFs and climate change is limited, but the proposed proj ect will strengthen public service systems to 
lower the risk of GLOF related disasters.  
 Government institutions have lim ited resources, capacity, and logistical feasibility to c onstruct infr astructure 
required for remote mountain communities to reduce exposure and  respond to disasters and climate change. 
Therefore, the proposed project is needed to establish efficien t and effective mechanisms to enhance the 
resiliency of vulnerable communities 
 Capacity and information avail ability at the community level t o prepare for and respond to immediate threats from 
GLOFs is limited. The proposed p roject will provide the communi ty much needed skills and information to address 
GLOF-related risks. 
 There is a lack of access to readily available financial capit al for households to cope with GLOF-related risks, and 
the proposed project will scale up a revolving, community-based  fund to enhance the resiliency of vulnerable 
communities.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 54 
	
	C
 Current natural resource, land,  and water use practices are un sustainable. Ecosystem-based adaptation 
interventions will provide a paradigm shift required to catalyz e new long-term sustainable use patterns that form 
the foundation of local agro-based livelihood assets. 
 
Scale up of ongoing activities 
34. The proposed projec t will scale up piloted interventions in  2 districts to 12 district s in Departments of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa (KP) and Gilgit-Bal tistan (GB). Below a table descr ibing the main activitie s that will be scaled up. 
 
Table 1. Activities that will be scaled up in 12 district in KP  and GB. 
Current activities (2 Districts) GCF resources  (12 districts) 
Two policies have been reviewed to address or incorporate 
GLOF risk reduction. 	By the end of the project, at least two policies have been reviewed and/or revised to address or incorporate GLOF risk 
reduction.
	
90% of households in target com munities are receiving early 
warnings and are taking the appr opriate actions following the 
warning.	By the end of the project, 95% of households in target 
communities are able to receive  and respond to early warnings 
and take the appropriate actions following the warning. 
2 targeted engineering structures (gabion walls) have been 
established to reduce the effects of GLOF events on livelihood 
assets.	By the end of the project, at least 250 small-scale engineering  
structures (biological and/or mechanical)  have been 
established to reduce the effects of GLOF events on livelihood 
assets (as appropriate: che ck dams, mini dams, ponds, spill 
ways, slope stabilization, tree plantation, controlled drainage )	
and from debris slides. 	
At least 2 GLOF-prone mountain  valleys are comprehensively 
covered by a GLOF Early Warning system. 
	100% of households in KP and GB  target communities are 
able to receive and respond to early warnings and take the 
appropriate actions following the warning. 	
-5 Automatic Weather Stations  (3 in KP and 2 in GB) have 
been installed. 
-5 Automatic Rain Gauge (3 in KP and 2 in GB) have been 
installed. 
-6 discharge measuring equipment (3 in KP and 3 in GB) were 
installed, two of those were damaged during recent flooding (2015). 
Bioengineering techniques for sl ope stabilization have been 
established to reduce GLOF impacts. Installation of 50 weather monitoring stations (22 in KP and 28  
in GB) to collect meteorological data in the catchment areas in  
order to understand parameters with flood peaks. 
The installation of 408 river discharge gauges/ sensors (170 in  
KP and 238 in GB) to collect river flood data in order to 
understand and predict flood peaks. 
The proposed technology will provide data to conduct 
hydrological modelling to generate flood scenarios and to 
capacitate village hazard watch groups that will be part of a 
local-level early warning system.  
Bioengineering techniques will be replicated.
	
 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
35. In the context of the stated project objective in C.2, the proposed GCF project has been structured around 2 inter- 
related outputs. 
 Output 1: Strengthened sub-nati onal institutional capacities to  plan and implement climate change -resilient 
development pathways 
This output responds to the need for systematic integration of GLOF risk management into the processes, policies and 
plans of institutions that have a stake in avoiding human and m aterial losses from GLOF events in vulnerable areas in the 
Departments of Khyber Pakhtunkh wa (KP) and Gilgit-Baltistan (GB ). 
 
37. GCF resources will be used to  strengthen the capabilities o f local level institutions (Disaster Risk Management, 
Agriculture, Livestock and Water sector in the Departments of G B and KP and federal level institutions (Ministry of 
Kashmir Affairs, Ministry of Environment and National Disaster Management Authority) to incorporate climate change 
adaptation considerations into dev elopment plans in GB and KP.  The incorporation of climate change adaptation


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 54 
	
	C
measures into the planning ins truments will also be based on pr ogress made at the national level under NCCP and by 
other regions in including climate change measures in sectoral,  territorial, and environmental planning instruments. More 
specifically, the project will ma ke use of the lessons learned from the recently compl eted UNDP/Adaptation Fund 
supported project: “Reducing Risks and Vulnerabilities from Gla cier Lake Outburst Floods in Northern Pakistan”. In 
addition, GCF resources will be used to promote the inclusion o f information generated from early warning systems and 
hydrological modeling (Output 2) to generate flood scenarios th at then can better inform local development plans and, by 
extension, budgeting. 
 
Activity 1.1: Provincial line and planning departments have tec hnical capacities to mainstream climate change 
into development plans   
38. Provincial and territorial governments have recognized the risks of climate change, and have begun mobilizing to 
address it. Building on this progress and based on the current structure and coordination me chanisms established by the 
NCCP, the project will support the development of provincial cl imate change adaptations acti on plans that address GLOF 
risks from a sectorial perspective, focusing primarily in Agric ulture, Livestock and Water. At the provincial level, the proje ct 
will support the integration of G LOF risks into existing KP pro vincial climate change policies, based on information and 
data generated in Output 2 [hydrological modeling and flood sce narios] and Output 3 [Climate-resilient land-use and water 
management techniques]. In addition, EPAs, line and planning de partments in GB and KP will integrate climate change 
risks that will set the foundati ons for adaptation sectorial an d provincial action plans. 
 
39. The Climate Change Action (CC A) action plan process will be  driven by the  DRM, Agricul ture, Livestock, and Water 
sub-national governments in KP and GB, based on the strategic l ines underlying the National Climate Change Policy. The 
overall purpose of Output 1 is to introduce appropriate policie s to address GLOF risks across different sectors. GCF 
resources will finance the ident ification and preparation of wr itten policy recommendations on how to address GLOF risks 
in diverse sectors, based on ev idence and will be subject to ap proval by a multi-stakeholder board. These policy 
recommendations will be submitted to Cabinet, with PSC members serving as advocates in their respective line ministries. 
Their adoption by relevant line Ministries and local authoritie s will be tracked. This will be instrument in addressing one of  
the most critical policy gaps in  catalyzing behavioral adjustme nts to managing GLOF risks across key sectors.  
 
40. As the impacts and severity of GLOF is multidimensional, af fecting  not only human lives  but infrastructure (e.g. 
houses, schools, bridges) and livelihoods (e.g. livestock, fore st and fruits tress), the inclusion of GLOF risk into sub-
national policies in both KP and GB provincial CC policies is a  complex task involving divers e Ministries. (See Annex XIII – 
Section “GLOF impacts on lives and economic assets in GB and KP ”). One of the expected result s is to develop evidence-
based policy recommendations on GLOF prevention and risk manage ment in diverse sectors (DRM, Agriculture, 
Livestock, and Water) that will be prepared and disseminated. C ontingency plans & risk management incentive schemes 
between KP and GB will be developed based on collaboration betw een relevant stakeholders under the CCA action plan 
and sub-national governments. 
 
41. Indicative inputs for the above activity include: 
‐ Develop integrated provincial CCA action plan encompassing key  sectors (mainstream CC risks into DRM, 
Agriculture, Livestock, and Wate r Sectors) in KP and GB, linked  to NCCP. 
‐ Integration of GLOF risks in the existing KP and GB provincial  CC policies which will serve as framework for the 
CCA action plan. 
‐ Build capacities of EPAs, line departments (Agriculture, Water  and DRM) and planning departments to 
mainstream CC risks in developm ent plans (building blocks of CC A action plans) in GB and KP. 
 
Activity 1.2: Sub-national institutions coordinate effectively to implement adaptation action plans and climate 
change initiatives 
42. GCF resources will also be used to strengthen and expand ex isting sub-national inst itutional and coordination 
arrangements including financial, planning and budgeting proces ses and other requirements for implementing adaptation 
action plans and climate change initiatives in GB and KP. Clima te change coordinating entities will be established (and 
strengthened if currently operating) using a multi-stakeholder approach to integrate climate change responses across key 
sectors. In addition, the projec t will increase consideration o f GLOF and climate change risks among district authorities, 
NGOs and CBOs as these will be ke y agents implementing adaptati on action plans. 
 
43. Pakistan’s National Climate Change Policy has layout 10 pol icy objectives “to ensure that climate change is 
mainstreamed in the economically  and socially vulnerable sector s of the economy and to steer Pakistan towards climate 
resilient development”. NCCP Objective #6 states the need to “s trengthen inter-ministerial decision making and 
coordination mechanisms on climate change”.  Activity 1.2 aims to strengthen and expand existing sub-national


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 54 
	
	C
institutional and coordination ar rangements including financial , planning and budgeting processes and other requirements 
for implementing adaptation acti on plans and climate change ini tiatives in GB and KP. 
 44. GCF resources will be used  to to strengthen the Climate Cha nge Cells in sectoral ministries in KP and 
GB to implement adaptation action  plans financed under Activity  1.1.  These CC cells were established under the National 
Climate Change Commission to coordinate all climate change acti vities at national and international level and are funded 
by the federal budget.GCF resources will be used to provide tra ining and support to targeted officials and experts of line 
ministries and departments that are part of the CC cells to fur ther their knowledge and capacities on managing climate 
change risks, in particular GLOFs.  
 
45. Indicative inputs for the above activity include: 
‐ Establish/ strengthen provincial -level CC coordinating entitie s within the Planning and Development Departments 
(involving CBOs, NGOs, and EPA) t o coordinate re sponses and man agement of  medium- and long-term risks 
across key sectors. 
‐ Raise awareness at the local level (district authorities, NGOs , and CBOs) to effectively coordinate CC initiatives 
and play key roles in implementi ng CCA action plans across key sectors. 
 Output 2: Community-based EWS and long-term measures are up-sca led to increase communities’ adaptive 
capacity 
46. A key result that GCF resourc es will finance focuses on the  scaling up of interventions  that have been tested with 
other financing (see Annex VIII) to increase adaptive capacity of communities in target valle ys. GCF resources will expand 
the climate information surveilla nce and discharge measuring ne twork in the region. GCF  resources will be used to 
procure and install 50 automatic weather stations (AWS) and 408  river discharge gauges/sensors. These monitoring 
instruments will provide the requisite data to conduct hydrolog ical modeling to generate flood risk scenarios that will feed 
into a flood early warning system to enable the dissemination o f flashflood warning signals on a 24-hour basis generated 
by PMD through cellphones. AWS and river discharge sensors will  provide information to capa citate village hazard watch 
groups that will be part of a lo cal-level early warning system.  Small-scale hard adaptation st ructures will be constructed 
(gabion walls, spillways, check dams) to protect human lives an d household’s assets in combination with bioengineering 
interventions to stabilize slopes slides, reducing the risk of debris slides. In Pakistan EIAs are not required for smaller 
infrastructure projects. The protective capability of these str uctures will be amplified by additional resources channeled to 
the communities ex ante and following a GLOF event through the scale up of already established, revolving community-
based disaster risk management f und. In addition, ecosystem-bas ed adaptation interventions w ill be promoted in order to 
increase resilience against GLOF s events while supporting livel ihoods. 
 
Activity 2.1: Expanded weather surveillance and discharge measu ring networks 
47. The project will facilitate t he updating of river discharge  and meteorological information into the Pakistan 
Meteorological Department (PMD)  network to address the vulnerab ility of the identified target a rea and provide information 
for the development of an Early Warning System. The installatio n of 50 automatic weather stations (22 in KP and 28 in 
GB) and the installation of 408 ri ver discharge gauges/sensors (170 in KP and 238 in GB), will be used to measure lake 
volume, flow and discharge rates, and will provide data to cond uct hydrological modeling to generate flood risk scenarios 
(Input 2.2.1). The information generated will also capacitate v illage hazard watch groups that will be part of a local-level 
early warning system (Input 2.2.2) (See Annex IX). In addition,
 the capacity for processing, validating, and interpreting 
river discharge and meteorological information will be strength ened at the national (PMD), and at the department level by 
GB Disaster Management Authority (GBDMA) and KP Disaster Manage ment Authority (KPDMA). PMD will integrate AWS 
as part of its network s, therefore it will cover M&O costs afte r the project has finalized. 
 
48. The capacity to better analyze how climate changes causes f loods caused by glacial lakes  will also be strengthened at 
the local and regional levels of the Project will enable more a ccurate predictions for the in tensity and breadth of GLOF, 
and for defining and implementing adaptation measures. The new automatic weather stations will be part of the national 
network; thus, the stations will generate information that will  also be useful outside of the project target area in assessing  
climate change, particularly in other areas of GB and KP. 
 
49. The new automated stations w ill provide data at a significa ntly greater frequency, recordi ng physical parameters (i.e. 
rainfall, wind, temperature, etc .) every minute, in all weather  conditions, day and night all year around. The technology will  
also provide accurate and useful data on extremes in climate (i .e., maximum rainfall intensity, maximum wind gusts, etc.) 
for the development of an effective early warning system that w ill help decision-making aimed at saving lives and avoiding 
high economic losses from GLOF.


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 54 
	
	C
50. Indicative inputs for the above activity include: 
‐ Installation of 22 weather monitoring stations in KP and 28 in  GB: to collect meteorological data in the catchment 
areas in order to understand parameters with flood peaks. 
‐ Installation of 170 river discharge gauges/ sensors in KP and 238 in GB: to collect river flood data in order to 
understand and pr edict flood peaks 
‐ GBDMA and KPDMA provide extensi on to PMD on installation and m aintenance of equipment 
 
51. This hydro-meteorological equipment with communication syst em will collectively form the warning systems. Although 
it is not possible for the system  to reduce or obstruct or prev ent a flood or disaster, the system, coupled with early warning  
communications, will have r educe the risk of loss. 
 
Activity 2.2: Early warnings are  effective in protecting commun ities from climate-induced risks. 
52. Existing flood early warning s ystems in the target area wil l be established to enable the dissemination of flash flood 
warning signals on a 24-hour bas is. Information generated by AW S and river discharge gauges (1 70) / sensors (22) will be 
used by Pakistan Metrological Department (PMD) to conduct hydro logical modeling to generate flood scenarios and 
calculate GLOF lead time. GLOF hazard maps previously developed  and updated hydrological modeling will be utilized to 
estimate the probable flood inundation sites. PMD will analyze this information and alerts will be issued through 
cellphones and other media. 	 
 
53. If the above activities are i mplemented, the warning dissem ination mechanism should be  very effective to save 
communities in the targeted regions from the probable GLOF disa ster. The lead time will also be estimated with the help of 
hydrological modeling so that expected time for the inundation at particular location may be estimated. Vulnerable areas 
prone to GLOF will be ranked (H igh, Moderate and Slight Vulnera ble) based 	o n 	 assigning weights to different 
characteristics of the lakes, such as 	processes and records of past events, geo-morphological and geo -technical 
characteristics of the lake with the help of hydrological model ing and different scenarios of flood inundation will be 
generated. For more information on the physical conditions of t he surrounding area that may be considered before 
declaring a lake to be potentia lly dangerous see  Section 5.2 o f the Technical Report in Annex XV] 
 
54. AWS and river discharge gauges/ sensors information will be  gathered and analyzed at t he Main Control Room at 
PMD, where an analysis of thresholds for potential GLOF risks w ill be carried out. When warnings are triggered, PMD will 
issue meteorological and hydrological alerts regarding possibil ities of GLOF events in the target valleys. The 
communication channels for PMD to disseminate the alerts will b e mobile phones (Call + SMS), sirens, FM Radio, Internet 
website (GLOF II Page). 	Most effective communication is GSM technology which is availab le in most of the valleys. 
However, where the GSM technology is not available, sirens or d eclarations from mosques are very common source of 
communications, moreover, satellit e based communication. PMD ha s well established this communications and alert 
system in other regions, howev er GCF resources will be used to expand it in the twelve target districts. 
 
55. The project will establish wa tch groups at the valley level  with community members and NGOs, leveraging the strong 
social networks and cohesion wi thin and between upstream and do wnstream communities, to increase early warning 
awareness and utilize existing community channels of communicat ion.  Training workshop s will ensure that EWS 
procedures are internalized and GL OF alerts reach the most at-r isk communities. 
 
56. Finally, a local governmen t representative will be designat ed as a focal point to ensure continued functionality of the 
EWS. This focal point will work w ith Local Support Organization s (LSOs) to monitor the EWS and  facilitate follow-up to any 
evident maintenance issues with government support. LSOs are re gistered entities with the government.  These 
organizations are managed by Board of Directors which have repr esentation from the local government, community 
members both men and women. Catering to a number of other rural  development projects, LSOs are experienced in the 
management of community funds which are regularly replenished t hrough public and private contributions. These funds 
have been established for the maintenance of communal services provided by various development projects, and will be 
used under this project to manage financial contributions by th e government and the communities for continued EWS 
operation and maintenance.  T he funds will be managed through a  separate bank account and an independent audit will 
be carried out by UNDP in addition to spot checks.  An agreemen t will be signed between the project and LSOs which will 
clearly elucidate the modalitie s for the distribution of these funds and the activities to be carried out upon completion of t he 
project. In the ongoing GLOF project, such agreements are done with community and government  departments, in which it 
is clearly stated that after the completion of project life tim e, relevant line departments a nd community will be responsible 
for the sustainability and Operations & Maintenance (O&M). In t his case, EWS systems officially handed over to local 
government to manage the operatio ns and maintain the systems at  the end of the project. Agreements will be signed by 
each local entity prior to managerial handover of responsibilit y for EWS management.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 54 
	
	C
 
57. Indicative inputs for the above activity include: 
‐ PMD conducts hydrological modeling to generate flood scenarios  and calculate GLOF lead time 
‐ Village hazard watch groups are set up (expanded) and capacita ted to monitor GLOF and disseminate early 
warnings 
 Activity 2.3: Vulnerable communities have adequate long-term me asures in place to address GLOF-related risks 
58. Potential outburst flood hazard s need to be add ress from di fferent perspectives and in c oordination with CBOs and 
community members aiming to protect life and property in the do wnstream of each valley, hence the importance to 
combine preparedness and response, small-scale infrastructures with EWS-based mechanisms downstream (Activity 2.2) 
to address GLOF risks. 
 
59. The project will support the ex pansion of DRM Committees an d emergency response cells by providing basic 
necessary early warning equipment  on communications as well as fostering advance planning of risk management 
activities using preexisting DRM plans (modified and enhanced b y GLOF I project). This will be done with a view to also 
monitor potential GLOF risk sites and prepare simulations to su pport risk management. GBDMA and KPDMA will provide 
training to DRM Committees and communities on managing GLOF ris ks in the medium- and long-term as well as 
preparedness and response to build their capacities and keep th em activated during peak GLOF risk seasons.  
 
60. Small-scale hard adaptation structures will be constructed,  expanding on the design of t he pilot project activities 
carried out in GLOF I project f inanced by the Adaptation Fund. In May 2014, a gabion wall built during that project proved 
successful in protecting the houses, agricultural land, livesto ck and orchards of 1,350 people in Chira village in Bagrote 
Valley of GB during a GLOF event. Gabion walls reinforce spillw ay banks and protect villages and property from flooding 
and erosion. Both gabion spurs and check dams retard the veloci ty of outburst flood waves, a ttenuating its destructive 
force and providing greater lead time for communities to prepar e and evacuate. Gabion spurs are permeable structures 
constructed perpendicular from the bank, extending into the str eam. Check dams extend across the entirety of the stream 
and can be constructed from different material (gabion material , dry masonry, and vegetation/soil) depending on the 
particular conditions and size of each spillway site. Small add itional spillways will be constructed near the glacial lake 
outlet to regularly drain and divert excess water, helping to p revent the buildup of pressure from meltwater accumulation 
that can lead to an outburst flood.  The exact size, specificati ons and placement of each of these protective structures is 
dependent on the particular conditions of each lake, outlet str eam, and valley. Detailed design and environmental and 
social safeguard assessments will be undertaken prior to instal lation. None of the hard structur e will be of a significant siz e 
to warrant EIAs (these will be lo w to medium risk activities). The protective capability of thes e structures is amplified when  
used in concert with additional risk mitigation measures, such as slope stabilization through bioengineering. 
 
61. A major risk related to clim ate change in the region is inc reased probability of land and debris slides, produced by 
intensification of acute rainf all events and cloudbursts. Debri s slides can also be both an effect of glacial lake outbursts, 
resulting from reduced slope stability due to bank erosion and flood scars, and a cause, as occurred when a major 
landslide blocked the outlet of  the glacial-fed Attabad Lake in  Hunza District, GB, in January 2010, leading to flooding of 
the Karakoram Highway and five upstream villages.  
 
62. Many slope sides in vulnerable valleys have been denuded of vegetation, increasing the ri sk of a slide. Ecosystem- 
based adaptation through bioengineering helps stabilize slopes at risk through reforestation an d vegetation, reinforcing the 
structural integrity of slope s ides and increasing their shear resistance. Because many slopes were degraded due to 
human exploitation of vegetation, this activity will be linked to the sustainable land and pasture management plan to 
ensure that the vegetative cover and the stabilization it provi des will be maintained in the long term. Choosing local 
indigenous species for re-vegetation will help conserve and res tore natural ecosystems in the project area, and 
sustainable harvest of those with economic value contributes to  income generation. During the pilot project, demonstration 
sites were established for slope stabilization through these bi oengineering techniques in two locations. These 
demonstration sites will be used to train communities and local  support organizations from the 12 districts included in this 
project.  
63. In GB and KP despite having ac cess to water resources from the glaciers, irrigated agricul ture is still limited. As a  
result of the reliance of the agriculture sector on rain-fed ag riculture, increasing climate variability is causing a greater 
frequency of crop failure and associated food insecurity. Incre asing and improving existing irrigation systems to insure 
against crop failure is therefore a priority. Among the foresee n works undertaken by  the project will incl ude increasing the 
capacity of and improving exis ting micro-irrigation systems and  rehabilitating irrigation channels thought the installation of  
240 water efficient farming technologies in 24 targeted valleys . 120 drip irrigation systems w ill be installed to support frui t


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 54 
	
	C
trees (apples, apricot, cherries, peaches, plums and walnuts) a nd 120 sprinkle irrigation syst ems for vegetables and cereal 
crops (potato) raising. 
 64. Proposed micro-irrigation sys tems are water saving technolo gies that do not require levelin g of fields (terraces). The 
farmers will grow fruit orchards o n slopes which are at present  not under agriculture crops increasing the area under 
agriculture. Both the micro-irrigation systems will be used by gravity flow as the mountain te rrain permits without using 
pressure pumps reducing the running costs to zero. Water tanks will be constructed at various levels and the water will be 
used at lower elevation through gravity flow through the pipes.  The micro-irrigation channels will be operated and 
maintained by the farmers on self-help basis in the mountain ar eas of GB and KP.   In addition to increasing the water 
efficiency in the area the rehabilitated irrigation systems wil l reduce GLOF risks by releasing the water pressure on the 
glacier lake banks 
 
65. Indicative inputs for the above activity include: 
‐ DRM Committees and emergency response cells are expanded to ac t as first responders and manage drills and 
simulations. 
‐ GBDMA and KPDMA train communities and DRM committees on disast er preparedness and response. 
‐ Construction of 250 small infrastructure to reduce medium- and  long-term risks of floods (gabion walls, check 
dams, spillways). 
‐ Expand slope stabilization to mit igate risks from debris slide s (100000 ha in KP and 140000 ha in GB). 
‐ Installation of 240 water efficient farming technologies (Micr o Irrigation Systems: 120 Drip Irrigation Systems and 
120 Sprinkle Irrigation Systems   and rehabilitation of irrigati on channels in 24 targeted  valleys)  
 
Activity 2.4: Improved financia l capacity to adapt to GLOFs and  other climate change-induced risks 
66. Access to finance is critica l for enabling communities and households to prepare for weather shocks and to build 
adaptive capacity. As part of t he UNDP/Adaptation Fund financed  GLOF I project, a community-based revolving fund was 
established with an initial endowment of Rs 1 million (2015 US$  9,800), which has since increased to Rs 2.7 million (2015 
US$ 26,600) through contributions by local communities and gove rnments. The fund operates on the basis of pooled risk-
sharing, and supports GLOF response and preparedness activities  within these communities where other sources of risk 
insurance or credit are lacking , and/or relief from the central  government is typically slow to  reach. The fund only disburses  
payouts preceding or following an emergency, and is repaid over  time by its enrollees. 
	As GLOF events can impact on 
human lives and livelihoods, the fund plays a vital role by pro viding financial support to community members the projects 
aims at increasing adaptive capacity of communities to recover from GLOF shocks and losses to their assets and 
livelihoods. However, it is currently insufficient to provide a dequate coverage within the pilot villages or expansion to the 
others included in this project. With GCF resources, a one-time  endowment will be made to set the fund officially and 
increase the size at US$ 50,000 for each disaster risk manageme nt cell, (total GCF Funding required for 24 DRM Cells is 
US $1.2 Million) which, based on the experiences to-date, is su fficient to cover climate adaptation measures. Also, 
relevant stakeholders (i.e. mic ro-credit lenders, insurance com panies, SMEs, Gov agencies, etc.) will be trained to 
improve coordination and deliver y of integrated adaptation and disaster risk management initiatives in GB and KP. Please 
refer to section E.6.3. for more details. 
 
67. Best practices of climate c hange adaptation measures must b e adopted and mainstream ed by all stakeholders 
active in the project area. Public and private entities may fac e different and additional risks than households at the 
community level. For example, small businesses may face vulnera bilities at every point of their operations and supply 
chain, such as damaged inventory, unavailability of labor, or i nability to transport goods to market. However, these entities 
currently lack knowledge of c limate and disaster risks and the capacity to manage these risks. Further, small businesses 
and public organizations lack adequate capital to invest in mea sures that would reduce risks from climate change and 
disasters or formal insurance policies to compensate for damage s, and the CBDRMC may be an inappropriate mechanism 
for covering organizational risk.  
 
68. This project will support awa reness raising and training ev ents that target local public and private entities to be made 
aware of their risks and risk management related to GLOFs and o f other local climate and disaster phenomena. Further, 
GCF resources will be used to inc entivize micro-credit lenders and insurance companies to better cover these 
organizations, for example by addressing current barriers in th e credit and insurance markets, and exploring new 
innovative products such as index -based insurance payouts based  on discharge as recorded by the river gauges (Input 
2.1.2) and/or rainfall as recor ded by the AWS (Input 2.1.1). 
 
69. Indicative inputs for the above activity include:


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 54 
	
	C
‐ Scale-up revolving community-based disaster risk management fu nd i.e. $ 50,000 USD per Community based 
Disaster Risk Management Committ ee (CBDRMC) to address climate change adaptation measures (medium- and 
long-term risks) 
‐ Relevant stakeholders (i.e. mic ro-credit lenders, insurance co mpanies, SMEs, Gov agencies, etc.) trained to 
improve coordination and delivery of the CBDRM Fund and adaptat ion/DRM initiatives on the ground in GB and 
KP. 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  
70. The Ministry of Climate Change of Pakistan (MCC) has five d epartments (National Disaster Management Authority, 
Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency, Pakistan Environmenta l Planning and Architectu ral Consultants, Global 
Change Impact Studies Centre and Zoological Survey Department) with an annual budget of US $4.5 million (2013-14).  
The MCC’s core mandate it’s associated to the Framework for Imp lementation of the National Climate Change Policy 
(NCCP). The Ministry is also responsible for other environmenta lly related national policies, including sanitation, drinking 
water, forests and resettlement a nd environmental (PEPA) polici es. The Public Sector Development Programme is the 
main instrument for providing budgetary resources for developme nt projects and programmes and its budget was US 
$ 115 million in 2013-14. The Ministry has the Climate Finance Unit that is designed as a focal authority on behalf of the 
lead implementing partner 	Executing Entity as defined by t he GCF, the MCC, responsible fo r coordinating implementation 
of the project. The Unit will chair the Project Board, be respo nsible for overall implementation, coordination and 
mobilization of the project. 
 
71. The Ministry of Climate Change (MoCC) has the capacity to i mplement large scale development projects and in the 
past has implemented many projects with collaboration of UN age ncies and local line departments under the overall 
guidance of Pakistan National Climate Change Policy and its Imp lementation Framework. The best example of which is 
Phase-I of GLOF project which was successfully implemented thro ugh Adaptation Fund by t he Ministry of Climate 
Change. MoCC has well-structured Wings and Departments headed b y Senior Government officials having working 
experience of different high le vel position at Federal and Prov incial departments. 
 
72. Moreover, Climate Finance Uni t (CFU) is also operating in t he Ministry of Climate Change headed by Federal 
Secretary, Ministry of Climate Change to look after all matters  related to Climate Finance available windows specially GEF 
and GCF. CFU is managing the GEF Country portfolio and is activ ely involved in the GEF projects development and 
implementation throughout the country. CFU has a Board / Steeri ng Committee having representation of all Federal and 
Provincial stake holders, Private Sector, UN agencies and Techn ical expert to review project development, approval, 
implementation, monitoring status etc. 
 
73. Ministry of climate change is the lead agency in the countr y to implement the climate change agenda in the country. It 
has the overarching role with the provinces and the regions in the country as well as the custodian of the international 
conventions and obligations. In order to best meet the internat ional obligations and the implementation of NCCP, it is of 
utmost importance that MoCC is i n the lead role. MoCC currently  has a project portfolio of more than US$500 million in 
adaptation and mitigation projects nationwide. The project amou nt being request of US$ 36.96 million to the GCF will 
support MoCC to implement and ex ecute a project to address GLOF  risks in Northern Pakistan.  
 
74. Women’s percentage share o f all managers in Pakistan is 3 %  (ILO, 2012). In the Natio nal Assembly 60 of the 342 
seats (17.5 percent) are reserved for women and allocated to th e political parties proporti onally from the provinces, 
according to the electoral result. At the provincial level Khyb er Pakhtunkhwa intends to retain the 33% quotas of reserved 
seats for women as enacted in 2001. Total presentation of women  in public sector is less than 2 % and most of the 
women are employed in education and health sectors. There is a minimal presentation in the sectors like trade and 
finance (Ministry for Lab or and Manpower, 2010). 
 
75. Following UNDP National Implementation Modality (NIM) guide lines, the executing entit y or Implementing Partner 
Executing Entity as defined by the GCF  is the entity responsib le and accountable for managing a project, including the 
monitoring and evaluation of proje ct interventions, achieving p roject outputs, and for the effe ctive use of UNDP resources. 
A single Implementing Partner is designated to manage each UNDP -supported project. The Implementing Partner may 
enter into agreements with other  organizations or entities to a ssist in successfully de livering project outputs. 
 
76. UNDP provides the required fi nancial resources to the imple menting partner to carry out project activities during the 
annual cycle. These arrangements must be clearly stated in the annual work plan. Under the Harmonized Approach to


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 54 
	
	C
																																																													
[1] An example of a signed project document (cover page) is provide d at http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g4958/g2_19062/Prodoc 
Signature Page for PIMS 4958.pdf  
A sample letter of agreement between IP and Responsible Party i s provided at 
http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g4710/g2_19222/2013-12-0 4_MoU_LDCF2_Final_Signed.pdf  Cash Transfer (HACT), three cash transfer modalities are availa ble: direct cash transfer, direct payment, and 
reimbursement. More informati on about financial management can be found in section F.4. of the proposal. 
 
77. Engagement with Ministry of C limate Change, as a Responsibl e Party for, will be formal ized through a Letter of 
Agreement (LoA).  A Responsible P arty is defined as an entity t hat has been selected to act on behalf of the Implementing 
Partner Executing Entity as defined by the GCF on the basis of a written agreement or contract to purchase goods or 
provide services using the project budget. In addition, the Res ponsible Party may manage the use of these goods and 
services to carry out project a ctivities and produce outputs. 	All Responsible Parties are directly accountable to the 
Implementing Partner ,	Executing Entity as defined by the GCF, in accordance with the terms of their agreement or 
contract with the Implementing Partner. Implementing Partners u se Responsible Parties in or der to take advantage of their 
specialized skills, to mitigate risk and to relieve administrat ive burdens. 	Procurement of goods, services and technical 
assistance required under the Work Plan w ill be conducted by th e CSO in accordance with the principles of highest 
quality, transparency, economy and efficiency.  Such procuremen t will be based on the assessment of competitive 
quotations, bids or other proposa ls, unless otherwise agreed in  writing by UNDP. 	The executing entity will account for and 
report on the use of GCF funds in an acceptable format and time ly manner consistent with UNDP’s Policies and 
Procedures and in line with requi rements as per the AMA agreed between UNDP and the GCF. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Not applicable.  
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)  
78. According to the Pakistan Environmental Protection Act (199 7) when a project is likel y to cause an adverse 
environmental effect an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) i s required.  Given the nature of the proposed activities 
of the project an EIA is not required by national regulations a lthough a number of specific studies will be required prior to 
final design and construction. As the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is the regulator y authority under the Ministry 
of Climate Change (EPA) responsib le for the project, the propos ed Pakistan GLOF project will not require licenses permits 
or a no objection certification.  As per strategy, Pakistan GLOF  project will conduct refore station with the Forest 
Department of the provincial governments and will follow all ru les and no objections before impl ementing such activities. 
Forest, Environment, PDMA's, Irrigation, Agriculture, and Plann ing and Development departments of the provinces are 
major stakeholders of th is GCF-funded project. 
 
79. According to the PEPA a license is required when handling o f hazardous substances but there is no legislation for the 
chemical fertilizers. In this cas e, a license i s not required. 
 
80. Regarding taxes on imported products during bidding process es are waived if process carried out by UNDP. 
C.7.   Institutional / Implementation Arrangements  
81. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National I mplementation Modality (NIM), according to the Standard 
Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of P akistan, the Country Programme Action Plan 
(CPAP), and as policies and proced ures outlined in the UNDP POP P (see 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/pp m/Pages/Defining-a-Project. aspx ) .The national executing entity - also referred to as 
the national ‘Implementing Part ner’ in UNDP terminology - is re quired to implement the project in compliance with UNDP 
rules and regulations, policies and procedures (including the N IM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the 
national Government’s signature of the UN Special Fund Agreemen t on 25 February 1960, together with a UNDP project 
document[1], which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern th e use of the funds (once the funds are 
secured).   
82. UNDP’s overall role as an Ac credited Entity is to provide o versight and quality assurance  through its Headquarter and 
Country Office units.  This role includes: (i) project preparat ion oversight; (ii) project implementation oversight and 
supervision, including financial management; and (iii) project completion and evaluation oversight.  It also includes 
oversight roles in relation to reporting and knowledge-manageme nt.  The ‘project assurance’ function of UNDP is to 
support the Project Board by carrying out objective and indepen dent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role 
ensures appropriate project management milestones are managed a nd completed. Project assurance has to be 
independent of the Project Manager; therefore, the Project Boar d cannot delegate any of its assurance responsibilities to


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 54 
	
	C
the Project Manager. A UNDP Programme Officer, or M&E Officer, typically holds the Project Assurance role on behalf of 
UNDP. The ‘senior supplier’ role of UNDP is to represent the in terests of the parties which provide funding and/or 
technical expertise to the project (designing, developing, faci litating, procuring, implementing). The senior supplier’s 
primary function within the Board is to provide guidance regard ing the technical feasibility of the project. The senior 
supplier role must have the authority to commit or acquire supp lier resources required. If necessary, m ore than one person 
may be required for this role. Typically, the implementing part ner,	Executing Entity as defi ned by the GCF, UNDP and/or 
donor(s) would be represented under this role. 
 
83. The Implementing Partner, 	Executing Entity as defined by t he GCF, for this project is Min istry of Climate Change. 
 
84. MCC is accountable to UNDP fo r managing the project, includ ing the monitoring and evaluation of project 
interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effectiv e use of UNDP resources.  The following parties have 
entered into agreements with Ministry of Climate Change to assi st in successfully delivering project outcomes and are 
directly accountable to Ministry of Climate Change as outlined in the terms of their agreement in Province of of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa (KP) and Gilgit-Baltistan(GB).  
 
85. The management arrangements for this project are summarized  in the chart below.   
 
86. The Project Board is comprised of the following organizatio ns: UNDP, MCC, Line Depart ments of Agriculture, 
Project	Board		
Senior	Beneficiar y:	
(Targeted	communities,	CBO’s,	
Relevant	Line	Departments	
(Agriculture,	Irrigation,	Forest,	
Environment,	WASA,	Wildlife),	
PMD,	NDMA	and	PDMA) 	
Executing 	Entity:	
MINISTRY	OF	CLIMATE	
CHANGE	
Senior	Supplier: 	
(UNDP)		
	
Project	Assurance: 	UNDP	
 Programme	Officer,	UNDP	CO	
 UNDP‐GEF	Unit			
 National 	Project	Manager 	
(NPM)	
National	Project	Coordinator	(NPC)	Project	Organization 	Structure 	
Team	A	(KP	
Province) 	
 Provincial	
Project//Monitoring		
Coordinator	(PPC)	
 District	Project	Managers	
(DPM)	
 District	Monitoring	
Officers	(DMO)	
 Provincial/District	
Administrative	Assistants	
 Provincial/District	
Support	Staff	
Team	C	(G‐B	
Province) 	
 Provincial	
Project/Monitoring		
Coordinator	(PPC)	
 District	Project	Managers	
(DPM)	
 District	Monitoring	
Officers	(DMO)	
 Provincial/District	
Administrative	Assistants	
 Provincial/District	
Support	Staff	
Project Support (PMU)
 National	Monitoring,	
Communication	and	
Reporting	Manager		
 National	Administration	&	
Finance	Officer	
 Support	Staff


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PR OGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 54 
	
	C
 
     
 
  
 Irrigation, Forest, E nvironment, WASA, Wildlife, as well as, PM D, NDMA and PDMA. 
 
87. The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required by 
the Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be made in ac cordance with standards that shall ensure management 
for development results, best va lue money, fairness, integrity,  transparency and effective inte rnational competition. In case 
a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP Programme Manager (Jacqui 
Badcock, UN Resident Coordinat or and UNDP Resident Representati ve in Pakistan). The Project Board will meet four 
times a year. 
 
88. The Project Manager will run  the project on a day-to-day ba sis on behalf of Ministry of Climate Change within the 
constraints laid down by the Project Board. The Project Manager  function will end when the final project terminal 
evaluation report and other documentation required by the GCF a nd UNDP has been completed and submitted to UNDP.  
The Project Manager is responsible for day-to-day management an d decision-making for the project. The Project 
Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project pr oduces the results specified in the project document, to the 
required standard of quality and wi thin the specified constrain ts of time and cost. 
 
C.8.  Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
Please refer to Annex X


---
*Page 26*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 54 
	
	D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
89. With a debt of about 62% of its  GDP (IMF, 2015), Pakistan i s among the most indebted countries in the world. 
According to Moody’s, in 2014, it had a considerable credit ris k and was rated Caa1, but it was recently upgraded to B3 
which shows an improvement in the government effectiveness. Thi s very high level of indebtedness prevents the 
government from borrowing to inv est in climate change adaptatio n. 
 
90. However, the need for investm ent to adapt to the increased occurrence of GLOFs in Pakistan is made manifest 
following the impacts of the previous floods and the obvious la ck of preparedness of the affected populations. Indeed, 
organizations – government, private sector, charities and inter national donors – investing in disaster management have 
mainly invested in disaster recovery rather than preparedness. Pakistan, therefore, needs GCF funding to operate a 
transformational change and to help increase the adaptation of these vulnerable populations in order to avoid facing the 
consequences of GLOF. This investment is urgent considering the  expected increasing occurr ence of these disasters. 
 
91. The intervention aims to re duce the vulnerability of the lo cal community to climate-induced changes (especially 
the threat of glacial lake outburst floods) thus reduces the fi nancial stress on government coffers in terms of the financial 
burden of funding emergency relief and rehabilitation activitie s in the aftermath of a disaster. There is no direct financial 
return for the Government of Pakistan or the implementing agenc y. In addition, GCF funding will not further indebt the 
country. On the contrary, we bel ieve it will generate substanti al economic benefits that will translate into a more robust 
local economy in the medium to long term. The government of GB has estimated an annual savings of US$ 1.2 million 
from outcomes the GCF proj ect activities will deliver.  
 
92. GCF funding will not crowd ou t local funding as the project  mix as proposed here, i.e. one that focuses on long 
run climate change adaptation, i s not something that is traditi onally financed by local private and public sector entities. 
This is especially true in light of the fact that many of the b enefits of the proposed project are in fact non-financial (i.e.  
non-pecuniary returns), rather e conomic benefits that do not ac crue as revenues. GCF funding is necessary in this 
scenario. 
 
93. Finally, the risk premium ha s not been quantified in this c ase. However, given that int erventions have already 
been successfully piloted, the Government of Pakistan is certai n of its ability to scale up (as proposed he re) without 
significant additional risks. The Government believes that it h as a strong case for success given previous experiences; 
therefore, there is no risk pr emium in exceedance of what has b een previously tolerated. Also, access to GCF fund gives 
the government the ability to continue and scale up the public support that has been provided to the vulnerable 
communities in GB and KP.  
 
94. GCF resources to address GLO F risks not only impulse sustai nable development for communities in rural areas, 
more importantly send a strong political signal in other GLOF-p rone countries in the Himalayas and Andes that 
integrating adaptation into pl anning tools and structures is pa ramount to avoid human losses and livelihoods assets. In 
addition, all the information and experiences generated will pr ovide knowledge and best practices to other communities 
in GLOF-prone regions, to bette r understand and ad dress such im pacts increasing the visibility of the GCF.   
D.2. Exit Strategy  
95. Sustainability is a ssociated with the capacity of local com munities and of local and regional authorities to influence 
collective decisions regarding t he implementation of policies a nd activities to address climate change impacts. For this 
result the foundation for sustainability are the community-inst itutional partnerships that will be built among MCC, 
provincial line and planning departments, CBOs, NGOs and commun ities in GB and KP to  address GLOF risks.  
 
96. In this regard, the project w ill facilitate the incorporati on of GLOF risks into development plans and development 
of provincial adaptation action plans in diverse sectors (DRM, agriculture, livestock, and water) based on a multi-
stakeholder approach that will guar antee the institutional supp ort of project actions and results after the project is 
completed. This will be further s trengthened by articulating pr ovincial-level climate change coordinating entities with 
Planning and Development Departments involving CBOs, NGOs and E PAs. The project will coordinate the 
communication between different entities but also create commun ication structure for sust ainable continuation of the 
project work in the future.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 54 
	
	D
 
 
 97. The project will provide trai ning in different topics relat ed to climate change adaptati on to staff of local, regional, 
and national-level institutions directly involved in the reduct ion of GLOF risks targeting women and monitoring (pre-post 
training assessments etc.) the pr ocess. Improved institutional knowledge and skills will be instrumental in the 
development and implementation o f adaptation measures during th e life of the project and in t he future, as well as for the 
replication of successful activi ties in other areas of Northern  Pakistan and neighboring countr ies threaten by GLOF risks. 
 
98. Regarding the financial sustai nability strategy for the loc al-level early warning system, the Pakistan 
Meteorological Department (PMD) will incorporate in its general  operation budget all associated costs related to the 
involvement of PMD in the EWS after the project is completed as  stated in the agreement between ongoing GLOF 
project and the PMD. This will in clude the incorporation of the  AWS and river discharges sensors that will provide 
information for the local EWS (Activity 2.1 and 2.2) as part of  PMD’s monitoring network. As such, the gathering, 
analysis, and dissemination of all climate-related information to be generated though the project will be done as part of 
PMD’s functions during and after the project conclusion. This w ill allow for the continued generation of information to 
feed the EWS, hydrological mode lling, as well as generation of flood scenarios for GB and KP. 
 
99. As for the small-scale infr astructures to reduce the risks of floods (Output 2.3) the sust ainability of interventions 
will be achieved by incorporating the adaptation measures as pa rt of the federally-administered territory of GB and KP 
programming budgets to cover for maintenance costs. 	As per LOA/MOA, the Beneficiary Community or Govt. 
Department will be resp onsible for the Oper ation and Maintenanc e of Infrastructure and Technology. 
 
100.   The community-based revolv ing fund established by the GL OF I project financed by  the Adaptation Fund 
(Output 2.4) is financial sustainable by only disbursing payout s preceding or following an emergency and is being repaid 
over time by its enrollees. Activities covered, fund management , and disbursal and repayment mechanisms are 
formalized and will be expanded with GCF resources. 
 
101.   The adaptation measures that are being proposed and that  will directly benefit local communities and respond 
to their adaptation needs were identified jointly with members of the local communities in the target area. That said, 
during implementation, community  groups, community members, and  women participation will be further fostered and 
strengthened through the implem entation of concrete adaptation measures. This approach, which includes capacity-
building and awareness-raising related to climate change adapta tion, will empower the partici pating social groups and 
will promote social organization for the development and implem entation of strategies to reduce risk related to GLOF. In 
addition, these interventions will promote alternatives for inc ome generation and food production to enable individuals to 
better cope with the impacts of climate variability increasing the ownership and su stainability of these interventions.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
                            EXPECTED PERFOR MANCE AGAINST INVEST MENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 54 
	
	E
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/progra mme to contribute to the achieve ment of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential  
102. The proposed interventions have been tailored and agreed u pon with beneficiaries to address climate 
change impacts and GLOF risks by p reventing loss of lives and c ommunity infrastructure based on a holistic approach 
in all 7 districts of Gilgit-Baltistan and five districts in Kh yber Pakhtunkhwa Province, th us contributing to a climate-
resilient sustainable development in the long-term.  
 
103. Overall, the project will cont ribute to Fund level impact of increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of 
the most vulnerable people affected by climate related disaster s and variability through the replication of 
demonstrated adaptation measures, empowering beneficiaries to a ddress climate-induced disasters including risks 
from GLOF.   
 
104. Please refer to the Project Logframe and Economic Analysis  for the assumptions and estimates of the 
impact potential. Contributing to the Fund Level impacts: 
Lives saved over 25 years of pro ject life = 93; 50% EWS efficac y 
Present value over 25 years of p roject life of avoided housing stock damage = $9.7 million; 50% FPW efficacy 
Present value over 25 years of p roject life of avoided housing stock damage = $12,251,174.98 
 
105. The proposed project will benef it 348,171 women and girls and 348,171 men and boys, totaling 696,342 
People on average directly (5 districts in KP and 7 in GB) and about 29,233,000 indirect beneficiaries, of whom half 
are women and girls. The projec t therefore benefits about 15% o f the total population of Pakistan, estimated at 185 
million as at 2014 (World Bank data). 
 
106. The project outcome will str engthen adaptive capacity and reduce exposure to cli mate risks posed by 
climate change impacts and GLOF r isks through the increased tec hnical capacity of provincial and line departments to 
integrate CC and GLOF risks into development plans, tools and b udgets and by expanding the Pakistan 
Meteorological Department’s EWS  based on hydrological modelling  and flood scenarios. The project will directly 
benefit 348,171 men and 348,171 women through expanded EWS, pro tective infrastructure, and community-based 
disaster risk management. 
 
107. The project will strengthen sub-national institutional cap acities to plan and implement climate change and 
disaster-resilient development pathways as proposed outputs and  activities will develop the capabilities of local level 
institutions (DRM, Agriculture, Livestock and Water sector in t he Departments of Gilgit Baltistan and Chitral) and 
federal level institutions (Min istry of Kashmir Affairs and Gil git Baltistan, Ministry of Env ironment and National Disaster 
Management Authority) to incorporate climate change adaptation considerations into development plans in GB and 
KP. The project will indirectly benefit all districts in GB and  KP, totaling 29,233,000 people of whom half are women 
and girls. 
 
108. The project will contribute to  the reduction in vulnerabil ity to GLOF risks by enh ancing adaptive capacity 
and resilience of vulnerable subsistence farmers and flood-risk  prone communities through community-based EWS to 
increase communities’ adaptive capacity. AWS and river discharg e sensors will feed info rmation into Pakistan 
Meteorological Department network for hydrological modelling to  develop flood scenarios to expand the EWS to 12 
districts in KP and GB, direc tly benefiting 696,342 people. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
 • Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 
(reduced vulnerability or increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender Total Direct: 696,342 
Indirect + Direct: 29,233,000  
Percentage 
(%) Direct: 0.38%


---
*Page 29*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 54 
 
	
	E
(adaptation only) Indirect + Direct: 15.79%  
109. The total number of direct beneficiaries are the members o f 37 communities among the 12 districts 
considered the most vulnerable and targeted for the interventio ns described here, based on physical danger from 
GLOF risks, socioeconomic asses sment, and current lack of capac ity  to adapt. 
 
110. Given that both the main problem (GLOF flooding) and core interventions (EWS, prote ctive infrastructure, 
and community-based disaster risk management) operate at the va lley level, direct beneficiaries are considered to 
comprise the total populations of each of the 37 communities id entified, totaling 696,342 people, but the project 
results will be distributed to a wider audience via different c ommunication channels and the project will enhance an 
awareness on climate change for many more people than the direc t beneficiaries alone. 
 
111. Indirect beneficiaries include the entire populations of K P and GB, who benefit from i nstitutional capacity 
building and climate policies, a ction plans, and sectoral (e.g.  agriculture and water) management plans being 
developed at the sub-national l evel totaling 29,233,000 people representing 15% of national population in Pakistan. 
 
112. An explanation of how benefi ciaries are quantified for eac h activity is prov ided in Annex XIII.  
 
113. A 2014 analysis of GLOF risks and management strategies in  three similarly situated countries – Nepal, 
Bhutan, and China – identified a number of best practices for G LOF risk reduction interventions4. These include 
commitment to local initiatives and greater community participa tion, improved GLOF mapping and data availability, 
strengthened institutions, and deployment of EWS and small-scal e infrastructure (protective walls, check dams, 
spillways, slope stabilization, r e-forestation) in communities of high GLOF risk. The study also noted key remaining 
barriers to the success of GLOF m anagement strategies in these countries, which include lack of specific inclusion of 
GLOFs into policy frameworks, and addressing GLOF risk linkages  to gender issues, natural resource management, 
and long-term food security. 
 
114. The activities within the pr oposed project in Pakistan (Se e Section C.3) build on the best practices and 
address the key barriers identifi ed in this analysis of compara ble contexts. These interventions will be rolled out in 12 
GLOF-affected districts, which in total contain a population of  7.1 million people (696,342 of which live in the target 
communities). As a comparative benchmark indicator, the Compreh ensive Disaster Risk Management Programme 
(CDRMP) assigned to UNDP through an inter-agency initiative in Nepal covers 13 districts with a total population of 
6.1 million. The CDRMP also combines initiatives focused on ins titutional capacity building, community-based DRM 
measures and training, and the in stallation of EWS in its proje ct districts (Iqbal, 2014). 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed acti vity can catalyze impact beyon d a one-off project/pro gramme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a nume rical multiple and supporting rationale)  
115. The project presents a holi stic model of climate-resilient  development to enable one region in Pakistan to 
manage the risks from GLOFs and other impacts of climate change , incorporating top-down regulatory support, 
bottom-up community preparedness, and long-term planning for su stainable and climate-resilient use of natural 
livelihood assets. These activities, working in concert with ea ch other and existing initiatives on the ground for 
livelihoods development, greatly enhance the region’s endogenou s adaptive capacity. The barrier each activity 
addresses, and its ability to support strengthened adaptive cap acity and reduced exposure to  risks, is illustrated in the 
theory of change presented below. 
																																																													
4 Iqbal, Aftab (2014). Analysis of Disaster Risk Reduction Init iatives From Bhutan, Nepal & China: To Inform and Document Risk Assessment 
& Planning Strategies for Future GLOF Initiatives in Pakistan.  Report from Adaptation Fund-supported UNDP project “Reducing R isks and 
Vulnerabilities from Glacier Lak e Outburst Floods in Northern P akistan”


---
*Page 30*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 54 
 
	
	E
 
116. The project districts cover  99% of the glaciated area of P akistan, and targets all those communities which 
are currently most vulnerable to GLOF events. Therefore, given that GLOF risks within Pakistan are idiosyncratic to 
these project sites, specific co re activities, such as GLOF EWS  and protective structures, may not be directly 
replicable in a national contex t. However, the design of and le ssons learned from the impl ementation and use of these 
components may prove useful in developing response and prepared ness measures in other vulnerable communities 
where GLOF risks are present across the Himalaya, Hindu-Kush, K arakoram, Tien Shan, and Andes mountain 
ranges. 
 
117. Further, the model that the pr oject presents – combining s ub-national institutional capacity building and 
support with hard and soft adapt ation measures to address risks  specific to particular communities – may be easily 
scaled up and replicated within Pakistan. Following the 18th Am endment, institutional responsibility for addressing 
climate change has been devolved to the provincial level, but l ike in KP and GB, there has been little progress on 
institutional support and planning for climate change and disas ter risk management in the other provinces of Pakistan 
– Punjab, Balochistan, and Si ndh, where 1,332 people recently d ied from a major heatwave in June 2015. Following 
this project as a model, disaster risk management and climate c hange policies and integrated action plans can be 
developed at the provincial level in concert with hard and soft  adaptation measures, and natural resource 
management plans, tailored to speci fic risks present in these o ther provinces. 
 
118. Within the project area, the activities will catalyze impa cts well beyond the scope of the 5-year project. 
Based on our economic analysis, benefits from avoided loss of l ife and property and livelihoods developments will 
continue to increase over 25 y ears, with an overall net interna l rate of return (IRR) fo r the project of 24.6%. 
 
119. In non-monetary terms, in t he holistic approach of the pro ject, activity streams feed off each other to 
produce and maintain a meaningful paradigm shift that enables t he long-term resilience of  the region. For example, 
slope stabilization through re-vegetation would not be sustaina ble beyond a one-off investment in the absence of a 
natural resource management plan. This project ties this ecosys tem-based adaptation measure with the 
mainstreaming of climate change risks and solutions at an insti tutional level within sub-national agriculture 
departments and environmental protection agencies. Further, it capacitates communities to pursue alternative 
livelihoods which are less demanding of natural resources and m ore resistant to climate change, catalyzing a shift in


---
*Page 31*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 54 
 
	
	E
land, water, and natural resource use practices. Together, thes e activities ensure that the forest resources planted for 
slope stabilization and their intrinsic protective value agains t GLOFs and other climate risks are conserved in the long 
term. 
 
120. Similar linkages are presen t between other project activit ies – for example, inviting engagement of micro- 
credit lenders in the region could enable individuals to pursue  other sustainable and climate-resilient livelihoods not 
covered by the programmatic or  temporal scope of this project; and drip irrigation systems to  enhance long-term water 
security could also support alternative livelihoods development  in addition to reducing pressures on water supplies 
required for natural resource conservation. 
 
Indicative numerical multiple 
121. According to WWF5, the countries at risk of GLOF ar e the countries of the Himala yas – Bhutan, Nepal, China 
(Tibet), India and Pakistan – as w ell as the countries of the A ndes – Peru, Bolivia and Vene zuela. However only in the 
Himalayas the risk of catastrophic flooding due to glacier melt  is considered severe, where in the Andes, the risk 
incurred by glacier melt resides  mainly in water supply issues.  
 
122. The population in  the highland areas o f the HTP (Himalayan -Tibetan Plateau) it is estimated approximately in
30 million people6. Communities in this area ar e bearing additional stresses due to global warming, “leading to shifting 
tree lines and biodiversity loss as well as increased hazards f rom GLOFs” (Manton, Stevenson, 2014). This area is 
particularly at risk form GLOFs, counting up to 151 potentially  dangerous glacial lakes (ISDR, GFDRR, WB, 2010) – 
excluding the 52 potentially danger ous lakes in Pakistan.  
 
123. Unfortunately, only few studi es have provided estimations of the risks that some specific areas face in the 
countries subject to GLOF.  
 
124. A study from WB’s GFFDR7  has estimated the probable imp acts for the 3 riskiest lakes i n Nepal in terms of 
GLOFs as well as for a transbor der lake between Tibet and Nepal .  
 
125. In Nepal, 16,754 people are es timated to be highly exposed  to a potential risk of fl ood while almost 4 million 
people are moderately exposed only by these three lakes (Imja T sho, Tsho Rolpa and Thulagi) with about US$ 459.6 
million of assets exposed8. Concerning the transborder lake – Lumu Chimi Lake – a total o f 16,313 people are highly 
exposed and 727,185 are moderately  affected by GLOF risks with an estimated total of US$ 188.81 million of assets 
exposed.  
 
126. A study has also be conduc ted in Bhutan, in Punakha-Wangdi  Valley and Chamkhar Valley, in the context of 
a UNDP-GEF project, which estim ated the total population at ris k of 3,835 people. 
 
127. Finally, even though the Andea n countries are less at risk  of GLOFs than the Himalayan countries9, after 
the lake Palcacocha had filled beyond its capacity record, that  100,000 residents of Huaraz in Peru were endangered 
of a lake outflow due to glacial  lake melting (Perez, 2013).  
 
128. As the proposed project will provide lessons learned and e xperiences in addressing risks from GLOF within 
neighboring countries, we estimate that the indicative numerica l multiplier of the number of potential beneficiaries will 
be approximately 30,000 million people living in the highland a reas of the Himalayan-Tibetan Plateau (Please see 
Annex XIII). 
 
																																																													
5 http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/aboutcc/problems/impacts/g laciers/   
6 Manton, and Stevenson, “Climate in Asia and the Pacific: Secur ity, Society and Sustainability”, Ed. Springer, 2014, page 299.  
7	http://www.unisdr.org/files/14048_ICIMODGLOF.pdf  
8	http://www.icimod.org/dvds/2011 04_GLOF/reports/final_report.pdf   
9	http://na.unep.net/geas/getuneppagewitharticleidscript.php?arti cle_id=104  (box 2)


---
*Page 32*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 54 
 
	
	E
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
129. Results from the project will be disseminated both within and outside of GB and KP through a number of 
existing information-sharing networks and forums. MCC (Executin g Entity) conceived this project as a pivotal 
experience for developing tools and information to reduce the v ulnerability of local communities to the effects of 
climate change, and to facilitate the incorporation of adaptati on measures into policy and planning processes at the 
local and regional levels. At the national level, the project w ill capture and disseminate lessons learned through the 
MCC’s web page. This webpage was developed to provide access to  the public for climate change-related information 
and to improve national capacity to address GLOF risks. In this  way the project results will be shared with a wide 
variety of stakeholders at the national level The technical off icers of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Resources, 
the Ministry of Food Security and Research and the Ministry of Water & Power working on areas where climate 
change will have adverse impact will be the key ministries for disseminating the results of the project.  
 
130. At the local level, the pr oject will establish and strengt hen provincial coordinat ing entities with 
Departments of Planning and Deve lopment to coordinate climate c hange response across key sectors (Activity 1.2). 
Community-based organizations, non-governmental organizations, community members, community leaders and 
EPAs will be the foundation to ident ify lessons learned from th e project and share knowledge among stakeholders 
and will be the basis for replicating successful experiences at  the local level. Additionally, lessons learned will be 
shared locally through printed material (booklets and leaflets)  and videos, which will be developed as part of the 
planned activities for Activity 1.2 for sharing information abo ut the successful experiences  and lessons learned from 
the project and its potential for replication in other location s. Utilization of telecommunica tion technology ranging from 
commercial radio to mobile phon es will ensure that the material s reach community beneficiaries.  
 
131. The project will build capacit ies of provincial and line p lanning departments to incorporate climate change 
adaptation considerations into and development plans for the ta rget districts (Activity 1.1) that have the potential to be 
replicated to other regions. 
 
132. Lessons learned will also be shared regionally and globall y through the Adaptation Learning Mechanism  
(ALM), which is a collaborative knowledge-sharing platform for sharing adaptation experiences and good practices 
through an open/global learning process. The UNDP is operating the ALM in close partnership with the UNFCCC, 
UNEP, WB, GEF, Ada ptation Fund and s pecialized UN a gencies.
E.2.3. Contribution to the creat ion of an enabling environment


---
*Page 33*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 54 
 
	
	E
133. The project has the potential  to enable the political envi ronment for long-term ad aptation and resilience 
by integrating climate change ad aptation considerations into ke y economic sectors, such as water, agriculture, and 
disaster management. This intervention is timely, as there is a n increased opportunity to mainstream climate change 
into policy making given the following in Pakistan: i) useful d evelopments in climate change management are 
underway now that the MCC is established and provides a good in stitutional base to steer climate change actions 
including transmitting the Nati onal Climate Change Policy to th e sector ministries; ii) t here have been improvements in 
overall economic development; and iii) the government and vario us reform initiatives are politically more stable.  
 
134. The project also creates a n enabling environment for priva te sector engagement and development. 
Directly, livelihood improvement s (e.g. drip irrigation), addit ions and alternatives will produce financial benefits for 
individual smallholders and SMEs throughout the project area. T hough additional income generated through these 
activities is minimal at the project scale, the capital it prov ides helps build individuals’ capacity to adapt. Indirectly, 
engagement with micro-credit lenders and insurance companies wi ll complement ongoing activities through the Small 
and Medium Enterprise Development Authority (SMEDA) and Agricul tural Support Fund (ASF) to catalyze business 
growth in the region, enabling private sectors to access capita l and manage risks from GLOFs and other climate 
impacts along their operations and supply chains. By enhancing their capacity to operate, the project enables the 
sustained participation and growth  of private sector actors as part of the climate -resilient developmen t pathway for the 
region. 
 
135. The proposal includes a number  of innovative activity stre ams. These include: 
 Expansion of EWS network and GL OF risk mitigation infrastructu re to 10 new districts 
 Demonstration of ecosystem-based adaptation measures to manage  climate risks in a mountain context 
 Community engagement and empowe rment to monitor and manage the ir own climate risks, e.g. through the 
capacitation of hazard monitoring watch groups and expansion of  community-managed disaster risk 
management funds, rather than relyi ng solely on top-down or inf rastructure-based measures. The 
community disaster risk managem ent funds have tr aditionally bee n mostly used by community members to 
recover from GLOF rela ted shocks and losses to their assets and  livelihoods.  GCF r esources will be used 
by communities for addressing long-term adaptation needs.  Comm unities will be sensitized towards 
integrating climate change adaptat ion measures into disaster pr eparedness activities.  
 The development of comprehensive climate change action plans a nd policies at the sub-national level, a 
process which can be replicated in other provinces of Pakistan 
 A holistic approach that combines institutional capacity build ing, hard and soft meas ures to respond to 
immediate threats, and liveli hoods improvements to enable long- term adaptive capacity 
 The utilization of information and communication technologies (ICTs) for disaster risk management and 
response and the further optimizat ion of EWS networks and commu nication channels 
 Strengthening and formalizing in formal risk sharing structures  (i.e. the Community Based Disaster Risk 
Management Fund) to support community resilience
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
136. Output 1 will strengthen the capacity of sub-national inst itutional and regulatory systems to integrate 
climate change and disaster risks into planning and development . Specifically, it bridges gaps in the current regulatory 
framework surrounding climate-re sponsive planning and developme nt: 
 
‐ Horizontally, across relevant line departments. The MCC and NC CP provide a clear mandate to take action 
to reduce vulnerability to extreme  weather and other adverse im pacts of climate change in Pakistan. 
However, climate change and natural disasters cannot be compart mentalized simply  as environmental 
issues. Rather, they are cross-c utting issues that must be inte grated within the activities of other sectors, 
notably water and agriculture. This project will build the capa city of sub-national water and agriculture line 
departments (as well as EPAs, disas ter risk management (DRM) bo dies, and planning agencies) to utilize 
climate change and disaster infor mation and mainstream associat ed risks into their development plans. 
‐ Vertically, between the federal and sub-national levels. Thoug h the KP EPA’s Climate Ch ange Cell is tasked 
with mainstreaming climate change into provincial policies, str ategies, and actions , this process is 
incomplete (e.g. the absence o f climate change in the SEAs), an d the KP government lacks an analog or


---
*Page 34*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 54 
 
	
	E
complement to the NCCP. In GB, t he federal NCCP applies and the  GB government recognizes the need to 
protect investments and ecosyste m functions against the impacts  of climate change, but specific actions for 
GB are not yet fully outlined or i mplemented. Using sectoral pl ans as a basis, this p roject will produce 
integrated climate change policie s and action plans (with parti cular inclusion of GLOF risks) at the sub-
national level for KP and GB, which are linked to the federal N CCP. 
 
137. The project will ensure coordination among different depar tments with regard to climate change response, 
and in developing integrated climate change action plans. Furth er, the project expands beyond the federal and sub-
national regulatory systems to c oordinate activities and inform ation with local governments, NGOs, and community 
organizations, and engage them as key actors in climate and DRM  initiative.  
E.3.  Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and ec onomic co-benefits, includin g gender-sensitive development impact  
138. The fundamental benefit of t he project is to save human li ves and property through  the operation of EWS 
and protective structures. Secondly, the project will promote s lope stabilization through ecosystem-based 
interventions. Nevertheless, the project will also produce sign ificant co-benefits in terms of income and business 
generation, community capacity-building, improved quality of hu man life, sustainable and climate-resilient land use, 
reversal of environmental degradation, and women’s empowerment,  as follows: 
 
Economic benefits 
139. The project will generate empl oyment opportunities for loc al communities both during and beyond the 
timeframe of the project. Labor will be sourced locally for the  construction of hard and soft infrastructure, such as 
gabion walls, check dams, spillways, river gauge stations, weat her stations, and reforestation and slope stabilization 
programmes. The engagement of microcredit lenders and insurance  companies, and development of an index-based 
insurance scheme, helps create an enabling environment to incub ate enterprise growth, in coordination with other 
existing initiatives (e.g. through SMEDA and ASF). Climate chan ge will have an impact on food security in areas 
where employment opportunities in ecosystem services sector are  scarce. The project will support the communities in 
protecting their natural resourc es by strengthening the capacit ies to sustainably use ecosystem services and thus 
generating new businesses that a re not entirely dependent on na tural resources. 
 
140. The project will strengthen local communities through GLOF  awareness and response training and the 
formation of village hazard watch groups. In addition, communit y leaders will be direct beneficiaries from the technical 
skills development and training program of the project. The tra ining will enable these community leaders to assist 
villagers in development and implementation of local land use p lans. Local NGOs/CBOs will have an improved 
understanding of community based and participatory approaches f or introduction and implementation of climate 
change adaptations at the local level. The formation of local c ommunity-based organizations will enable farmers and 
women to receive small grants for addressing GLOF impacts. 
 
Environmental Benefits 
141. The project produces a num ber of environmental and ecosyst em co-benefits. Much of the natural state 
of slopes and floodplains in the target valleys has been degrad ed. Bioengineering and reforestation not only creates 
natural buffers for flooding and reduces risks of landslides, d ebris slides, and avalanches, but these activities can also 
restore the natural biodiversity of the region. The project wil l coordinate with other initiatives (e.g. the Mountains and 
Markets project) focused on alte rnative livelihoods and sustain able harvest of non-timber forest products (e.g. 
medicinal plants) to tie ecosystem conservation to income gener ation. Together, these activities help reduce 
dependence on natural resources, improve overall land productiv ity (both for pasture and farmlands), increase the 
functional integrity of the natural landscape, and reverse degr adation of land and water resources, resulting in greater 
resilience to climate change im pacts both overall and in the co nstituent productive areas. 
 
142. Healthier ecosystems provide higher crop yields, strengthe ned agricultural practices, and reduced crop 
losses. Ultimately, this will contribute to enhanced food secur ity and resilient livelihoods and ecosystems. GCF 
resources will also yield environmental benefits through streng thened ecosystem resilience and improved soil


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 54 
 
	
	E
retention. 
 
143. Indirectly, the planting o f trees will increase carbon abs orption and, therefore, r educe the impacts of 
climate change. Secondly, the pl anting of tress to reduce lands lide and provide soil protection will result, in time, in the 
reduction of infrastructure, including homes, being destroyed. Further benefits can then accrue, including reductions 
of raw materials needed to repair homes or build new homes and of waste material after homes are damaged.  The 
prior two issues will also be di rect results of the programme t hrough the development of small-scale hard 
infrastructure, particularly when using environmental friendly construction materials. 
 
Social Benefits 
144. With respect to social bene fits, the programme will provid e the communities with improved information to 
allow them to make decisions prior to, during and post GLOF eve nts.  It will also provide valuable data that will allow 
for future planning in terms of structural planning of houses, the management of their agricultural crop, etc., as well as 
how communities need to adapt thei r current activities to meet the increasing threat of climate change.  With this 
information, it is highly likely that lives will be saved and i t will improve two-way comm unication me chanisms and 
inclusion of resilience building projects in the socio-economic  planning process. 
 
145. The programme will provide the communities with improved i nformation to allow them to make decision 
prior to, during and post GLOF events.  It will also provide va luable data that will allow for future planning, in terms of 
structural planning of houses, t he management of their agricult ural crop etc as well as how communities need to 
adapt their current activities to m eet the increasing threat of  climate change.  With this information, it is highly likely 
that lives will be saved and it w ill improve two-way communicat ion mechanisms and inclusion of resilience building 
projects in the socio-economic planning process. 
 
146. The gender dimension will be  taken into account throughout  the project in order to better understand how 
women empowerment can strengthen project interventions and sust ainable development in the targeted area. In this 
sense, the project will mainstream a gender perspective into th e all activities and gender balance will be taken in to 
account when hiring and engaging the project team. Traditionall y, women have passed on their skills in water and 
forest management and the management of biodiversity. Climate c hange affects women differently than men, and so 
climate strategies must consider gendered patterns in order to be effective. Through experience, women have 
acquired valuable knowledge to effectively contribute to the id entification of appropriate adaptation techniques and it 
is important to understand how the gender approaches to strengt hen sustainable livelihoods can also make initiatives 
more effective. In the targeted areas, women are primarily resp onsible for household tasks, including collecting 
firewood and water. Based on the Action Gender Plan, women quot as have been established for the active 
participation of women during the project implementation, from project management unit to all activities supported by 
GCF resources such as particip ation  in DRM committees and vill age hazard watch groups and trainings provided on 
climate change, GLOF events, D RR, business development, slope s tabilization programme, etc. 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country an d population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of countr y and beneficiary groups (Adaptat ion only)  
147. According to a recent Climate Public Expenditure and Insti tutional Review (CPEIR) published in April 
2015, climate change has been recognized in Pakistan as a core component of the economic growth model which is 
required to be addressed to foster economic growth, poverty red uction and well-being of the population. 
Indeed, Pakistan is highly threatened by changing monsoon patte rns, melting glaciers (which normally supply 40% of 
inflow to the entire Indus Rive r system and supports 90% of Pak istan’s agriculture sector and almost 30% of its power 
sector), increased occurrence of  extreme weather events (floods  and droughts), and decreased capacity of water 
reservoirs. Due to these impacts, the total costs of adaptation  in Pakistan are currently e stimated at around $6.5 
billion per year (2015) but expec ted to increase to $26.4 billi on by 2050 under a business-as-usual scenario, based on 
a UNFCCC National Economic and Environmental Development Study.  Timely preparedness interventions are 
needed now to build adaptive capacity and reduce future climate  damages. 
 
148. Within Pakistan, the beneficia ry region covered by this pr oject is particularly vulnerable, as demonstrated


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 54 
 
	
	E
by recent events. From 16-22 July  2015, in the process of draft ing this proposal, the region  was struck by  major GLOF 
events triggered by monsoon rain s and rapid snowmelt. Initial a ssessments indicate that  at least 285,000 people have 
been affected in Chitral District, KP alone, including 3 fatali ties. Another 2 fatalities are reported from Diamer District, 
GB. Within the entire project re gion, at least 389 houses have been damaged (many completely destroyed) in addition 
to 17 bridges, 11 power stations , and 109 drinking water supply  structures. 
 
149. Since 1996, it is estimat ed that there have been a total o f 575 human deaths, 7,028 livestock killed, and 
10,121 buildings (homes, shops, hotels, schools) partially or c ompletely damaged by GLOFs and related hazards 
within the 12 project districts,  based on field reports prepare d for this proposal. These are illustrated on annual basis 
in the graphs below. 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
150. In spite of the adoption of t he National Disaster Plan Res ponse in 2010, Pakistan has not succeeded in 
building resilient communities and promoting disaster risk prep aredness as demonstrated by the floods in 2010, 2011 
and 2012 (J. Ahmad et al., 2014). T he investments in disaster m anagement from government, pr ivate sector, charities 
as well as international donors have been largely used for disa ster recovery instead of prevention (M.A. Kahn, 2014). 
The 2010 flood resulted in US$9.7 billion, representing 5.7% of  Pakistan’s GDP, however, the observation of 
institutional gaps and regulatory  weaknesses revealed that thes e losses could have been highly reduced through 
improved disaster preparedness and response (S. Deen, 2015). 
 
151. Vulnerable populations are not able to face the costs of a daptation due to their low resources and the 
high costs of adaptation. The av erage household income within t he 37 project communities is estimated at US $1,126 
per year, compared to a national  average of US $3,796 per year.  Based on one study of multi-dimensional poverty10, 
38.8% of all people in the 12 dist ricts covered by the project are living in poverty, compared to a national poverty 
index of 27.8% (See Annex XIII).  
 
152. Financial resource s at the institutional level are also se verely lacking to manage this kind of climate 
vulnerability, and external financing, particularly through gra nts, is vital. G-B is entirely dependent on yearly grants 
from the Federal Government; it does not have a revenue base of  its own. However, G-B has the most focused policy 
commitment for climate change with the highest expenditure. Hen ce, there is a critical need to allocate external funds 
on climate change to interventions in GB and it is evident that  the prioritization of climate change and the commitment 
are strong.  
 
153. The geographic location of KP makes it particularly vulner able to gradual rising temperatures. This creates 
																																																													
10 Arif, G.M. Poverty Profile of Pakistan , produced by the Pakistan Institute of Development Economics ( PIDE) and the Benazir Income 
Support Programme. Available at http://www.bisp.gov.pk/PIDERepo rts/poverty.pdf


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 54 
 
	
	E
the need for fiscal space for an effective climate response. Th e poor and uncertain law and order and security have 
taken a toll on the province’s e conomic activity and shrunk the  tax base. However, greater  than 98% of climate-related 
investments by KP are adaptation related, which is high compare d to the Federal level. Resorting to external 
financing, whether foreign loans of Federal Government loans, r uns the risk of creating debt for future generations. 
Hence external grants to cover adaptation needs are critical. 
 
154. The need for an effective EW S and institutional capacity i n the country has been critical – even though a 
warning system was available during the 2010 floods, only 10% o f the affected villages had received advanced 
warning due to limited technical capacity of the system and ina bility of district authorities to transmit information to the 
community level (P. Gonzalez, e t al., 2014). The project, by ex panding the previous interv entions carried out by GLOF 
I to improve technical capacity and community-based EWS and the  GLOF response measures, will ensure that the 
targeted vulnerable populations receive adequate and timely inf ormation that will ensure their preparedness and 
response in future flash flood events. 
 
155. As of today, institutions still need to be strengthened to  improve the resilience o f the populations to climate 
change. The severity of the impacts of the recent floods has be en an indicator of this institutional failure, in particular 
due to the improper implementation of adaptation plans (M. Shab bir, et al., 2014). In addition, flood-prone areas are 
large and numerous in Pakistan, which implies a unique focus fo r preparedness activities; however, Pakistan is not 
yet prepared to cope with disasters of the magnitude of GLOF ev ents (J. Karamat, 2010). By strengthening sub-
national institutions, the project will ensure better response and capacity to alleviate the harm from these natural 
hazards. 
E.5.   Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ie s) ownership of, and capacity to impleme nt, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national c limate strategy and coherence w ith existing plans and polic ies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
156. Pakistan is signatory to sev eral multilateral agreements c overing environment, including the three major 
Rio1992 agreements of Conventions on Biological Diversity (CBD) , United Nations  Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), and the convention on Combating Desert ification (UNCCD). 
 
157. The Public Sector Development Programme, under the MCC, is  the main instrument for providing 
budgetary resources for developm ent projects and programmes and  its budget was US $ 115 million in 2013-2014. In 
addition, the Ministry has the Clim ate Finance Unit that is des igned as a focal authority responsible for coordinating 
and implementation of the climate -related initiatives that will  chair the Project Board. 
 
158. The goal of the Climate Change Policy of Pakistan (2011) i s to ensure that climate change is 
mainstreamed in the economically and socially vulnerable sector s of the economy and to steer Pakistan towards 
climate resilient development. The Policy also recommends setti ng up appropriate mechanisms to monitor the 
development of glacial lakes and develop evacuation strategies in case of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOF) for 
vulnerable areas in Pakistan. The proposed GCF project will dir ectly support the federal Climate Change Policy in this 
regard. 
 
159. The project is also aligned with the "Vision 2030" elabora ted by the Pakistan Planning Commission in 
2007, which aims for equitable sharing of environmental benefit s, increasing community management of national 
resources, and integrating environmental issues into socio-econ omic planning to achieve sustainable development. 
 
160. The Government of Pakistan (GoP) ratified the National Cli mate Change Policy (NCCP) in 2012, which aims 
to ensure that CC is mainstreamed in the economically and socia lly vulnerable sectors of the economy, and to steer 
Pakistan towards climate-resilient development. In 2012, the Mi nistry of Climate Change (MCC) expressed an interest 
in undertaking a Climate Public Expenditure and Institutional R eview (CPEIR) to assess the level at which the GoP 
has so far been able to respond to the challenges of CC, and to  identify opportunities for further strengthening its 
response. 
161. The proposed project has been designed and developed with full ownership of the GoP through a series of


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 54 
 
	
	E
consultations, at community, district and national levels. As t he proposed project aims to scale up current ongoing 
activities, consultations were carried out with diverse stakeho lders including government ministries and departments, 
NGOs, Civil Society, private sector and development partners to  obtain input and feedback into the development of 
the proposal. All key partners were consulted individually as w ell as collectively to gain and in-depth understanding of 
the needs and also solicit idea s on how the needs could be addr essed through the proposal . The National Designated 
Authority (NDA) was involved in the entire process. Further det ails on stakeholder engagement are provided in 
Section E.5.3. Noting that the design of the proposal has taken  into consideration the national priorities and relevant 
strategies highlighted above, the NDA has issued a ‘no objectio n’ letter for the submission of the proposal to the GCF. 
As an expression of commitment and ownership, the regional gove rnments also provided co-financing for the project. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entit ies and executing entities t o deliver  
162. UNDP is one of the world’s largest brokers of climate chan ge grants for developing co untries, with a current 
portfolio of $1.34 billion in mit igation and adaptation grant-f inanced projects in over 140 countries, supported by co-
financing of $6.7 billion. 
 
163. UNDP Pakistan-Environment and Climate Change Unit is curre ntly working with the Ministry of Climate 
Change on a number of projects such as: 
‐ Mountain and Markets 
‐ Glacial Lakes Outburst Floods (GLOF) 
‐ IS project- Montreal Protocol 
‐ Sustainable Land Management project 
‐ Comprehensive reduction and elim ination of persistent organic pollutants in Pakistan 
 
164. UNDP Pakistan has also compl eted many projects with the MC C in the areas that have been mentioned as 
separate components under the proposed GLOF-2 project; those ea rlier UNDP interventions with the government 
have proved to be very successful and have also been replicated  in other areas by the government. Under the GLOF-
2 project, UNDP and the government of Pakistan intends to exten d their partnership to di saster-prone areas that 
remain unreached by past effort s but where the threat from GLOF  events is imminent. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civ il society organizations and ot her relevant stakeholders  
165. Local support organizations, councils, and other stakehold ers were consulted during the development of 
this proposal to identify the appropriateness, need, and feasib ility of various activity options, as well as to select the 
communities (identified above) most in need of the project as d irect beneficiaries, based on physical and 
socioeconomic vulner ability (See Annex XIII). This programme pr esents a complement to the activities of local 
stakeholders in the region, which primarily focus on livelihood s development, agriculture, water security and 
sanitation, and business incubation. Disaster risk management a nd long-term resilience is a critical and fundamental 
requirement for the success of all of these activity streams, a nd local stakeholders recognize the value that would be 
added by the initiatives of this programme, from providing the enabling regulatory environm ent to build capacity for 
climate change and DRM, to hard and soft adaptation structures that will help protect, over the long term, the assets 
that these stakeholders create. 
 166. During the project developm ent phase the provincial govern ments (GB and KP) and households living in the 
project area were consulted and interviewed to collect lessons learned from the initial project. In KP the consultation 
meetings were held on the 20th, 22nd, 23rd and 24th of June 201 5. In Gilgit the meetings were held on the 20th, 
22nd, 24th and 27th of June 2015.  Other meetings were organized  on the basis following the proposal development 
with different line departments, stakeholders at provincial lev el and on the national level the team had around 4 
meetings weekly during the entire development process. 
 
167. The funding proposal was prepared in a close cooperation w ith the NDA. On the 26th of May the initial 
project idea was discussed with the NDA and the idea was approv ed by the national authority. The NOC letter was 
received on the 1st of July and the concept was submitted for c omments from the NDA and provincial governments 
before it was submitted to the GCF on the 10th of July. The fun ding proposal was submitted for comments and 
approval to the NDA on the 27th of July and the final proposal was submitted on the 1st of August to the GCF. A 
delegation from the government of Pakistan had a mission to mee t GCF to discuss the readiness and this GLOF


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 54 
 
	
	E
proposals between 15th and 17th o f September in GCF HQ in Songd o, South Korea. 
 
168. In turn, the local knowledg e, support, and experience of t hese stakeholders will be leveraged to support 
the implementation and long-term sustainability of programme ac tivities. A multi-sectoral stakeholder committee will 
be established in each of the district to support the implement ation of the project activiti es, facilitate dialogue on 
GLOFs and coordination among all stakeholders. The implementati on will include a system for effective monitoring 
and enforcement of the process a nd delineation of roles and res ponsibilities among key stakeholders. A brief 
description of some key stakehol ders active in the region and t heir involvement in the programme is outlined below: 
 
‐ Research and Academic Institutions, Karakoram International Un iversity Gilgit, Abdul Wali Khan University, 
Chitral, KPK: provide courses on Glaciology, Snow Hydrology, Me teorology and Natural Disaster 
Management etc. and technical support to identify climate resil ient adaptation and mitigation interventions 
‐ NGOs and CBOs (Aga Khan Foundation, WWF-Pakistan, FOCUS Intern ational, PRCS, Rescue 1122, IUCN 
& Dubani Development Organization etc.): provide technical and financial support, share their experience of 
disaster relief, rehabilitation and community mobilization. The y will also be enlisted to support the field level 
implementation of programme activ ities in their respective area s of expertise.  
‐ Communities (women, men, and youth): the main beneficiaries of  the Programme interventions and 
improvements are the local communities, farmers and pastoralist s. They will actively be engaged in planning 
and implementation of field act ivities that enhance their livel ihoods and increase their resilience to climate 
change impacts and mitigate natural disasters. During consultat ion from the communities, women were 
particularly targeted to gain their input and their voices has been recorded and given preference during each 
stage of the proposal development. Mechanisms to ensure that wo men’s perspectives and needs are 
continually sought out and addressed will be instituted through out the project. Mainstreaming of gender 
considerations will form a component of all trainings and knowl edge-sharing activities associated with project 
implementation.  
E.6.  Efficiency and Effectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, fi nancial soundness of the  proje ct/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency  
Adequacy of financing structure 
169. The GCF grant resources sou ght for this project will help remove key barriers to support investments 
which, due to the primarily publ ic good nature, do not entail a ny revenue generation or signifi cant cost recovery during 
the project duration. The one exception is the community-based revolving fund financed by adaptation fund (Output 
2.4). Even in the community-based revolving fund, cost recovery  is primarily aimed to sustaining the financial 
intervention. The financial and te chnical barriers in Pakistan that prevent capacity strengthening of sub-national 
institutions on climate change and resilience, scaling up of co mmunity-based EWS and GLOF response measures 
and reduced vulnerabilities of critical community resources can  only be removed by public investment financed by 
grant resources. The Government is also seeking these funds fro m global financing instruments such as GCF. As 
such, the public goods nature of this project’s outputs does no t entail revenue generation or significant cost recovery 
from the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries during the  project duration. Hence, a detailed financial analysis of 
this project is not deemed pertinent. 
 
170. The full concessionality of G CF resources requested by the  Government of Pakistan will be paramount 
to remove barriers in the provision and expansion of public goo ds being proposed: EWS and flood control small-scale 
infrastructure. In addition, interventions related to the resto ration of forest ecosystem services, due to its scale and 
approach, do not entail revenue g eneration or cost recovery dur ing the project duration. 
 
171. The financial and technical barriers to address the limite d resources, capacity, and logistical feasibility of 
PMD to expand EWS in remote mountain communities can only be re moved by public investment financed by grant 
resources from international development institutions.  
 
172. Given the small size in popul ation, socio-economic standar ds and remoteness location of these 
communities threaten by GLOF risks, Pakistan’s private sector h as no incentive to invest in the proposed project;


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 54 
 
	
	E
therefore it has been proven diffi cult to receive any co-financ e as the project has not any direct and immediate 
revenue generation potential. H owever, the project will engage with the private sector, especially micro-credit lenders, 
insurance companies, SMEs to e xpand the work of the proposed co mmunity-based disaster risk management fund. 
 
173. The proposed project will benefit 696,342 in 37 communitie s in 12 districts resulting in having a US$60.54 
cost per beneficiary (including co-finance). The proposed inter ventions, using GCF resources will generate economic 
benefits making the project economically viable (See Section F. 1 and Annex XII) with an economic internal rate of 
return (EIRR) of 24.6%.  
 
Efficiency and Effectiveness 
174. The proposed project is build ing upon the experiences, dat a, information and coordination networks 
created by the GLOF I project f inanced by the Adaptation Fund. By expanding scope of proven interventions, based 
on existing institutional and management frameworks, the propos ed project is more cost-effective than the 
implementation of a separate new initiative. Additionally this approach builds upon strengthened local capacities and 
previous experiences that will ma ximize effectiveness of propos ed interventions on which future investments can build 
on. Synergies between the proposed project and current PMD’s EW S for GLOF risks currently covering two districts 
will be used to enhance the cost- effective hiring of specialize d technical staff, coordinati on of data and information, 
training (operations & maintenance of equipment; forecasting te chniques; tailored advisories and warnings), and 
effective use of communications and standard operating procedur es. 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveragi ng and mobilized lo ng-term investm ents (mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
E.6.3. Financial viability


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 54 
 
	
	E
Expected economic rate of return 
175. The proposed interventions a re public goods and do not inv olve revenue generation or cost recovery from 
the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries. For this reaso n, a financial analysis of this project is not considered 
pertinent. The expected economic i nternal rate of return is 24. 64% for this project (see Annex XII for details). 
 Financial viability in the long r un beyond the Fund interventio n 
176. MCC through its divisions will provide technical and manag ement support to implement interventions on 
the ground support to the proposed project through its budget a llocations. PMD will incorporate in its general 
operation budget all associated co sts related to the involvemen t of PMD in the EWS after the project is completed. 
This will include the incorporation of the AWS and river discha rges sensors that will provide information for the local 
EWS as part of PMD’s monitoring network, as such, the gathering , analysis, and dissemination of all climate-related 
information to be generated though the project will be done as part of PMD’s functions during and after the project 
conclusion. This will allow for the continued generation of inf ormation to feed the EWS, hydrological modelling, as well 
as generation of flood sc enarios for GB and KP. 
 
177. The community-based revolvi ng funds under DRM cells (Input  2.4.1) which will be capitalized by a one- 
time endowment of $50,000 from GCF resources, will provide micr o-credit to support GLOF response and 
preparedness activities within these communities only when othe r sources of risk insurance or credit are lacking, and 
relief from the central government is slow to reach. The fund w ill only disburse payouts preceding or following an 
emergency, and is repaid over tim e by its enrollees. The credit  terms typically are – interest rate of 10% per annum 
and a tenor of 1-1.5 years. The fund management cost is 10% whi ch needs to be recovered from the fund. Given that 
this is non-profit making activity funded by a grant, the micro -credit scheme’s interest rate only needs to factor-in fund 
management costs, inflation and loan default risks. However, si nce the interest rate of  10% covers only the fund 
management cost, the net fund resources available for on-lendin g to communities will keep reducing annually. 
Nonetheless, this reduction is likely to be small enough to ens ure the fund’s financial sustainability at a reasonable 
level, if loan repayment rates a re 100%. If repayment rates are  lower, the available fund re sources to communities will 
be lower and hence, it is important for the fund managers to en sure that repayment rates remain high, ideally 95% 
and above to ensure financial sustainability of the fund. If re payment rates are 50% or below , the fund resources will 
deplete rapidly and won’t be sufficient to meet much of the com munities’ requirements beyond the first 1-2 years of 
the project duration. Based on evidence of the ongoing instrume nt in place in Pakistan, the risk of default is low.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
178. UNDP and the Government of P akistan have implemented a pro ject on managing risks associated with 
GLOF, with financing from the Adaptation Fund. This initiative targeted communities in two (2) districts. The proposed 
project is planning to expand the scope of the EWS to 12 distri cts, building upon all the experiences, data, information 
generated and coordination mechanism established. This baseline  will prove beneficial when  acquiring and installing 
AWS and river discharge sensors, when developing hydrological m odelling and flood scenarios and when organizing 
the community around watch groups to disseminate early warnings . Using similar technology as in GLOF I project, 
PMD will have the technical capacity to replace, maintain and r etrofit the technology. 
 
179. The proposed project also adopt s best practices in communi ty engagement based on the support already 
extended to Pakistan. Proposed project will train communities o n GLOF preparedness and response, expand the 
village hazard groups, provide i nputs for land-use and water ma nagement techniques and to restore ecosystems 
services using established channels and platforms during baseli ne. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators  
GCF 
core 
indicators Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investmen t cost / expected lifetime emiss ion reductions 
(mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed proj ect/programme and as a result of the


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINS T INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 54 
 
	
	E
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by  public and private sources ( mitigation only) 
Not applicable 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. e stimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of t he project/programme)


---
*Page 43*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 54 
 
	
	F
F.1.  Economic and Financial Analysis  
180. Key Output: The “Scaling-up Gl acial Lake Outburst Flood (G LOF) risk reduction in Northern Pakistan” 
project aims to scale up interventions that were shown to have impact in a pilot project phase to help reduce the 
vulnerability of mountain communities in Pakistan to climate re lated flood damages. The economic analysis quantified 
a sub-set of project life-span ben efits and costs to produce an  economic net present value and an economic internal 
rate of return. The project is constituted of two components as  described in this document. The economic cost benefit 
analysis covers all 2 components: component 1 (support policy-m aking efforts and strengthen technical capacities to 
address GLOFs risks) and component 2 (which reduces community v ulnerability to climate related flood risk). 
 
181. Quantified Benefits and Costs : The benefits we have includ ed in the analysis are a  subset of the total 
possible benefit stream generated by the intervention. Estimate d benefits associated with Component 2 include (1) 
deaths averted by the installation of the early warning system;  and (2) housing stock damage averted by installation of 
flood protection works, and (3) im proved farm profit from the l ivelihoods intervention through improved irrigation. The 
bulk of benefits are generated by deaths and housing stock dama ge averted. We exclude any gains from the 
community endowment fund as it is unclear what (if any) the inv estment strategy for that fund is. For a more complete 
discussion for quantified benefit s, including benefits resultan t from averted deaths, refer to the Economic Analysis in 
Annex XII (b). 
 
182. Net Present Value (NPV) and Economic Internal Rate of Retu rn (EIRR): The projec t has a positive net 
present value of $11,064,354 and an with an economic internal r ate of return of 15% over a presumed 25 y ears project 
life span (which includes 5 year s of project implementation and  20 years of operation) using a 10% discount rate (all 
values in 2014 terms). Under Component 2, sub-activity EWS gene rated a net present value of $10,290,270 with an 
economic internal rate of return of 18%, while sub-activity Liv elihoods had a net present value of $4,737,938. The bulk 
of costs is incurred during the 5 years of the project implemen tation. Moreover, operational and maintenance 
expenditures (as specified for the five years of project implem entation) were carried forward for the full life of the 
project with an assumption tha t half of those were labor costs.  
 
183. Sensitivity Analysis: The dr ivers of the benefit value str eam are the efficacy of the early warning system, 	
flood protection works and the benefits due to expansion in irr igation (all sub-activities of project Component 2). The 
efficacy of all 3 systems has been set to a conservative 50% (b ased on literature). In terms of switching values, a 
reduction in efficacy of the early warning system from 50% to 3 % results in zero net present value while even a 
reduction in efficacy of the flood protection works from 50% to  0% results in a positive net present value (the flood 
protection works would have to be actively destructive for a ne t present value of zero). So, the early warning system’s 
efficacy is crucial to generating real benefits from this proje ct as a smaller “drop” in assumed efficacy results in 
dramatic reductions in the benefit stream. 	
F.2.  Technical Evaluation   
184. This project has been designed by expanding work of scope from previous GLOF I project to provide EWS 
to communities prone to GLOFs risks with a focus on policy-leve l activities and on sector critical protecting livelihoods 
and reducing the impacts of GLOF and climate related risks: int egrate climate change adaptation into development 
plans, EWS for GLOF risks combined with community-based early w arnings, small-scale infrastructure to protect lives 
and assess from GLOF and support livelihoods of subsistence far mers. 
 
185. The technological approaches to deliver these services hav e been specifically designed based on the 
experiences and results from GLOF I project (See engineering re port from baseline project interventions in Annex II) 
that fit the technical capabilities of PMD to expand its AWS ne twork and reaching out to remote communities. 
Technical specifies, costs of operating and maintaining AWS aft er project closure, providing human resources to 
operate the news AWS have been discussed and agreed with PMD en suring that the project w ill be providing services 
during and after projects ends. 
 
186. New AWS will measure temperat ure, Humidity, wind speed, wi nd direction, solar radiation (incoming & 
outgoing), Precipitation (rainfa ll, snow scale). Precipitation in the form of rainfall is also a crucial indicator for the GLO F


---
*Page 44*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 54 
 
	
	F
triggering phenomena. Thus real time data display from the inst alled stations will be available simultaneously at PMD 
Islamabad Hq. office, Met office GB and KP t, GLOF Project offi ces, and Disaster Management office in GB and KP. 
Based upon the continuous hydro-meteorological monitoring in th e target valley with the help of installed stations, 
glacial lakes outburst  probability will be estimated. The exten ded network will provide more  accurate data from diverse 
geolocations that will help to define alerts thresholds and lea d time more precisely.  
 
187. The project will further stre ngthen the capacity for proce ssing, validating, and interpreting river discharge and 
meteorological information at t he national (PMD), and at the de partment level by GB Disaster Management Authority 
(GBDMA) and KP Disaster Manageme nt Authority (KPDMA). The capac ity to better analyze climate data and river 
flows’ changes over time will enabl e more accurate predictions for the intensity and breadth of GLOF.  
 
PMD data analysis   
188. Flow Diagram of PMD Responsibilities: 
 
	
	
F.3.  Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Consideratio ns 
189. This project has completed t he UNDP’s Social and Environme ntal Screening Procedure (see SESP 
attached as Annex VI). This screening was undertaken to ensure this project complies with UNDP’s Social and 
Environmental Standards. UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standa rds were reviewed by the GCF accreditation 
panel and deemed sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit low and medium risk projects. The overall social and 
environmental risk category for this project is moderate as hig hlighted below.  Specific project risks are listed in 
Section G below.  Appropriate mi tigation measures are included within the following section. 
 
190. The project will have a number  of environmental impacts wh ich will be temporally and spatially restricted.   
 
191. During tree planting for slope stabilization, it will be n ecessary to undertake earth works to re-stabilized areas 
where alternative activities has previously been undertaken.  A  remediation plan will be condu cted based on the target 
area rapid analysis to be prepared. All the seven districts are  located in dry temperate zone where the precipitation is 
quite low and is received in the winter season and mostly in th e form of snow. Planting in dry zone will be successful


---
*Page 45*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 54 
 
	
	F
only with water harvesting system (hillside ditches & conservat ion contour trenches). The tree and bush species 
suitable for planting in all the districts include:  Pistacia k hinjak , Fraxinus xanthozloides (Wild Ash), Prunus ebernia 
(Wild almond), Tamarix gallica, Elaeagnus hortensis (E. angusti folia), Ailanthus altissima, Melia azadirecta, Gleditsia 
triacanthos, Cupressus arizonica ( at the upper reaches), Cedru s deodara (deodar) (at the upper reaches), Prosopis 
glandulosa (successful plantation in Quetta valley Balochistan) , Atriplex canescens (Four wing salt bush), Atriplex 
lentiformis (Quil salt bush), A. numularia, Sea-buckthorn(Hipop hae sp.), Capparis spinosa (Caper), Sophora sp., 
Artimisia sp. ,Fugic sp. (Shatshakh), Vitex augnus , Daphne muc ronata, Astragalus oplites, Berberis calliobotrys, 
Ephedra intermedia, Rosa webiana, Rubus anatolicus, Haloxylon g riffithii.  
 192. The suitable tree species for planting in districts Manseh ra, Swat and Dir of KPK include; Cedrus deodara, 
Pinus wallichiana (blue pine), Pinus roxburghii (Chir pine),  Q uercus spp.(Oak), Alnus nit ida, Poplar species(Populus 
deltoides, P. alba, P. ciliata) at moist sites, Willow species (Salix tetrasperma, S. alba, S. acmophylla) at moist sites,  
Robinea speudoacacia (black locust),  Ailanthus altisimma , Ipl e Iple ( Leucanea leucocephalla), Mulberry 
species( Morus spp). 
 
193. District Kohistan is located in the transitional zone betw een moist temperate and dr y temperate zone and the 
suitable tree species are there are: Quercus spp. (Oak) Olea cu spidata, Acacia modesta, Pistacia khinjak in the lower 
reaches and in the upper reaches Cedrus deodara and blue pine ( Pinus wallichiana) and chir pine (P. roxburghii). 
Among the exotic Ailanthus alti ssima and honey locust (Gleditsi a triacanthos )  
 
194. Similarly, during the installation of rock gabions, protec tion walls, check dams, ear th works to prepare for the 
foundations will be required.  Pri or to undertaking any activit ies with respect to the design and location of hard 
infrastructure, appropriate modelling and detailed design will be undertaken to ensure the location of the proposed 
infrastructure is the right loc ation.  The earth works will mov e sediment that, if not pr operly contained, may enter the 
aquatic environment and/or result in land slips.  To ensure tha t the sediment is not mobilized through either wind or 
more specifically water movemen t, it will be necessary to prepa re an erosion control sediment plan and install silt 
curtains to restrict sediment m ovement.  The plan should contai n aspects including but not limited to the installation of 
sediment curtains to reduce sediment movement and the covering of sediment where practic able.  All works should be 
undertaken in the autumn period  to reduce the potential impacts  from GLOF. 
 
195. Overall, it is expected tha t the programme will have some environmental impacts although these can be 
mitigated effectively through appropriate management measures.  The programme will have significant environmental 
benefits in the short to long term  through the improvement of f lood mitigation, improved water quality through the 
minimization of sediment loss, h illslope protection, the absorp tion of greenhouse gas emissions and most importantly, 
through providing communities wit h climate information that wil l result in lives being saved. 
 
196. There are limited social impac ts associated with the proje ct. It is understood that t he inhabitants of the 
area are indigenous and therefore special considerations need t o be made to ensure impacts are alleviated. 
Importantly, no people will be displaced or relocated, however there will be a reduction in the availability of grazing 
land through the rehabilitation and planting of vegetation. Thi s will overall improve the live lihoods of peopl e working in 
and around the rehabilitated forests and increase their income potential.  Where availabl e, local people will be 
employed to undertake propagation,  planting and maintenance of the trees, thereby providing a social benefit to the 
community.  Further the trees will act as a buffer during storm
, events and therefore reduce the potential loss of lives 
and assets. Where the impacts cannot be mitigated, a Livelihood  Restoration Plan and Indigenous Peoples’ Plan will 
be developed. 
 197. To ensure that the projec t will not adversely impact gende r, particularly the needs of women in the targeted
	
communities, gender considerations will be mainstreamed into al l trainings and knowledge-sharing activities 
associated with project implementation. For example, opportunit ies for women to take leadership roles will be 
assessed, such as to provide ho me garden-based livelihood train ings. Early warning system communication design 
will apply gender-particular considerations to the disseminatio n of disaster warnings and post-GLOF support. Local 
government entities in charge of  managing post-GLOF support wil l be trained in order that f inancial support can flow to 
activities that meet the needs of  women. Likewise, operations a nd management plans for EWS are subject to


---
*Page 46*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 54 
 
	
	F
managerial handover to local governments in collaboration with communities. Women’s voices will inform the 
management at the local level of EWS and the maintenance commit tees will provide an additional avenue for women 
to assume leadership roles. 	
F.4.  Financial Management and Procurement 
198. The financial management and procurement of this project w ill be guided by UNDP financial rules and 
regulations available here: https://info.undp.org/global/docum ents/frm/Financial-Rules-and- Regulations_E.pdf .   
 
199. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources ma nagement section of the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures available at https://info.undp.org/global/popp /frm/Pages/introduction.aspx . 
 
200. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as ou tlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ 
section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedu res (POPP).  The policies outline formal 
procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the p rocurement process, and they apply to all 
procurements in UNDP.  See here:  https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ cap/Pages/Intr oduction.aspx.  
 
201. The project will be implemented following the National Imp lementation Modality (NIM) following NIM 
guidelines available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/docum ents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx? sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Impl
ementation%20by%20the%20Government %20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx& action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1    
 
202. UNDP will ascertain the nati onal capacities of the impleme nting partner by underta king an evaluation of 
capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implemen ting Partners/Executing Entities (part of the 
Harmonized Approach to Cas h Transfers - HACT). 
 
203. All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable 
audit guidelines and policies. 
 204. The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies an d procedures, as set out in the UNDP 
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) which a re available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/Pages/default.aspx .  The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by  
UNDP, and are fully compliant wit h UNDP’s procurement and finan cial management rules and regulations. 
 
205. The national executing entity, the Ministry of Climate Cha nge - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing 
Partner’ in UNDP terminology - is required to implement the pro ject in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, 
policies and procedures (including the NIM Guidelines). In lega l terms, this is ensured through the national 
Government’s signature of the UN DP Standard Basic Assistance Ag reement (SBAA), together w ith a UNDP project 
document which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to go vern the use of the funds. Both of these documents 
require compliance. Prior to signature of the project document,  all national Implementing Partners need to have 
undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessm ent by UNDP to assess c apacities to implement 
the project.  This is in line with standard UNDP policies and pr ocedures; a thorough capacity assessment of the 
“Executing Entity” (Implementing Partner, in UNDP terminology) will be carried out prior to commencement of 
implementation (after assurance of funding). This assessment (c onducted by an independent audit firm includes an 
assessment of accounting, procurement, reporting, internal cont rols, etc and a risk rating is attributed. UNDP then 
advances funds to the IP where the risk is determined to be low . In cases where risk rating is low, the Implementing 
Partner will sign and manage contracts with various sub-contrac tors (called responsible parties in UNDP 
terminology).  When the risk rating is medium or high, UNDP will  provide services in the areas where capacity 
assessment results are medium to high risk. A separate bank acc ount for the project will be opened which will help in 
managing the funds flow, audit etc. During implementation, UNDP  will provide oversight and quality assurance in 
accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific r equirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement 
(AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with the GCF. This may include, but is not limited to, monitoring missions, 
spot checks, facilitat ion and participation in project board me etings, quarterly progress and annual implementation 
reviews, and audits at project level or at Implementing partner  level on the resources received from UNDP. UNDP


---
*Page 47*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 54 
 
	
	F
carries out one spot-check every quarter and there is a regular  annual independent audit by an external audit team 
which continues throughout the proj ect period and concludes by a  final audit after the project is completed.  
 
 
206. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessment s; (3) cash transfers and disb ursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews (spot che cks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and 
special audits. During micro-assessment, there can weaknesses i dentified for which actions are required to addresses 
the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addresse d it will mean that the level of assurance activities 
will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have to be reviewed if 
necessary. All details are available here: https://undg.org/wp-content/upl oads/2015/02/2014-UNDG-HACT-Fram ework-
English-FINAL.pdf . 
 
207. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP polici es and procedures on audits, informed by and 
together with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA curren tly being negotiated with the GCF. According to the 
current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. I n UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the 
programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis  of the implementing partner's risk rating and 
UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine wheth er the funds transferred to the implementing partner 
were used for the appropriate pur pose and in accordance with the  work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a 
financial audit or an internal control audit. 
 
208. GCF resources will be provided to the implementing partner , less any agreed cost recovery amount. Under 
UNDP’s national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash fun ds on a quarterly basis to the implementing 
partner (executing entity) for t he implementation of agreed and  approved programme activities, in accordance with 
UNDP standard policies and the NIM Guidelines. These disburseme nts will be based upon ap proved annual work plan 
and on quarterly basis on the submission of quarterly work plan  and other required documents for quarterly release of 
funds. The implementing partner reports back expenditure via a f inancial report on quarterly basis to UNDP.  Any 
additional requirements will be as  in accordance with the AMA a s and when it is agreed.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 54 
 
	
	G
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social a nd environmental and other ri sks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Al so describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
 
Sediment movement during construction activities of 
hard infrastructure 
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Prior to undertaking works, UNDP will prepare an erosion contro l sediment plan and install silt curtains to restrict 
sediment movement during constr uction activities.  Design and a ppropriate hydrological modeling will be undertaken 
to ensure the infrastructure is ideally located.  Further, all activities will be undertaken in autumn to reduce the 
impacts of GLOF events. 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
 
Sediment movement during forest rehabilitation 
activities 
 
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Prior to undertaking works, UNDP will prepare an erosion contro l sediment plan and install silt curtains to restrict 
sediment movement during planting activities.  Further, where p ossible, all planting will be undertaken in autumn to 
reduce the impacts of GLOF events although where this is not po ssible due to plant survival, appropriate forecasting 
should be followed. 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Reduction in the availability of land through the Social and Low (<5% of Low  G.1.  Risk Assessment Summary  
209. Risk factors associated with  the project implementation in clude both technical and operational aspects 
to acquire, install and monitor AWS and river discharge sensors ; and social and environmental due to the 
implementation of climate-resilient livelihoods initiatives and  construction of small-scale protective infrastructures 
against GLOF risks. The risk may affect the sedimentation movem ent during construction of small-scale 
infrastructures and during forest rehabilitation activities. Ot her risks may affect the lack of commitment from 
communities where restoration activities, alternative livelihoo ds and EWS are planned. 
 
210. The proposed project includes several mitigation measures to address these risks. This mitigation  
strategies include preparing an er osion control sediment plan a nd install silt curtains to restrict sediment movement 
during construction and reforestation activities. To encourage communities’ ownership and participation in proposed 
interventions, the project will be implemented respecting socia l organization, norms and traditions in GB and KP.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 54 
 
	
	G
rehabilitation and planting of vegetation  
 
 environmental  project value)  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Carefully planning and stakeholder consultation will be underta ken prior to the planting to ensure peoples do not 
lose their livelihoods.  To ensur e there is limited impact on p eople, diversification is planned.   
Selected Risk Factor 4  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Failure of infrastructure constructed as part of the 
programme 
 
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Prior to construction, all structures will be designed based on  site evaluations. Secondly, structures will be built 
during late summer and autumn to remove the potential for damag e during construction. All structures will be 
designed and built consistent with international good engineeri ng practice so as the struct ures are resilient to these 
events. 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Lack of commitment from communities where 
restoration activities, alt ernative livelihoods and EWS 
are established undermine s the effectiveness of the 
GCF project demonstrations. 
 
  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The GCF project will avoid a ‘t op down’ approach and seek to cr eate community ownership  of the project through 
community training and encouraging participation in project act ivities. 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Climate shocks occurring  during the design and 
implementation phase of the GCF project result in 
disruptions to restoration activities and severely affect 
communities, prior to the EWSs being established. 
 
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Disaster mitigation and response  activities will be prioritized  at the target communities whilst the EWS is being 
established.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 54 
 
	
	G
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
A disaster takes place and the EWS system fails to 
alert the population on time. 
 Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Detailed planning and practical tr aining with the stakeholders and regular system maintenance to ensure peoples do 
not lose their livelihoods and to ensure there is limited impac t on people. 
Selected Risk Factor 8  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Access and Maintenance of Equipment could be 
difficult as target area is r emote. Limited capacity of 
the community members in maintenance of equipment 
as well as management of funds. 
 Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 Constant monitoring from the Project Coordinator and local gov ernment officials in the ta rget area to inform the 
Project Board will reduce the incidence of vandalism and will s erve as the institutional mechanism to ensure that 
equipment is secure and properly m aintained. Activities impleme nted for enhance local capacity building to maintain 
equipment. 
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Description Risk category Level of risk  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Security issues in the targe t area may cause delays in 
implementation. Some of the proposed sites have 
remained exposed to instability due to sectarian 
violence which cause delays in the activities and utilization of DRM funds.
 Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Coordination with local government’s official and police office rs in the target area with Project Management Unit will 
minimize the risk that security issues affect the implementatio n of the project. Awarene ss raising activities 
communities about the significan ce of these adapt ation and disa ster management activities.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 54 
 
	
	H
H.1.  Logic Framework.    
Please specify the logic framewor k in accordance with the GCF’s  Results Management Framework  and 
Performance Measurement Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level11 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development The project presents a holistic  model of climate -resilient deve lopment to enable Northern 
Pakistan to manage the risks from GLOFs and other impacts of cl imate change, incorporating 
regulatory support, community prepa redness, GLOF response capac itation, and long-term 
planning for sustainable and climate-resilient use of natural l ivelihood assets. 
Expected Result Indicator Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) Baseline Target Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if 
applicable)  Final   
Fund-level impacts  
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions 1.1 Change in expected 
losses of lives and 
economic assets (US$) 
due to the impact of extreme climate-related 
disasters in the geographic 
area of the GCF intervention.  
-Project reports: 
annual reports; mid-term and final 
evaluations. 
- Field visits to engineering 
structures 
-Satellite imagery of glacier lakes and vulnerable sites 
before and after the 
project. There are 
33 
potentially dangerous 
lakes in 
KP and GB. 
960 
destructive outburst floods are 
in KP and 
GB areas in last two 
decades.  By the end of 
the project,  
100% of households in 
KP and GB 
target communities 
are benefiting 
from engineering measures 
and early 
warnings in place to 
reduce the 
impact of GLOF events. 
(696,342 
people: 348,171 men, 
348,171 
women)   The political 
situation stays 
stable throughout the project 
duration. 
Stakeholders are able to perceive 
reductions in 
vulnerability over the time-scale determined by 
project duration. 
No flooding disasters in target 
communities 
occur throughout the project 
lifetime. 
  
 
																																																													
11 Information on the Fund’s expec ted results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measur ement Frameworks available at  the 
following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operation s/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Prog ramme level 
Expected Result Indicator  Means of 
Verification (MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  
Mid-
term 
(if 
applica
ble)  Final   
Project/programme 
outcomes Outcomes that c ontribute to Fund-level impacts 
7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive 
capacity and 7.2: Number of 
males 
and females -Review of climate 
change, DRM and 
development policies GLOF early 
warning 
system in  By the end 
of the 
project, Government remains 
supportive to link longer-
term climate change


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 54 
 
	
	H
reduced 
exposure to 
climate risks  reached by 
climate related 
early warning 
systems and other 
risk 
reduction 
measures 
established/ 
strengthened  and plans at the 
national, district, and 
community levels. 
 
-Review of Disaster 
Management Act, DRM 
policies, plans, and 
institutional structures.  
 
-Project reports: annual 
reports; mid-term and 
final evaluations. 
 
-Site visits before/after 
the project  
 
-Questionnaire-based 
surveys 
(QBS)/Interviews at the 
beginning, mid-term 
and end of the project. 
 KP and GB 
covering two 
districts 
 
Vulnerable 
households 
are not able 
to receive 
and react to 
GLOF early 
warning 
messages in 
the KP and 
GB. 
 
No physical 
structures in 
place to 
mitigate the 
effect of 
GLOF 
events. 100% of 
households 
in KP and 
GB target 
communities 
are able to 
receive and 
respond to 
early 
warnings 
and take the 
appropriate 
actions 
following the 
warning 
(348,171 
men, 
348,171 
women). planning with current 
disaster risk management 
initiatives 
 
 
No tampering with early 
warning system 
installations. 
 
Community workforce 
available to support 
engineering measures. 
Project/programme 
outputs Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. 	Strengthened sub-
national institutional 
capacities to plan and 
implement climate change resilient development 
pathways.  1.1. Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for climate-
responsive 
planning and development.   
 
  
 
1.2. Number of policies introduced 
to address GLOF 
risks or adjusted to incorporate GLOF 
risks.  
 Questionnaire-based 
surveys (QBS)/ 
Interviews) at the beginning, mid-term 
and end of the project. 
 Impact assessment at the end of the project. 
 
Satellite imagery of glacier lakes and 
vulnerable sites before 
and after the project.  
Qualitative assessment 
(e.g. through a standardized 
scorecard) of the 
various strategic plans and documents that 
integrate GLOF risks. 
 National, 
provincial 
and local disaster 
managemen
t institutions and development 
planners are 
unable to design, 
finance and 
analyze GLOF risk 
reduction 
measures on the basis 
of reliable, 
comprehensive 
information.  
 Only 2 
comprehensi
ve disaster managemen
t guidelines 
exist for the KP and GB 
regions.  By the end 
of Year 3, 
100% of the 
national and 
90% of 
district and 
community 
authorities 
in the KP 
and GB 
regions are 
able to 
prioritize 
and plan 
measures to 
minimize 
potential 
losses from 
GLOFs. 
 
By the end 
of the 
project, at 
least four 
policies 
have been 
adopted by 
Government 
to address 
or 
incorporate 
GLOF risk 
reduction. The political situation stays 
stable throughout the 
project duration.  
 
Stakeholders are able to 
perceive reductions in 
vulnerability over the time-
scale determined by project 
duration. 
 
No flooding disasters in 
target communities occur 
throughout the project 
lifetime. 
2. 	Community-based EWS 
and long-term measures are 
up-scaled to increase 
communities’ adaptive 
capacity. 2.1. Number of 
vulnerable 
households in KP and GB covered by 
a GLOF early 
warning system.  
2.2. Number of 
Community-based 
organizations QBS with households. 
 Mock drill protocols. 
 
Field visits to EWS 
sensor, relay and  
Vulnerable 
households 
are not able 
to receive 
and react to 
GLOF early 
warning 
messages.  By the end 
of the 
project, 
100% of 
households 
in target 
communities 
are able to 
receive and 
respond to No tempering with the early 
warning system 
installations, 
 
Functioning backup 
systems in place.


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 54 
 
	
	H
trained in the 
operation and 
maintenance of the EWS.   
 
  
 
  
2.3. No. of physical 
assets constructed to withstand the 
effects of GLOF 
events.  communication sites.  
  Site visits before/after 
the project 
 
24 GLOF 
early 
warning 
system for 
KP and BG 
in place. 
 
 
No physical 
structures in 
place to 
withstand 
the effect of 
GLOF 
events. 
 early 
warnings 
and take the 
appropriate 
actions 
following the 
warning.  
(696,342 
people: 
348,171 
men, 
348,171 
women) 
 
By the end 
of the 
project , at 
least 24 
CBOs are 
trained in 
the 
operation 
and 
maintenanc
e of the 
EWS and 
ensure its 
continued 
functionality. 
 
 
By the end 
of the 
project, at 
least 250 
targeted 
engineering 
structures 
have been 
established 
to withstand 
the effects 
of GLOF 
events on 
livelihood 
assets.   
 
 
  
 
Communities are receptive 
to the adoption of mitigation 
measures and participate 
actively in construction 
efforts. 
 
Activities Description Inputs Description 
1.1.Provincial line and 
planning departments have technical capacities to 
mainstream CC into 
development plans   Capacity building activities to integrate CC and 
GLOF risk into development plans and 
instruments.   1.1.1.Develop 
integrated provincial 
CCA action plan 
encompassing key 
sectors (mainstream 
CC risks into DRM, 
Agriculture, Livestock, 
and Water Sectors) in 
KP and GB, linked to 
NCCP 
 
1.1.2. Completion of 
the KP Provincial CC 
policy which will serve 
as framework for the 
CCA action plan.   Technical training ac tivities on developing 
provincial CCA action plans that address 
GLOF risks from a sec torial perspective, 
focusing primarily in Ag riculture, Livestock 
and Water in GB and KP.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 54 
 
	
	H
1.2.Sub-national institutions 
have improved capacities to coordinate, plan, and 
implement CCA measures 
across sectors.  Strengthen sub-national institutional and 
coordination arrangements including financial, 
planning and budgeting processes and other requirements for implementing CCA action 
plans and CC initiatives in GB and KP 1.2.1.Establish/ 
strengthen provincial-
level CC coordinating 
entities within the 
Planning and 
Development 
Departments (involving 
CBOs, NGOs, and 
EPA) to coordinate CC 
response across key 
sectors. 
 
1.2.2. Raise 
awareness at the local 
level (district 
authorities, NGOs, and 
CBOs) to effectively 
coordinate CC 
initiatives and play key 
roles in implementing 
CCA action plans 
across key sectors. Through multi-stakeholders participation, 
coordinate response to CC and GLOF 
risks. 
2.1. Expanded weather 
surveillance and discharge 
measuring networks. Increase the area coverage by hydro-
meteorological instruments and equipment to 
address GLOF risks. 2.1.1. Installation of 22 
weather monitoring 
stations in KP and 28 
in GB.  
 
2.1.2. Installation of 
170 river discharge 
gauges/ sensors etc. 
in KP and 238 in GB. 
 
2.1.3. GBDMA and 
KPDMA provide 
extension to PMD on 
installation and 
maintenance of 
equipment. Installation of hydro-meteorological 
infrastructure to expand EWS in 7 valleys. 
2.2. Early warnings are 
effective in protecting communities from	climate-
induced risks. Expansion and development of tailored 
warnings for GLOF risk through Pakistan 
Meteorological Department. 2.2.1. PMD conducts 
hydrological modeling 
to generate flood 
scenarios and 
calculate GLOF lead 
time.  
 
2.2.2.Village hazard 
watch groups are set 
up (expanded) and 
capacitated to monitor 
GLOF and 
disseminate early 
warnings 
 The installation of 50 automatic weather 
stations (22 in KP and 28 in GB) and the 
installation of 408 river discharge 
gauges/sensors (170 in KP and 238 in GB) 
[Input 2.2.1 & 2.2.2) will provide data to 
conduct hydrological modelling to generate 
flood scenarios and to capacitate village 
hazard watch groups that will be part of a 
local-level early warning system.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 54 
 
	
	H
 2.3. Vulnerable communities 
have adequate long-term  
measures in place to 
address GLOF-related risks.  GLOF response expanded, small-scale 
infrastructures constructed and increased 
natural protection through vegetative cover to protect lives and property downstream of each 
valley. 
 Implement water efficien t farming technologies 
to increase yields to promote food security to 
cope with GLOF events. 2.3.1. DRM 
Committees and 
emergency response 
cells are expanded to 
act as first responders 
and manage drills and 
simulations. 
 
2.3.2. GBDMA and 
KPDMA train 
communities and DRM 
committees on GLOF 
preparedness and 
response. 
 
2.3.3.Construction of 
250 small 
infrastructure to 
reduce risks of floods 
i.e.(gabion walls, 
check dams, spillways) 
 
2.3.4. Expand slope 
stabilization to mitigate 
disaster risks from 
debris slides (Increase 
vegetative cover i.e. 
100,000 ha in KP and 
140,000 ha in GB). 
 
2.3.5. Installation of 
240 water efficient 
farming technologies 
i.e. Micro Irrigation 
System, Drip Irrigation 
System, Sprinkle 
Irrigation and 
rehabilitation of 
irrigation channels in 
24 targeted valleys. 
 Expansion of DRM Committees and 
emergency response cells by providing 
basic necessary equipment regarding 
communication and relief. 
 
Small-scale hard adaptation structures will 
be constructed and vegetative cover 
expanded to reduce risks of floods and 
from debris slides. 
 
Increase the capacity of subsistence 
farmers and women to address CC impacts 
by installing micro-irrigation systems, and 
household gardening in targeted valleys 
2.4. Improved financial 
capacity to adapt to GLOFs and CC-induced risks.  Enable communities and households to 
prepare for weather shocks and to build adaptive capacity. 2.4.1. Scale-up 
revolving community-
based disaster risk 
management fund i.e. 
$ 50,000 USD per 
CBDRMC. 
 
2.4.2. Relevant 
stakeholders (i.e. 
micro-credit lenders, 
insurance companies, 
SMEs, Gov agencies, 
etc.) trained and 
working in ways to 
improve coordination 
and delivery of the 
CBDRM Fund and 
DRM initiatives on the 
ground in GB and KP. Expansion of a community-based disaster 
risk management fund for disaster risk 
management cells to provide support ex 
ante and ex post  GLOF events. 
 
Workshops and trainings targeted 
specifically for local public and private 
entities to be made aware of their risks and 
risk management related to GLOFs.


---
*Page 56*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 54 
 
	
	H
 
 
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
211. Project-level monitoring an d evaluation will be undertaken  in compliance with the UNDP POPP  and the  
UNDP Evaluation Policy .	UNDP will perform moni toring and reporting throughout the Repor ting Period in accordance 
with the AMA. UNDP has country presence and capacity to perform  such functions. In the event of any additional post-
implementation obligations ove r and above the AMA, UNDP will di scuss and agree these with t he GCF Secretariat in the 
final year of the implementation period. .  
 Oversight and monitoring responsibilities:  
212. The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitori ng and implementation rests with the Project 
Manager. The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The 
Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Coun try Office of any delays or difficulties during 
implementation, including the implementation of the M&E plan, s o that the appropriate support and corrective measures 
can be adopted. The Project Man ager will also ensure that all p roject staff maintain a high level of transparency, 
responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting p roject results.   
 
213. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager a s needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP . Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troub leshooting support will be provided 
by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project t arget groups and stakeholders including the NDA 
Focal Point will be involved as muc h as possible in project-lev el M&E.   
 
214. A project inception worksh op will be held after the UNDP p roject document has been signed by all relevant 
parties to: a) re-orient project stakeholders to the project st rategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that 
influence project implementation; b) discuss the roles and resp onsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) revi e w  t h e  r e s u l t s  f r a m e w o r k  a n d  d i s c u s s  r e p o r t i n g ,  
monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finali ze the M&E plan; d) review financial reporting procedures 
and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for t he annual audit; e) plan and schedule Project Board 
meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Proj ect Manager will prepare the inception report no later than 
one month after the inception workshop. The final inception rep ort will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the 
UNDP Regional Technical Advise r, and will be approved by the Pr oject Board.    
 
215. The Project Manager, the UNDP  Country Office , and the UNDP  Regional Technical Advisor will provide 
objective input to the annual Project Implementation Report (PI R) for each year of project implementation.  The Project 
Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project  results framework are monitored annually well in advance 
of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report prog ress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR.  The 
annual PIR will be shared with the project board and other stak eholders.  The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the 
input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR.   The quality rating of the pr evious year’s PIR will be 
used to inform the preparation of the next PIR.  The final proj ect PIR along with the terminal evaluation report and 
corresponding management response will serve as the final proje ct report package.     
 
216. An independent mid-term revi ew process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for  enhanced implementation during the final half of 
the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review proc ess and the final MTR report will follow the standard 
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final MTR report w ill be cleared by the 
UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, an d will be approved by the Project Board. The final 
MTR report will be ava ilable in English. 
 Additional GCF evaluation requirements: 
217. An independent terminal eval uation (TE) will take place no  later than three months  prior to operational 
closure of the project.  The terms of reference, the review pro cess and the final TE repo rt will follow the standard 
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final TE report will be cleared by the


---
*Page 57*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 54 
 
	
	H
 UNDP Country Office and the UNDP R egional Technical Adviser, an d will be approved by the Project Board. The TE 
report will be available in English.  
 
218. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project t erminal evaluation in t he UNDP Country Office 
evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the 
public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) ( http://erc.undp.org ).  Once uploaded to the ERC, the UNDP 
Independent Evaluation Office will undertake a quality assessme nt and validate the findings a nd ratings in the TE report, 
and rate the quality of the TE report.   
 
219. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for th is project for up to seven years after project 
financial closure in order to  support ex-post evaluations. 
 
220. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan  will be included in the UN DP project document.   
 
221. UNDP will perform monitori ng and reporting  throughout the reporting period in accordance with the AMA and 	
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA).  UNDP has country presence and  capacity to perform such functions.  In the event of 
any additional post-implementation obligations over and above t he AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the 
GCF Secretariat in the final y ear of the project and will prepa re a post-implementation monitoring plan and budget for 
approval by the GCF B oard as necessary.


---
*Page 58*
---

ANNEXES 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING P ROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 54 
 
	
	I
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
document.  I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal  
☐          NDA No-objection Letter Annex I  
☒   Feasibility Study Annex II  
☐    Integrated Financial Model tha t provides sensitivity analysi s of critical elements (word format) Annex III (a) 
☐          Integrated Financial Model t hat provides sensitivity a nalysis of critical elements (xls format) Annex III (b) 
☐          Confirmation letter or le tter of commitment for co-fin ancing commitment Annex IV  
☒          Term Sheet (including co st/budget breakdown, disburse ment schedule, etc.) – see the Accreditation 
             Master Agreement Annex V   
☒          Environmental and Socia l Impact Assessment (ESIA)  Annex VI (a)  
☒          Environmental and Social Management Plan (in English)  Annex VI (b) 
☐          Environmental and Social Management Plan (in Urdu) Annex VI (c) 
☒          Gender Analysis and Action Plan Annex VI (d) 
☐          Appraisal Report or Due D iligence Report with recommen dations Annex VII  
☐          Evaluation R eport of the baseline project Annex VIII 
☐          Map indicating the locati on of the project/programme Annex IX  
☒          Timetable of project/p rogramme implementation  Annex X  
☐          Projec t/Programme confirmation  Annex XI  
 
Additional Information 
☒          Economic Analysis Annex XII (a) 
☒          Economic Analysis (excel file) Annex XII (b) 
☒          Additional Background Details Annex XIII  
☐         Responses to GCF Com ments on Proposal Annex XIV 
☐         Letter of Endorsement from UNDP Annex XV


---
*Page 59*
---

Annex I- NDA No-Objection Letter GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL    
I              NDA No- Objection Letter


---
*Page 61*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.01 	
Environmental 	and	social	report(s)	 disclosure 	
Basic	project/programme 	information 	
Project/programme 	title	Scaling‐up	of	Glacial	Lake	Outburst	Flood	(GLOF)	risk	reduction 	in	
Northern	Pakistan	
Accredited 	entity	 UNDP	
Environmental 	and	social	
safeguards 	(ESS)	category 	Category	B	
Environmental 	and	Social	Impact	Assessment 	(ESIA)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	
of	disclosure	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://www.pk.undp.org/content/pakistan/en/home/operations/projects/environment_and_
energy/project_sample/ 	
The	ESMP	contains	a	simplified	impact	assessment	(ESIA)	consist ent	with	the	
requirements	of	PS1. 	
Other	link(s)	
Environmental 	and	Social	Management 	Plan	(ESMP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	2015‐11‐27	
Language(s)	
of	disclosure	English,	Urdu	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://www.pk.undp.org/content/pakistan/en/home/operations/projects/environment_and_
energy/project_sample/ 	
ESMP	in	English	and	Urdu	(in	pdf)	can	be	found	under	“Related	D ocuments”	
Other	link(s)	
Resettlement 	Action	Plan	(RAP)	(if	applicable) 	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	
of	disclosure	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://	
Other	link(s)	 http://


---
*Page 62*
---

GCF/B.14/07/Add.01 	
Any	other	relevant 	ESS	reports	and/or	disclosures 	(if	applicable) 	
Description	of	
report/disclo
sure	
Date	of	
disclosure	on	
accredited	
entity’s	
website	Click	here	to	enter	a	date. 	
Language(s)	
of	disclosure	
Link	to	
disclosure	http://	
Other	link(s)	 http://	
__
______