=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20160623213102+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/ModDate: D:20160623213102+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum 09 
Funding proposal package for FP 017 
 GCF/B.1 3/16/Add. 09 
23 June 2016  Meeting of the Board  
28 – 30 June 2016  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem 12(e) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following four parts:  
a) A funding proposal summary titled “ Climate Action and Solar Energy Development 
Programme in the Tarapacá Region in Chile”  submitted by CAF – Banco de Desarrollo 
de America Latina ; 
b) A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and 
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;   
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(is) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund , the funding proposal titled “ Climate Act ion 
and Solar Energy Development Programme in the Tarapacá Region in Chile ” submitted 
by CAF  is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Memb ers and 
Alternate Board Members  to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally 
privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.13/16/Add.09  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal summary submitted by the accredited entity  
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point  
                 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Project/Programme Title:  Climate Action and Solar Energy Development Programme  
in the Tarapacá Region in Chile   
Country/Region:  Chile  
Accredited Entity:  CAF – Banco de Desarrollo de América Latina  
Date of Submission : [ May 2016  ] 
2016


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section H  RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the  funding proposal template  
  
  Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
 The total num ber of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to:  
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 50 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Climate Action and Solar Energy Development 
Programme  in the Tarapacá Region in Chile  
A.1.2. Project or programme  programme  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Chile  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Ms. Marcela Palominos, Ministerio de Hacienda  
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity  CAF – Banco de Desarrollo de América Latina  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity: Atacama Solar S.A   
Beneficiary: Atacama Solar S.A.  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
US$) ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  ☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☒  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation f ocus  ☒  Mitigation  ☐  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  May 2016  
A.1.1 0. 
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Antonio Garcí a, Environment and Climate Change Executive  
Organization  CAF 
Email address  agarciap@caf.com  
Telephone number  +57 1 743 7369  
Mailing  address  Carrera 9 76 -49 Bogotá, Colombia  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions  from:  
☒ Energy access and power generation   
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport   
(E.g. high -speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment  and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 50 
 
 
 A 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives  and primary 
measurable benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated in 
section C . 
 
An enabling setting shall be made available by the GCF  and CAF – Latin American Development Bank  to set up the 
first Chilean national -level convergence instance between climate funding, private funding, and sector plans for 
adaptation and active institutional programmes toward a low -emission sustainable devel opment.  
The international financing mechanism leaded by the GCF and CAF will support a project (Atacama Solar) being 
driven by Sonnedix company, expanding the photovoltaic solar energy projects scale in an area where the electricity 
generation matrix is hi ghly intensive in thermoelectricity (intensive in GHG emissions), making it more competitive in 
one of the main mining development regions in Chile.  
Atacama Solar consists on a 143 MW solar photovoltaic plant in the Atacama Desert region of Chile, located in an 
area with the highest level of solar radiation in South America. Currently, Chile is at a crossroad with regards to its 
energy matrix future. This development represents a clean, sustainable solution to Chilean energy challenges, since 
the country is  still heavily dependent on fossil fuels (which are mostly imported) and hydrological sources (which are 
becoming less reliable).  With a commitment to have a 20%  of non -conventional  renewable power generation by 
2025, the decisions and investments taking p lace now will shape the transition to an energy system based on 
renewables.  
When fully completed, the site will have an installed capacity of at least 250 MW to be built -out in two phases:  
- Phase I: 143 MW – documentation & financing  (this Project)  
- Phase II: 107 MW – in development  (future growth)  
The Atacama Project – due to its scale, adoption of top tier technology, and favorable cost structure – provides an 
estimated annual CO2 reduction of approximately 193,949  tones/year for Phase  (3,697,440 to ns of C02e over 20  
year lifespan , allowing for 0.98% annual deterioration ). 
The Project seeks to contribute to Chile’s stated and quantified policy goals of shifting towards a low emission 
sustainable development pathway by developing and connecting a larg e-scale, expandable, clean energy power 
generation using top -tier solar photovoltaic  components, within an electrical transmission system (SING) currently 
dominated ( >94%, Sept 2015 ) by fossil -fuel based thermal power generation, and providing the lowest c ost per t 
CO2eq among its solar project peer group in Chile  
In an innovative financial design for solar power generation projects in Chile, the proposed financial model of the 
Project is based on cash flows calculated at estimated market prices, since the Project will not count on a fixed price 
guaranteed from any contract of sale of energy (PPA). Based on market conditions, the Project will compete and 
displace other more polluting power generation plants demonstrating that solar power generation in Chile has the 
potential to meet both energy requirements from the country and help meeting its emission reductions and renewable 
power generation target.  
The Project seeks to be a turning point demonstrating access to loans and investments for renewable project s with 
high upfront capital costs and need for long repayment tenors which are currently unavailable in Chile’s capital 
market s. 
In addition to the Project finance, CAF will expand its work in a strategic partnership with Chile aimed to build 
resilience at  local and regional level vis a vis climate change impacts. This articulation seeks to permanently set in 
place the resilience of the communities involved, while being a national reference model  for cross cutting 
programmes that will ensure a low emission and climate resilient development in the northern region of Chile .


---
*Page 7*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3 OF 50 
 
 
 A 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  The Project was approved by CAF on December 2015.    
Expected financial close (if applicable)  [08/2016 ] 
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: [2017]  (Commercial Operations Date)  
End:  [2042] 
Project/programme lifespan  20 years [0] months  (Land concession: 30 years)


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 50 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
Please provide:  
 an integrated financial model in Section I  (Annexes)  that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme  
 
 
The Financial Model used in this document has been reviewed and modified by CAF, using as a base the original 
Financial Model provided by the Sponsor of the Project.  It is worth mentioning that:  
i. The Model was not prepared by the Sponsor, but by its financial advisers (Pan -American Finance), using data 
from technical Advisors such as: DNV KEMA Renewables  (solar radiation); Synex (spot -market -price 
consultant ); equipment costs estimates from the pro curement process  followed by the Sponsor of the Project ; 
and operation costs from the selected O&M contractor’s experience  (Biosar) .   
ii. CAF made further assumption adjustments to the Financial Model, in order to present a more reasonable and 
conservative base case scenario, with included, among others, using the P90 Solar Radiation Scenario as 
Base Case Scenario . 
iii. Finally, technical advisers to CAF provided opinions regarding the reasonability of the results of the Financial 
Model.  Opinions were provided by p rofessionals from the engineering firm Hatch; by Systep ( spot-market -price 
advis er to CAF); and by CAF’s own  extensive financial experience.    
iv. The definitive Financial Model should include al l definitive financial information from Senior Lenders, updated 
investment amounts, and adjustments to Electricity Spot Market Prices, if any.  
Results were sound  and CAF approved this operation in December 2015, showing its  commitment to this low-emission 
and climate -resilient  Project.   
Cost Structure  
The P roject’s cost structure is around US$ 255 million  
The largest componen t is the Engi neering, Procurement and Construction work, which represents more than 70 % of 
total costs. It has been deemed reasonable by the Independent Engineer in comparison with similar projects in the 
region.  
Some of the items in the Construction Cost section, particularly the EPC cost, have been revised downwards since 
CAF’s approval due to improvement s in the technology and materials used. Consequently, the Total Investment amount 
and financing are expected to be lower than those shown in this Funding Proposal. However, those changes will not 
have any negative impact on the project risks nor its perfor mance. Throughout this document, an asterisk (*) sign has 
been placed next to figures that may end up being lower than presented.   
 
Sources of Funds  
- Proposed co -financing  will allow the P roject to be developed , possibly  involving  involve local banks despite the 
recent lack of appetite in financing merchant generation of projects in Chile :  
Senior Debt:  [19.5%] CAF -assuming it provides senior debt financing of US$ 50 million for 20 
years - 
[19%] GCF  
[16.5%] Local banks  
Equity:  [45%  remaining ] Sponsor; ( these figures exclud e the  [US$ 8 million ] VAT facility) . 
- Sonnedix is a strong and well -capitalized sponsor wi lling and ready to support the P roject with a base equity 
contribution of [US$  116 million ], representing 45% of project costs . 
- With the proposed financial structure , in which leverage  is modest , the P roject is expected to provide strong


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 50 
 
 B 
Senior DSCRs  of [~1.47x] minimum  and [~1.8x] average at P90 under a 100% merchant case.  
 
Financial Model  
 an integrated financial model in that includes a projection covering the period from financial closing through 
final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a sensitivity analysis 
of critical elements of the project/programme  
The Project is able  to generate EBITDA of approximately 80% once its operations and expected market prices have 
stabilized (year 2022). In the base cas e projection, the P roject is able to repay its debt according to the designed 
amortization schedule, including additional pr epayment of the last 4 capital amortizations with part of the cash flows 
available after regular debt service (cash sweep).  
 
The minimum amortization schedule (assuming no additional prepayment) will be as follows:  
 
 
The projected amortization schedule in  the base case (assuming additional prepayments) will be as follows:  
 
 
A sensitivity analysis has been made taking into account the effect of several variables, the most important being the 
spot price, on the capacity of operation and repayment by the Rec ipient.  
 
 Price: It is the most critical variable for the Project. While all the energy will be sold due to the preference of 
dispatch that renewable energy sources enjoy in Chile, the price will be uncertain. The following table shows 
the project ed prices  for the spot market (in US$/MWh ): 
2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026  2027  2028  2029  2030  2031  2032  2033  2034  2035  
44 52 49 52 61 74 77 79 77 73 79 83 85 84 82 84 78 78 80 
 
 
The P roject will be able to service its debt with different degrees of amplitude depending on the price scenarios 
used. The following table shows the coverage ratios (DSCR) assuming different constant prices across the life 
of the senior loan:  
 
 
The break -even price for the debt repayment would be around 46 US$/MWh. In this case, the Project is still 
able to service debt every year. The same occurs when stressing the series prices projected downward by 
22%.  
 
 2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026  2027  2028  2029  2030  2031  2032  2033  2034  
  Base Case (Average 
Price=72USD/MWh)  1.50  1.53  1.88  1.47  1.71  1.86  1.92  1.93  1.86  1.93  2.04  2.10  2.09  2.05  2.07  1.98  N/A 
  Scenario with Price 
level=65 US$/MWh  1.89  2.15  2.47  1.68  1.67  1.66  1.61  1.61  1.63  1.64  1.64  1.63  1.63  1.63  1.62  1.61  N/A 
  Scenario with Price 
level=55 USD/MWh  1.59  1.74  2.06  1.41  1.41  1.43  1.39  1.40  1.42  1.42  1.42  1.41  1.41  1.40  1.39  1.37  N/A 
  Scenario with Price 
level=46 USD/MWh  1.30  1.35  1.60  1.11  1.08  1.09  1.03  1.07  1.11  1.14  1.15  1.16  1.16  1.16  1.15  1.15  2


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 50 
 
 B 
 Radiation: It affects the amount of energ y that can be generated by the P roject and injected in the syste m. 
Given that the solar resource does not vary considerably, it is not a critical variable for the repayment capacity, 
as it can service debt in every scenario contemplated (P50 -P99) in the base case of prices.  
When comparing the energy produced in the 4th year of operation in P50 and P99 scenarios  taking also into 
account  the equipment degradation , the total energy generated in  GWh would drop by 17%.  
 
In every radiation scenario the P roject is able to service its debt under the base case of prices, being the 
minimum DSCR equal to 1.30 x in the P99 scenario.  
 
It is important to note that some modifications will be made to the Financial Model in order to better reflect the reality 
faced by the Project. The core assumptions of it remain the same and provide a solid basis for Lenders’ base case. The 
main changes  will relate to the following  aspects of the Model : 
 Updated price projections:  more conservative prices (capped at 67 US$/MWh) based on data provided by 
external consultants.  
 EPC price (and consequently, investment needs) and irradiation (which in turn affects energy production) :  will 
be updat ed based on the latest information provided by Biosar, the contractor.   
 Senior Loan amount and final leverage  are lower  (US$ 119 million and maintaining a Debt -Equity ratio of no 
more than 60 %/40%), resulting in a more solid financing scheme.  Under a P90 100% merchant  sales  
conservative scenario t he Project is expected to provide strong Senior DSCRs of [~1. 32x] minimum and 
[~2.17x] average . 
 Any decrease in t he financing required  to develop the Project  will generate an adjust ment to  the required 
commercial bank financing, leaving the participation of CAF in US$ 50 million and the participation of the GCF 
in US$ 49 million.  
 Senior Loans Amortization New Proposed S cheme:  Dual amortization schedules for CAF/GCF loans to 
determine minimum and target amortization : 
- Minimum amortization schedule - for default covenant purposes  
 Based on a 20 -year door -to-door tenor  
 A DSCR of at least 1.10x, of the Minimum Amortiz ation Schedule.  
 Principal payments under this schedule are not required during the grace period  
- Target amortization schedule - for distribution purposes  
 Based on an 18 -year door -to-door tenor  
- A DSCR of at least 1.30x, of the Target Amortization Schedule . Third-party Senior L oan will have a 
minimum 15 -year door -to-door tenor.  
- Grace period has  been shortened to 2.5 years.  
- After applying the aforementioned change, resulting Senior Loan lives are shorter than initially 
expected.  
 Taxes: Corporate and Stamp Tax were updated . 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  273* million USD ($)


---
*Page 11*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 50 
 
 B 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient  (i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants *  491 
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
…………………  
 million USD ($)  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD ($)  20 years  
 
 
 
 
 
 Not less than 
LIBOR + 375  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing a nd 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total requested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  49 million USD ($)   
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Senior Loans  
Equity  
Senior Loans  
Options  50+42 *=92* 
116* 
8 (VAT)  
……………  million USD  ($) 
million USD ($)  
million USD ($)  
Options  CAF+Other  
Sponsor  
TBD 
…………  20 yrs 
(TBD)  
years  
 Min. LIBOR+375  
 12,82 % IRR  
 
 senior  
junior  
senior  
Options  
Lead financing institution: CAF  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -financing institution.  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
[Not applicable]  
If there is a financial arrangement betwe en the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
                                                             
1 CAF is syndicating the transaction, and possibly will be requiring extra financial support from the GCF.  In the event that t here are 
no sufficient funds in the market to complete the syndication, CAF might enter into an approval process to support a poss ible 
participation increase, with the support of the GCF, that in turn might require further approvals.  
2 The Expected IRR of the Sponsor at P50.  The IRR calculated on Section B is the IRR to the Project, and based on CAF’s 
adjustments.


---
*Page 12*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 50 
 
 B 
Choose an item.  ………………….  Options  (  )  years  (   ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
[Not applicable]  
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable)  
 
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non -concessional) determined?  
The final price is in the process of being determined, and will depend on the market evaluation and participants in the 
financing.  However, the objective is that final pricing is fai r.  A reasonable and f air price of the  loan is required in order 
to:  
i. Allow (if needed) sell -down of the loans to commercial (local and international) financial institutions at some point 
of time after Project Completion . 
ii. Disincentive (as much as possible) the refinancing of the loans  at one point of time  after Project Completion.  
Currently, CAF is in talks with local commercial banks and other development agencies to promote their participation in 
the financing of the Project, along with CAF and the GCF.    
Please refer to section D.1 of this Funding Prop osal for more information on GCF’s value added to the transaction.  
 
Table: Comparable sol ar PV transactions developed in the period 2013 -15 
Project name  Closing  
(MM/YYYY)  Size 
(in MW)  Investment  
amount  
(US$  M) Leverage  Debt 
amount  
(US$ M) Offtake  
       
Atacama Solar (Phases I & II)  07/2016  142.5 265* 55%* 140.0 * Merchant  
Quilapilun  07/2015  110.0  230.0  70% 160.0  PPA 
Los Loros  05/2015  53.8 134.0  70% 93.8 Merchant  
Laberinto  04/2015  146.0  334.0  56% 187.0  Merchant  
San Pedro III  02/2015  54.0 N/A N/A 104.0  Merchant  
Cerro Dominador (CSP)  01/2015  100.0  1,000.0  50% 500.0  Merchant  
Javiera  10/2014  69.5 160.0  81% 130.0  PPA 
Luz del Norte  06/2014  141.0  366.0  79% 290.0  Merchant  
Maria Elena (CSP)  06/2014  72.8 N/A N/A N/A Merchant  
Chañares, Diego de Almagro,  
Lalackama I & II  05/2014  155.0  272.0  N/A N/A PPA 
La Huayca II  11/2013  30.5 67.1 73% 49.0 Merchant  
San Andres  11/2013  50.7 142.0  71% 100.8  Merchant


---
*Page 13*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 50 
 
 B 
Amanecer Solar  10/2013  100.0  267.0  80% 212.5  PPA 
Salvador  09/2013  70.0 200.0  70% 140.0  Merchant  
Pozo Almonte & Calama  04/2013  26.5 82.7 79% 65.0 PPA


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 50 
 
 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
Please describe relevant national, sub -national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies.   
 
The following sections highlights the global (COP21), Chile’s national, CAF’s and GCF’s institutional context relevant to 
the Atacama Solar Project.  
 
I. Global Context:  On December 12, 2015, 195 nations adopted the Paris Agreement to combat climate change 
and unleash actions and investment towards a low carbon, resilient and sustainable future. The Atacama 
Project provides a “shovel ready”, large scale, and expandable so lar PV project with peer -leading CO2 offset 
potential in Chile (see also section E.1).  
 
II. Chile’s Context:  In preparation for this 2015 Agreement, Chile submitted its new climate action plan (“Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution”) to the UN Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). It 
outlines that (a) 45% of new power -generation capacity installation between 2014 to 2025 is expected to be 
non-conventional renewable capacity, and (b) that related investments will be driven by the private sector . A 
signature goal of the Chilean government's 2014 -18 energy agenda is the “20/25” objective, which calls for 20% 
of Chile's power generation to come from renewable sources by 2025.  Given this context and the scale of the 
Atacama Solar development, the pr oject will act as and enable a paradigm shift in Chile.  
 
Regarding other issues in Chile’s Context, we can add the following:  
 
Hydro Situation in the Country:  Hydro Projects are very important in the SIC.  They account for around 50% of 
the SIC’s energy generation capacity.  However, there are certain inconveniencies for further developing these 
types of projects:  
- Variability of Hydrology (Hydrological Risk , see  section C.5 on this issue ); 
- Environmental concerns of the Chilean people and the Chilean State  with regard to large scale hydro 
developments  (see section C.5 on this issue) ; 
- Capital costs.  
Argentina Gas Issue:  In 1997, Argentina and Chile signed a trade agreement that brought a significant natural  
gas supply at convenient prices.   Several investments followed this agreement, including  gas pipelines to 
supply residential and industrial clients, and the development of thermal  power plants with combined cycle 
power generation units.  Thus, an important share of SIC  and SING (Chilean interconnected grids – see 
Section C.5 for more info on SIC and SING networks) capacity started to depend on the Argentinean fuels 
market.   
III. Institut ional Context - CAF:  CAF’s involvement in the Project would be aligned with four of its institutional 
objectives :  
i. CAF’s Strategic Climate Change Mitigation Program highlights a desire for an increased engagement 
in new renewables, including solar projects . 
ii. CAF’s green financing, which accounted for 24% of approvals in 2014, is expected to increase to 30% 
by 2020.  
iii. CAF is seeking suitable opportunities to make its first major direct investment in Chile, one of CAF’s 
member counties.  
iv. CAF has certain restric tions on the amounts to be allocated to Non -Sovereign clients, and therefore, 
the US$ 50 million commitment shows a strong commitment of CAF on the Project.    
v. CAF is pursuing its first co -financing opportunities with the GCF, which – in turn – seeks to secure 
significant CO2 offset per unit of investment, and additionality, by bridging riskier stage (construction &


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 50 
 
 C 
connection) , and seeking “crowding in” additional private sector funding over time.  
 
CAF’s experience in Chile is not extensive.  However, Chile is a member country of CAF, and one of the 
current objectives of both C hile and CAF is to strengthen  CAF’s presence in the country.  
 
 
IV. Institutional Context - GCF : GCF ’s involvement in th e Project would be aligned with  its institutional objective  
of “Investing into low -emission and climate resilient development”.  Solar generated energy, from a non -
renewable -energy - import -dependent country, fits very well into the mentioned main objective of the GCF.  
Furthermore, given current global financial s ituation, the participation of CAF and the GCF promotes the 
development of this type of large -scale renewable  projects, acting as counter -cyclical and patient providers  of 
capital .  
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline , key barriers, challenges 
and/or policies) and the  outcomes and the  impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving 
the baseline scenario.  
 
Chile “Intended Nation ally Determined Contribution” (Sept 2015) to the UNFCCC details the country’s baseline 
conditions and vulnerabilities. These include the country’s reliance on energy intensive copper mining (57% of the 
Chile’s national exports),  which is also the main ener gy consumer in northern Chile currently served predominantly by 
fossil -fuel based power generation, with energy costs rivaling the highest in OECD countries. The norther n SING 
electricity system, in which the Project is located, features over 90% of total energy production by thermal sources : 
mainly coal (75%), followed by natural gas (12%) and diesel generation (9%).  
 
As noted in Section C.1, Chile has developed its “20/25” objective which calls for 20% of Chile's power generation to 
come from renewable sources by 2025. As of September 30, 2015, the installed capacity of renewable energy 
represented 2,269 MW (or 11.4% of total installed capacity), the large majority of which (90%) is located in the SIC 
transmission system (while the Project is located in the northern SING system). Chile – and the Project – are benefitting 
from declining levelized cost of energy (“LCOE”) for solar PV, which is already less than that of natural gas CCGT and 
approaching parity with wind, small hyd ro and coal -fired technologie s. 
 
The large -scale Atacama Project is aligned with Chile’s renewable energy policies and strategies. The Project also 
leads its solar PV peers in the Atacama Region, including in terms of investment cost per tCO2 offset (see also Section 
E.1).  As in the c ontext described above, the Projects acts as and enables a paradigm shift to renewable energy, 
mobilizing private sector developer and financing, in the energy intensive, northern Chile.  
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
Describe the main activities  and the planned measures  of the project/programme according to each of its 
components.   
 
1) Development, construction, commissioning and operation of a large -scale solar park (143  MW) in the Atacama 
Desert of Chile. The Project site is located in an unpopulated area, and in a region  with the highest level of solar 
radiation in South America.  The associated main activities and preliminary timelines are presented in the chart 
below. The Project is permitted for and can be expanded to reach a total of 25 0 MW.  
 
2) In partnership with Transelec, the largest transmission line operator in Chile,  and utilizing a Build -Own-Operate & 
Transfer (BOOT) to model, develop, const ruct, connect the Atacama Solar  PV plant via a 45.5 km transmission line 
to the Lagunas Substation, a major and existing node of the Northern Electrical Interconnection System of Chile 
(known as SING in its Spanish acronym) .


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 50 
 
 C 
3) Implementation of  a Stakeholder Engagement Plan , which provides for structured engagement, gender 
mainstreaming , a grievance mechanism, and a series of proposed voluntary corporate responsibility oriented 
proposals .  
 
Other important third -party activities include the Government of Chile’s efforts to interconnect the Northern Electrical 
Interconnection  System  (SING), to which the Project will be connecting, with the Central Interconnected System  (SIC)  
to improve capacity. This interconnection of the transmission line systems is planned to occur by the end of 2017, 
although the Project’s related conversi on factors for CO 2 emissions and related estimates assume a 1 -year delay.  
 
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the 
project/programme intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should b e consistent with the 
information reported in the logic framework in section H.  
 
The linkages, outputs and outcomes are outlined from (1) GCF institutional perspective, and (2) a project 
implementation and project -financing perspective below.  
  
1) In terms of broader GCF objectives and indicators, the successful completion, connection and operation of the 
large -scale Project , acting as and enabling a paradigm shift,  would result in a substantial displacements of CO2 
(quantified further below) by increasing the  number of large, low -emission power suppliers in the SING transmission 
system, currently characterized by over 90% fossil fuel based thermal power generation (used mainly by energy 
intensive copper mining operations). The Project would also ena ble and support the realization of Chile’s COP21 -
related ambitious commitments to increase its energy generation matrix from, currently, 11.4%, to 20% of 
renewables by 2025.  
The Project is expected to take a leading rank among its solar PV project peers i n the Atacama Desert in terms of 
size (Phase I 143  MW, expandable to 250  MW), energy  generation (Phase I: 412 GWh/year, P90 value), low 
specific unit costs (Phase I: 71.67US$/t CO2 eq for total investment of US$265) for CO2 offset (Phase I: 3,697,442 
tons of C02 eq. over 20 year lifespan, and 0.98% annual deterioration) , and displacement of large number of 
households’ energy use (Phase I: 190,565, based on average Chilean household power use of 2,160 kWh/year).    
2) In terms of Project  implementation , outputs include progress and completion along defined physical, performance 
and financial milestones typical of project -financed private sector developments. Key elements are presented in the 
table “Key Milestone” and the simplified Gantt “Preliminary Project Sche dule” further above. Physical outputs which 
can be monitored  and are tied to payments of EPC contractor include delivery of components on site, civil works, 
electrical works, installation solar panels, installation of monitoring systems and security instal lation, mechanical 
and electrical completion, grid connection and energization, commissioning and testing, provisional acceptance 
testing, and final completion.  Once completed, the plant will generate and transfer clean PV power into Chile’s merit 
order ba sed dispatch grid, therefore reducing the CO2 intensity of the system and displacing CO2.  Project finance 
loan documents and related completion tests will define relevant indicators which will also be  tied to any GCF c o-
financing. Related k ey financial performance indicators are presented in section B.1 further above.  
 
Other Project -related corporate responsibility -oriented social  objectives,  activities, outputs and expected outcomes 
relate to the successful implementation of the Stakeholde r Engagement Plan, is summarized in the following table.  
 
    
Objectives   Activities  Outputs  Outcomes  
Stakeholder 
engagement  Resources: setting up one 
office in Pica, completion 
of grievance mechanism, 
min. of one quarterly 
meeting and/or similar 
engagement activity  Informed, engaged 
stakeholders; knowledge of 
concerns and intervention 
opportunities;  100% of grievances captured; 
100% of captured grievances in 
process of or fully resolved; 
reduced discontent and maintaining 
good reputation


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 50 
 
 C 
Gender &  
minority 
mainstreaming  Implement a non -
discrimination policy. 
Liaison with EPC, 
Municipality, Civil Society, 
training; providing 
information and access.  
Posting relevant vacancies 
and procurement 
opportunities through the 
local municipalities.  
 Nominate one Community 
Relations Officer and 
Women Champion; generate 
one list populated with 
women -owned or managed 
enterprises or associations; 
screened and trained 10 or 
more women interested in 
employment during 
construction or operation  Improved access, engage ment and 
participation of women for 
vacancies, procurement 
opportunities;  
simplified access to grievance 
mechanism and resulting reduction 
of use of judicial processes(which 
will continue to be available)  
Capacity 
building  Training & development 
initiati ves, engaging with 
municipalities, vocation 
and academic centers, 
civil society  Generate up to 3 MOUs 
during 2016 or construction 
period; obtain outline of  
curricula by 
academic/training MOU 
partners, target reaching 
goal of 20 trained and 
qualified gradu ates within 
construction period; prepare 
and provide populated list of 
qualified persons available 
to EPC/O&M contractor and 
encourage local hiring;  Improved access and uptake on 
project un/related job and 
procurement opportunities;  
Local hiring, 
procure ment  Advertising and outreach  Liaise with local 
municipalities for vacancy 
and procurement 
announcements; identify and 
collate register of qualified 
job seekers and 
enterprises/associations 
which can be trained or used 
to serve project needs to 
simplify local hiring and 
procurement by EPC/O&M 
contractor;  
generate quarterly summary 
of vacancy announcements 
and successful local 
recruiting (matching).  Increased % local workers (baseline 
assumed to be zero), quantify 
spending on local goods & services; 
achieve a sense of fairness and 
equit y; quantify reduced EPC costs 
(such as reduced accommodation 
and transportation costs)  
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and f inancial profile of  the Sponsor ( Executing 
Entity ) and how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity  investment , management, operations, 
production and marketing.  
 
Project Sponsor : 
- Founded in 2010, Sonnedix is a lar ge global solar photovoltaic (“S olar PV”) independent power developer and 
producer, incorporated in Bermuda .  
- Sonnedix has raised over €500MM in equity to date from founders, management, private and institutional


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 50 
 
 C 
investors .  
- Sonnedix is a joint -venture owned and controlled by Sonnedix Global Holdi ngs Ltd. an d IIF Solar Investment 
Ltd. (“JPM IIF”) , an entity controlled by the Infrastructure Investment Fund, an investment fund advised by J.P. 
Morgan Asset Management on behalf of institutional investors.  
- J.P. Morgan Asset Management has over US$ 1.7 t rillion in assets under management . 
- J.P.M. IIF has broad experience in investing into energy companies globally and provides access to a global 
network of executives, institutions and governments . 
- Sonnedix’s management is very experienced in the electricit y sector.  
- As of August 2015, operated and/or mechanically complete d 22 power plants with 126 MW  of installed 
capacity . 
- Sonnedix owns and is developing controlling interests in 39 parks in nine countries: Chile  (this Project) , France, 
Italy, Japan, Puerto Rico (USA), South Africa, Spain, Thailand, and the UK .  
 
 Asset management approach:  
- O&M:  Sonnedix, in line with industry practice, outsources the O&M activities (with the related warranties) to 
trusted partners, ideally capitalizing on existing relationships . However, Sonnedix follows a proactive approach 
to asset management and maintains close follow up of O&M activities . 
- Team:  Sonnedix retains an asset management team that proactively improves performance of the operating 
plant portfolio by:  
 Developing specialized engineering capabilities . 
 Providing detailed daily monitoring and issue detection of each plant as well as long -term performance 
tracking and optimization . 
 Proactive driving of the O&M contractors to address issues quickly . 
 Best-practi ce development – O&M procedures, O&M provider selection, EPC and O&M contract 
improvements and equipment selection . 
 
 Asset management components:  
- Central leadership:  Head of Asset Management with two staff located in London control center with oversight 
across the global portfolio . 
- Monitoring and analytics : Online monitoring of whole portfolio with single monitoring system (Skytron) – driving 
standard reports and alarms and simplifying issue detection (both daily and long -term trends) . Redundant feeds 
for main inputs (meter and irradiation ). 
- Local presence : Asset managers in eac h country dedicated to managing plants: performance analytics, site 
visits, contractor and local authority relationship management, punch -list management – with guidance and 
support  from London . 
- Outsourced O&M:  Management of the operation and predictive and corrective maintenance. Contractual 
incentives to drive outperformance through availability and partially through performance ratio guarantees . 
 
C.5. Market Overview


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 50 
 
 C 
 
The Chilean Electricity Market is influenced by Chile’s general economic and political characteristics:  
 
- Chile is the highest credit rated country in Latin America with AA - according to S&P  
- Attractive business climate – The Ease of Doing Business Index, created by the World Bank, lists Chile as 34th 
in the world as of 2014  
- The Global Competitiveness Report for 2014 – 2015 ranked Chile as being the 33th most competitive country in 
the world a nd the first in Latin America, well above Brazil (57th), Mexico (61th) and Peru (65th)  
- Chile was the first Latin American country to establish a binding renewable energy mandate, with its latest 
objective that at least 20% of all the electricity generated  in the country come from renewable sources 
(biomass, geothermal, marine, small hydro less than 20 MW, solar, and wind) by 2025  
- Chile offers a stable regulatory framework in a politically stable country  
- Chile is one of the best rated economies in Latin Ame rica and among the emerging economies worldwide  
- Its sustained economic growth and social progress have been highlighted by different international 
organizations and, in 2010, it became the first South American country to join the Organization for Economic  
Co-operation and Development (OECD) .  
 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts.  
The Chilean electric power grid is organized in four independent systems. From north to south, they are the Northern 
Interconnected System (SING), the Central Interconnected System (SIC), and two medium size systems in the 
extreme southern region.  The Project will be part of the SING.  
The SING system has an installed gross capacity of 4,202 MW as September 2015, of which 94.1% is thermal 
generation.  Maximum demand in year 2014 was 2,372 MW. It provides energy mainly to large non -regulated 
customers as mining and industrial customers that represent near ly 90% of the total system demand.  
Under such scenario, Chile currently  has the following gross power generation capacity, as of September 2015:  
 
Power g eneration in Chile, is characterized as a competitive market where several generator  companies offer energy 
at different prices, according to their production costs and comm ercial strategies.


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 50 
 
 C 
The system operator (CDEC) has to balance the market aiming to meet the electric demand at a minimum cost, 
preserving system security levels.  It should be noted that the dispatch is done centrally, so the CDEC decides 
autonomously generation levels of all central system as if it were the owner of virtually every one of them.  
Chile imports almost all fossil fuel demanded by the electricity generation segment, which makes the country 
dependent on external suppliers of these resources.  
Furthermore, the electricity generated with hydro -power plants suffer from high volatility.  The annual hydroelectric 
generation is highly variable, depending on hydrology, as can be seen in the next chart. The chart presents the 
hydroelectric generation with all the existing power plants in 2010, considering the historical inflows for the hydrological 
years from 1960 -61 until 2013 -14.   
 
New large hydroelectric projects, that are financially feasible, have been opposed  by the Chilean people and 
government’s opposition.  Those projects would be on the Chilean Patagonia, and not only extensive land would be 
flooded, but the Transmission Lines would be too long, crossing thousands of Km of wild areas.  
 
Describe the competitive environment including the list of competitors with market shares and customer base 
and key differentiating factors (if applicable).  
 
In Chile, the electricity generation, transportation and distribution activities operate as separated businesse s, which are 
mostly developed by the private sector. The government fundamentally plays a regulatory, supervising and subsidiary 
role. 
Private electricity companies are free to decide about their investments, the commercialization of their services. 
Howeve r, they must also fulfil l some obligations established by law, regulations and technical standards that form part 
of the electricity regulatory framework.  
The ownership of power plants in SING is highly concentrated in three market agents: GDF  Suez (E -CL), AES Gener 
and Endesa:  
Regarding electricity demand, since 1998 the demand has increased at rates of 5.0% for the SIC and 6.0% for  the 
SING.  The latest official estimation s forecast a 4.46 % and 6.08% mean  growth rate for the SIC and SING (2014 -
2023), respectively.  
Demand in SING system is basically driven by non -regulated, almost 90%  corresponding to industrial  consumption, 
mainly mining industry.  In turn, for SIC system  almost 70% of consumers have regulated tariffs, mainly residential and 
commercial . 
The SIC and SING new projects are considered in construction when they have  approved all permits required, such as 
environmental approval and others.  
The generation  projects with environmental approval but not yet under construction are presented in  the following


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 50 
 
 C 
table , where the total new generation capacity is 12,556 MW, solar plants being the most  relevant, followed by wind 
and coal -fired. Solar and wind power plants projects account  for 55% and 17%, respectively.  
It is important to mention that there is a Project underway to connect the SIC with the SING, and to strengthen the SIC 
(which is larger and more complex than the SING).  The State is promoting such projects, and they should be ready by 
2018 or 2019.  The projected line (600 km) would connect the Mejillones S/S (SING) and Cardones S/S (SIC), calling 
for an investment of appr oximately US$ 700 million . 
 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any).  
 
Tariffs are indexed to the US$, ev en though clearing is in Chilean Pesos. The denomination is in US$ in order to 
generate a natural hed ge with the energy sources used given that  most energy sources in Chile are imported and 
denomi nated in US$ (oil, gas, ca rbon) . Therefore, there is a pass -through to the final consumer, avoiding subsidies.  
Generation companies have different alternatives to commercialize their energy and power:  
1. Supply large consumers in the market at non -regulated prices ; 
2. Establish long term  supply contracts with distribution companies through competitive auction processes ; 
3. Sell their energy in the Spot Market at marginal costs that are set on an hourly base by the dispatch entity.  
The Project will be selling energy using the third alternative : the Spot Market . 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
 
Regarding the regulation issues, i t is important to start by mention ing that in Chile there is a s table institutional 
framework in place , that can be summarized as follows :  
- Respect for democratic values  
- Low corruption levels  
- High judicial independence  
- Confidence in the political system  
- Strong safeguards for investment contracts  
 
Rationale for Awarding Sonnedix with the Electricity Generation Concession  
- Sonnedi x, through Atacama Solar S.A., holds all of the development, permitting and transmission rights, as well 
as the public land mining concessions, for a period of 30 years.  
- Generation of Energy in Chile is subject to market competition  (Open Market Scenario) . 
- In that respect, once Permits are obtained (including mining concessions), electricity g eneration is permitted . 
- Sonnedix is protected from new entrants  due to the following reasons:  
 Obtaini ng the concessions and the permits challenging and applicants have  to present strong cases 
and show implementing and operating capabilities . 
 Lower Marginal Cost Producers have the right to enter into the grid first.  
 Lower Marginal Cost Producers are still limited in Chile, and there is space in the market for them.  
 As more Low Marginal Cost Producers enter into the market, new Projects will fail to be able to make 
the required returns on investments .


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 50 
 
 C 
 
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the 
project/programme, the issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue.  
 
Permits not Awarded – In Progress  
- Resolution which approves the Favorable Informe for Construction (PAS 96).  Permit is under development.  
- Building -permit for the Project and permit for temporary facilities and camp .  There is a Building Project for the 
Pilot Project.  We are reviewing if it applies for the whole site/project.  
- Pertinence Letters filed under the Environmental Authority regarding modifications to the Project .  In progress.  
- Definitive Electricity Transmission Concession.  T ranselec  is working on this issue.  
 
Please notice that more than 50 permits/concessions etc. are around the Project.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations.  
- Taxes   
- Primarily Value Added Taxes, which can be returned once sales start.  
- Income taxes are around 3 5% of Income Before Taxes . 
- Foreign Exchange Regulations   
- As mentioned, Chile promotes foreign investments, and conditions are po sitive for dividend payments.  
Please be aware that tariffs are indexed to US Dollars . 
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme.  
- Insurance  
- Insurance policies for all -risk, business interruption and third -party liability in accordance with usual industry 
practice will be contracted, and they should be acceptable to Senior Lenders.  
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s 
 
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the 
organization structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering 
committee, executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  Also describe which of these 
structures are already in place and which are still pend ing. For the pending ones, please specify the 
requirements to establish them.  
 
 
Project  Structure  
Atacama Solar S.A., a Chilean subsidiary of Sonnedix Power Holdings, will b e the recipient of the GCF funds  and will 
be responsible for the project’s development . The legal entity that will sign the financing documentation (the Borrower) 
will be Atacama Solar.  
 
Atacama Solar qualifies as “Project Finance” because debt providers will provide funding through a special purpose 
vehicle (“SPV”) that has no cash flows at the time the financing is disbursed. In addition, the debtors will only rely on the  
cash flows generated from the P roject alone, once it begins operations, with limited or no recourse to cash flows from 
entities outside the Project/SPV or the  Project’s equity investors .


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 50 
 
 C 
 
In order for funds to be disbursed to the recipient, a number of conditions precedent will have to be met. These 
conditions will be agreed upon during the loan documentation phase.   
 
Organization  Structure  
Sonnedix’s  executive l eadership and managemen t consists of a group of  executives with a proven track record in 
developing, constructing, acquiring, financing, and operating solar PV assets  globally.  
Sonnedix has a solid presence to develop its business in Chile. The company  will provide administrative services , 
including supervision of the EPC and O&M agreements, accounting, administration, tax filings, debt compliance and 
regular review of changes to the legal/ administrative environment . 
The p roject’s key p ersonnel  biographies are shown below.  
Paulo Pimentel – Sonnedix’s Engineering and Construction Manager Chile  
 Mr. Pimentel has almost 25 years track record in the energy and industrial sectors. Before starting with 
Sonnedix, Mr. Pimentel served 8 years as COO at SelfEnergy, a Portuguese ESCO, mainly dedicated to the 
areas of Energy Efficiency and Decentralized Production (solar PV), with offices in UK, Spain, Mozambique and 
Angola. In this role he was responsible for several projects of PV rooftops projects, with more than 20  MW 
installed in Portugal and Spain, and also for PV development projects of 50 MW in Africa and Eastern Europe. 
The total asset values worth around 100MEuros.  
 Earlier in his career, Mr. Pimentel worked during almost 15 years for ABB, Macllela n International plc and VW 
as Technical Director, Site Manager and Senior Engineer in the Industrial Maintenance and Facilities 
Management areas, as an outsourced service provider for the complete maintenance management facilities of 
automotive, pulp and p aper plants, with annual value more than 15MEuros  
 Mr. Pimentel graduated as an electrical engineer from Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon and has also a Post 
Graduation in Energy Efficiency and Renewables and Business Management . 
 
Felipe Ribbeck – Sonnedix’s Chile Country Manager  
 Mr. Ribbeck has over 20 years of experience in the power industry, his first position at Gener S.A., second 
largest Chilean IPP. During 6 years he led the Latin America expansion closing over a billion dol lars of 
investment  
 Company grew from 500 MW to a diversified energy conglomerate traded on the NYSE, controlling over 7000 
MW in 6 countries  
 Since 2000 he assists European and US utilities, investors and mining companies on, among other: M&A, 
greenfield de velopment, corporate strategy and climate change policy  
 Mr. Ribbeck has an MB A from the Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez; a bachelor’s degree in Administration from the 
Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez; and an Electric Engineering Degree from the Universidad de Chile . 
 
Idris Tayebi – Sonnedix’s Chile Business Development Manager  
 Mr. Tayebi has more than 11 years of experience in the Power sector. After 7 years serving as economist and 
Finance Manager for EDF and GDF SUEZ where he was in charge of conventional and renewa ble energy 
projects financing and part of the development team, in France and Chile  
 In addition, Mr. Tayebi worked as Independent Financial Advisor in the Renewable Energy Sector, across 
European, African and Latin American Jurisdictions. He successfully c ontributed to the sale of 600 MW of 
Solar PV projects in Chile to major Equity investors in the course of 2013 and 2014. He also advised the World 
Bank, GIZ, DFID and the Chilean Government on the design and implementation of Financial Instruments 
associat ed with Carbon Finance topics and Renewable Energy policies, in Chile and various African countries


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 50 
 
 C 
 Mr. Tayebi is currently in charge of the Business Development of Sonnedix in Chile, bringing the exis ting 
portfolio of projects to “ Ready to Build” and lead ing the acquisition process of new assets. He is especially 
focused on the commercial structuring of Atacama Solar and the overall definition of power contracting 
strategy . 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements. Also d escribe 
operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction. If 
applicable, provide the credit analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural 
mitigants to cover the counter party risks.  
 
Key Contractual Arrangements : 
Engineering, Procurement and Construction  (EPC) and Operation & Maintenance (O&M)   
Biosar is the EPC and O&M contract or. 
 
 Biosar is the brand name of the international company  AKTOR S.A., a Greek Company, listed in Athens Stock 
Exch ange, operating in 23 countries  in several continents . 
 EPC company with experience of large utility scale PV plants constructed (or in construction) for ENEL and EDF, in  
the Atacama Desert area. It has experience in multiple countries, including U.S.A, Panama and Chile, Italy, 
Bulgaria and Romania . 
 
Transmission line  
PV plant power substation, transmission line and grid connection equipment at Lagunas substation will be developed 
by Transelec under a Build, Own, Operate and Transfer ( BOOT ) contract and repaid under a 25  year lease with fixed 
payments and repurchase opt ion of US$  1. 
 
Insurance  
Insurance policies for all -risk, business interruption and third -party liability in accordance with usual industry practice are 
in the process of being contracted.  
 
CAF’s Monitoring Activities During Construction  
 
i. CAF has engaged Hatch as independent engineer for supporting the Lender’s technical information 
requirements and the Chilean Legal Firm Carey, for identifying and support on all legal issues around the 
Project.  
ii. Environmental issues will be followed up by CAF’s own personn el. 
iii. Issues regarding the specific monitoring of the Project’s emissions, etc., will be engaged by CAF .


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 50 
 
 C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme  Implementation  
Please provide a project/programme  implementation  timetable  in section I (Annexes) . The table below is 
for illustrative purposes. If the table  format below  is used, p lease refer to the act ivities as numbered in 
Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be completed.  
The key project finance, transmission line, and EPC milestone schedule is presented  below . Selected 
monitoring and evaluation criteria a re also presented in Section H.  
The granting of Project required permits might take more time than expected, which would delay the start 
of construction.  Such risk will be covered with a longer Grace Pe riod.   However, having the permits or a 
favorable opinion of the Local Legal Counsels to Senior Lenders regarding the status of the registry of 
such permits would be a condition precedent to disbursements.   
 
In addition to lenders’ project monitoring ac tivities, which will be supported by the Independent Engineer 
already selected by CAF . Given the relatively short -term nature of constructing solar project and its 
associated transmission line, and the need to capture more high -level and institutional less ons through an 
evaluation exercise, it is proposed to conduct the mid -term evaluation within 1 year of physical completion 
of the Project, with the full evaluation to be competed 5 -year thereafter, and, in any case, prior to GCF’s 
exit.    
It is assumed th at the evaluation will be carried out by an independent third party satisfactory to CAF .   
It is anticipated that a summary of the evaluation report (excluding proprietary, business confidential or 
personal information) may be disclosed by the GCF to the p ublic.   
Milestone    
Project financing milestone schedule    
Preparation/update market, of irradiation, and E& S reports by third party consultants  Apr-15 
Information memorandum/ presentation and financial model  May -15 
CAF mandate letter  Sep-15 
CAF due diligence finalization and Board of Directors approval  Dec-15 
Green Climate Fund due diligence  Mar-16 
GCF board of directors presentation and approval  June -16 
Commercial banks due diligence  May -16 
Common term sheet: commercial banks, CAF, GCF  June -16 
Documentation and signing  Aug-16 
First disbursement  Sept -16 
Transmission line milestone schedule    
Transmission line - preliminary engineering completed  Mar-15 
Transmission line - business strategy  Jul-15 
Transmission line - NTP to Transelec for detailed engineering and RFPs  Aug-15 
Transmission line - Project CAPEX determined  July-16 
Notice to proceed for construction  Aug-16 
COD  Oct-17 
Phase II EPC milestone schedule    
EPC - Preparation of RFP  Mar-15 
EPC contractors prepare bids  Jun-15 
Selection of EPC contractor  Sep-15 
Preparation and negotiation of EPC contract  Oct-15 
Notice to proceed  Sept -16 
COD  Nov-17


---
*Page 26*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 50 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
 
The participation of the GCF, along with CAF, would complete the US$  141 million * in long  term project financing 
required to  bring this worthy large -scale, “shovel ready” and private sector -led s olar photovoltaic  power Project to 
fruition.  
- The participation of the GCF is additional and key for attracting other financial institutions to participate in 
the financing.  
- Current economic and financial market condit ions restrict the participation of commercial banks (local and 
international), and even, other development agencies.  GCF and CAF would act as countercyclical and 
patient financial institutions, for sound projects like this one, which  achieve fast, quantifiable results  (CO2 
displacement), and will act and enable a paradigm shift in Chile.  
- Being able to take electricity spot -market risk will be a step forward in promoting sustainable green energy 
projects in Chile.  Many countries could learn from th e Chilean experience in the electricity generation 
market. In this sense, the Project will act as and support a paradigm shift in Chile and beyond.  
Other issues worth mentioning:  
- The “shovel ready”  Atacama Solar P roject would assist the government of Chile  to achieve its mandate to 
generate 20% of electrical power from renewable energy sources by 2025 . 
- The P roject is located in the Atacama Desert in the SING (northern power grid) where power is 
predominantly generated by coal -fired and LNG power plants serving nationally important and energy 
intensive copper mini ng sector; the Project is a low cost, clean and renewable alternative to new coal -fired 
and/or LNG generated power . 
- Nevertheless, a number of development banks who would traditionally have partic ipated in this type of long 
term project financing already have substantial exposure to solar in Chile and are not willing to fina nce 
more Chilean solar projects.  
- Furthermore, the local banking market lacks depth and availability for loans of this type and  tenor  and 
electricity spot -market risk.  
- The participation of the GCF along with CAF would complete the US$  141 million in long term project 
financing required to bring this large -scale and “shovel ready”  solar PV power project to fruition , and realize 
fast and quantifiable results  in terms of CO2 displacement.  
The first five years of the Project are expected to be the riskiest and, therefore, the ones most difficult to finance, and 
there is where the GCF and CAF’s support provides the most additionality.  This is mainly in light of (i) the risks 
associated with the construction of the Project and its corresponding transmission line and (ii) the uncertainties 
surrounding the SIC -SING interconnection and  the resulting price volatility . 
- GCF role will be additional when financing the Project during this period with the possibility to locally 
refinance (or “crowd in”) once these Project and market risks are reduced.  
- This financing will support the increase in Chile’s renewable generation c apacity (and associated CO2 
displacement) and allow for local financial institutions to safely increase their exposure to large -scale 
renewables in the medium term.  
 
 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy


---
*Page 27*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 50 
 
 
 
 D 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability  will be ensured  in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support  from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long -term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a  description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable) . 
 
The Project is structured in such a way that its financial sustainability is assured , providing the framework for a 
possible sell -down  of the loans to financial markets.  It includes not only the Project’s fundamentals, but also the 
financing structure : 
Chilean  Electricity Market – Regulatory Fundamentals  
- Lower marginal cost electricity providers enter to the grid prior to other energy p roviders (oil, gas and 
carbon plants).  
- Electricity generation permits are given for 30 years, facilitating capital investment recovery and therefore 
promoting private investments.  
 
Technical Fundamentals (see section F.2)  
- Technology used is proven and available in the market.  
- Technology used comes from Solar Energy Technology developers in Germany and China (panels).  
 
Construction and Operating Fundamentals  
- Construction risks will affect only the initial years of the life of the Project, and there is wh ere CAF and the 
GFC participate and mitigate such risks.  
- Construction of this  type of power plants is  perceived as of low complexity.  Most costs are equipment 
costs.  Construction of facilities etc., are less than 20% of the total EPC value . 
- Operation of this type of plants is not complex, and it is almost commoditized.   
- O&M Agreement with Biosar will be for a 5 -year period: local operation might be developed.  Please take 
into account that solar plants are relatively common in Chile, providing a sustaina ble source of trained 
personnel to manage and operate the Project.  
 
Financial Structure Fundamentals  
- Relatively Low Leverage : The leverage of the Project will be around 60/40  or lower .  Similar projects with 
PPA’s could reach up to 90/10 leverage levels (depending, primarily, of the strength of the PPA).  
- Long Tenor : The tenor of the loans helps in decreasing the pressure of cash -flows of the Project.  
- Grace Period : The grace period should be sufficient to mitigate any project construction delays.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
In this section , the accredited entity  is expected  to provide a brief description of the expected performance of 
the proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed  where 
relevant and applicable.  This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 . 
 
E.1. Impact Potential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub -criteria and 
assessment factors in th e Fund’s investment framework .  
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock -in of long -lived, high emission or 
climate -vulnerable infrastructure.  
 
 Total tons of CO2 eq uivalent  to be avoided or reduced per annum  
184,872 tCO2e (20 year life, 0.98% annual efficiency loss)  
 
 Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries and number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population (e.g. total lives to be saved from disruption due to climate -related disasters)  
No estimates directly attributable  to Project available  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO 2 eq) to be 
reduced or avoided (Mitigation only)  Annual  184,872   t CO2e  
Lifetime  3,697,442 tons 
 Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries , disaggregated by gender  (reduced 
vulnerability or increased resilience);  
 Number of beneficiaries relative to total population , 
disaggregated by gender  (adaptation only)  Total  Not relevant  
Percentage (%)  Not relevant  
 
Other 
relevant 
indicators   The realization of the Project would add a large scale (US$  265 million *, 143  MW plus expansion 
opportunity for an additional 107 MW) clean power generation facility to Chile’s northern SING 
electric system, which is currently dominated (>94%) by fossil -fuel based thermal power generation 
serving energy intensive and nationally  important copper mining sector  
 Enables the development o f Project which leads Atacama Desert solar PV peers in terms of size, 
and specific unit costs, including unit CO2 offset per unit of investment  
 Further encourages the government to improve the interconnection and capacity of the main  
electric transmissio n systems in Chile to accommodate emerging new and cost effective solar 
parks which can take advantage of abundant solar irradiation of Atacama Desert  
 
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the 
indicator values for a similar project/programme in a comparable context).


---
*Page 29*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
The Project was benchmarked against a selection of solar peers (for which relevant information could be obtained from 
public sources) based in the Atacama Desert region. The result s are presented below and associated approaches and 
assumptions are listed further below.  
 
Project Name  Closing 
Date  
 Size 
(MW)  
 Invest -
ment 
Amount 
(US$  M) 
 Off-
take Power 
Gene -
ration 
GWh  Comp - 
letion 
date Regio -
nal 
Grid Calcul'
d '000t 
CO2e 
offset 
over 
life-
span  kg 
CO2e / 
US$ 
invest -
ed over 
lifespa
n Offset 
house -hold 
energy 
use/year 
(Chile)  
Atacama Solar 
(Phases I & II)  Juln-16 142.5 265* Mer-
chant  412 Jul-17 SING  3,697  13.95  190,565  
Quilapilun  Jul-15 110 230 PPA 242 Mar-16 SIC   2,069  9.00  112,037  
San Andres  Nov-13 50.7 142 Mer-
chant  99 Mar-14 SIC  838   5.90  45,833  
Amanecer Solar  Oct-13 100 267 PPA 270 Jun-14 SIC  2,289   8.57  125,000  
Pozo Almonte & 
Calama  Apr-13 26.5 82.7 PPA 45 Sep-14 SING   457   5.52  20,833  
Carrera Pinto  May-15 97 180 PPA 260 Aug-17 SIC  2,236  12.42  120,370  
 
1. Estimated annual output and completion dates for Project’s solar peers in the Atacama region , as well as their 
regional grid connections,  were extracted from the latest www.bnamericas.com publications  or elsewhere .   
2. We assumed an expected lifespan of 20 years for all peers to enable comparison  of CO 2e generation over 
useful life of peers . 
3. Claimed CO 2e offset data by peers are published data, as available  (and probably  not adjusted for P90 output 
and 0.98% annual e fficiency degradation as applied to the Atacama Project) .  
4. Specific emission data were taken from the web site of the Chilean Ministry of Energy: 
http://huelladecarbono.minenergia.cl/ and used in such a way, that until December 2017 the 2010 -2014 five 
years averages were taken for bot h SING and SIC  transmission systems . From January 2018 onwards, when 
the two systems are expected to be interconnected, a weighted average was calculated on the basis of the July 
2015 installed capacity of 4,829.1 MW @ SING & 1 8,458.4 MW @ SIC.  
5. An adjustment of 0.98% year efficiency deterioration was incorporated over the lifespan C O2e offset 
calculation.  
6. For the average household ene rgy use we used 2 ,160 kWh/year (source: Chilean Ministry of Energy).


---
*Page 30*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity  can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication  (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s  expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate -
resilient development pathways could be scaled -up and replicated including a description of the steps 
necessary to accomplish it.  
 
- Current economic and financial market conditions restrict the participation of commercial banks (local and 
international), and even, other development agencies in Chile.  Availability of countercyclical and patient capital 
for sound projects will promote and enable a paradigm shift in Chile an d beyond.  
- Being able to take electricity spot -market risk will be a step forward in promoting sustainable green energy 
projects in Chile.  Many countries could learn from the Chilean experience in the electricity generation market.  
- The project is located in the vast Atacama Desert in the SING (northern power grid) where power is 
predominantly generated by coal -fired and LNG power plants serving nationally important and energy intensive 
copper mining sector; the project is a low cost, replicable, clean and renewable alternative to new coal -fired 
and/or LNG generated power . 
- Atacama Desert provides ideal solar radiation, low population density, lack of competing land use, and 
otherwise suitable environmental and social conditions and could host many more large -scale solar PV 
projects  
- The Project demonstrates the declining cost structure of solar PV projects associated with adoption of 
technological improvement, the appropriate project siting in low environmental and social risk area  
- The government will be encou raged to pursue/improve interconnecting the grid system to take advantage of 
the energy production capability of AS Pha se I & II (250MW) – and possibly  other projects  
- Project has developed  a stakeholder engagement plan , including gender mainstreaming  (summarized below) , 
and is seeking collaboration opportunities with academic and vocational centers to further promote non -
conventional renewable projects in Chile . 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning


---
*Page 31*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective 
learning processes, or institutions.  
 
- The Atacama Desert features highest solar radiation in the world but this has not been translated into largest or 
most solar PV developments in the world . 
- The experience with solar PV in northern Chile (broader Region I) is based on smaller and modular scales and 
is mainly contracted through PPAs . 
- The Atacama Solar P roject would demonstra te the technical and financial viability of large scale operatio ns, 
crowd -in private sector funding from various sources at scale, and allow a more rapid ramp -up of renewable  
energy generation, and associated economy of scale . 
- Also, the government will be encouraged to pursue/improve interconnecting the grid system to take advantage 
of the energy production capability of AS Phase I & II (250MW) – and possible other projects . 
- Significant learning is also expected to emerge from this Project which is CAF’s first major direct project finance 
deal in Chile, CAF’s first majo r direct investment in Chile’s renewable energy generation sector in Chile, and 
CAF’s first co -financing with t he GCF. At the same time, this P roject would also be Chile and CGF’s first 
collaboration, which comes on the heels of the COP21/Paris Agreement.  
- Project is developing expanded stakeholder engagement plans  (including gender mainstreaming ) and seeking 
collaboration opportunities with academic and vocational centers to further promote – and share knowledge 
about - non-conventional renewable projects i n Chile . 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained 
participation of private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development  that go beyond the 
program.  
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples 
include:  
 
- Project’s power generation will further provide incentive to government to pursue the interconnection and  
reinforcement of the north -south grid systems, thus encourage access for more renewable projects  
- Demonstrate access to loans and investments for renewable projects with high upfront capital costs and need 
for patient capital with  long repayment tenors  
The Atacama Solar PV Project is a low -cost substitute for coal -fired and LNG generated power that is prevalent in the 
SING (northern power grid) in Chile . 
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies


---
*Page 32*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to 
systematically drive investment in low -emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional 
low-emission policies, and/or improve climate -responsive planning and developme nt. 
- Chile was the first Latin American country to establish a binding renewable energy mandate. In October 2013, the 
country approved the mandate increase, which rose to 20% renewable electricity generation by 2025. Project will 
contribute to achieving thi s mandate.  
- Project has already been permitted under Chilean regulatory requirements.  The Project has introduced additional 
elements and activities, such as submission of verified project documents under the UNFCCC Clean Development 
Mechanism . 
- The P roject has gone beyond national permitting requirements, inviting externals environmental and social impact 
evaluation based on  the IFC Performance Standards (adopted also by the GCF) . 
- Project has develop ed stakeholder engagement plans and is seeking colla boration  and capacity building  
opportunities with academic and vocational centers to further promote non -conventional renewable projects in 
Chile . 
- Even though: i) Chile has a robust regulatory regime; ii) the State is promoting the development of these types of 
non-conventional renewable -energy projects; and iii) local banks have participated in the financing of merchant 
generators, this specific Project will have a better financing structure (more flexible to face spot -price risk), and will 
not face the  Transmission restrictions that generation projects in the SIC faced.  
-  Finally, promoting the participation of institutions with little financial and risk exposure to Chile helps in the 
diversification of projects and financial sources.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
 
Economic co -benefits:  
- Total number of jobs created:  As detailed further in the Project’s Summary ESIA and Annex I of this proposal, 
the Project will use EPC contractors who, in turn, will recruit temporary workers  for a variety of skilled, semi -
skilled and unskilled tasks during construction. Only a very small number (<20) of permanent jobs will be 
created during operations for O&M support . The Project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan contains measurable 
gender mainstreaming initiatives and expected outcomes, as outlined also below:  
Activity  Output  Outcome  
Resourcing, liaison with 
EPC, Municipality, Civil 
Society, training; providing 
information and access  Set up Women Champion role, office in 
Pica, lists of women -owned enterprises; 
screened & trained women interested in 
employment; grievance mechanism  Improved access, engageme nt and 
participation of women for vacancies, 
procurement opportunities; simplified 
access to grievance mechanism  
 
- Given the presence of a developed tourism infrastructure, the population centers near the Project, particularly 
Matilla and Pica (population  ca 5,000), and Pozo Almonte (ca 10,000), are expect to benefit from provision of 
goods and services (including accommodation) to the Project during the construction period lasting 
approximately over one year . 
- 2011 tourism statistics show that Pica has cap acity to provide over 17,000 room nights (and 65,000 bed nights) 
per year, while Pozo Almonte has a capacity of approximately 16,000 room nights (and ca 36,500 bed nights).


---
*Page 33*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
This means that the population centers near the Project area are already well posit ioned to capture additional 
economic benefits associated with the construction phase of the Project .  
- Amount of foreign currency savings:  N.A. 
- Amount of government’s budget deficits reduced:  N.A.  
 
Social co -benefits:  
- Improved access to education:  Project is seeking collaboration opportunities with academic and vocational 
centers to promote renewable energy and related training opportunities. The Project’s formalized Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan is designed to make Project opportunities more accessi ble to women (though gender 
mainstreaming efforts , see further below ) and indigenous groups by tapping into existing organizational 
structures and activities  
 
- Improved regulation or cultural preservation:  While  the project site is devoid of population and cultural heritage, 
the broader region features indigenous people and world class cultural heritage, such as geoglyphs. Project 
and its scale is locally viewed as an opportunity for additional touristic attraction  
- Improved health and safety:  Project would provide and apply world class  occupational health and safety 
standards, including compliance with core ILO conventions  
 
Environmental co -benefits:  
- Project independently analyzed by Prizma (staffed by former E&S specialists and current STC of the EBRD 
and the World Bank Group) using the IFC Performance Standards which is also used by the GCF for its project 
evaluation process. Project is located in an  OECD member country with associated strong institutional 
structures. Project falls in a “B” category, meaning that the Projects has limited adverse social or environmental 
impacts that are few in number, generally site -specific, largely reversible and rea dily addressed through 
standard mitigation measures . Given site characteristics, including lack of competing land use in desert flat 
largely devoid of population and biological resources, no major or unique environmental and social risks were 
identified. EPC contractors will be required to follow Good International Industry Practice, including in areas 
such as occupational, health and safety. T he main environmental benefit of the Project is its clean and 
renewable energy generation potential detailed elsewhere in this GCF proposal. Additional details are provided 
in Annex I . 
- Improved air quality:  N.A.   
- Improved soil quality:  N.A.     
- Improved b iodiversity:  Project has committed to conduct surveys of flora along the transmission line route, 
which is characterized by hyper -arid desert. The collected information will improve the biodiversity knowledge 
base of this region . Developer is also developi ng a wildlife rescue/relocation plan, and plans to avoid certain 
flora, both common for projects in the Atacama Desert.     
 
- Gender -sensitive development impact   
- Proportion of men and women in jobs created :  
 In line with Chile’s regulatory requirements, which prohibit gender discrimin ation, Atacama Solar is 
committed to developing a human resources policy that states that discrim ination  in hiring will not be 
allowed .


---
*Page 34*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
CAF’s Gender Assessment Report for Chile and associated recommendations for the Project have been disclosed by 
CAF on its website. The Project has integrated a gender mainstreaming effort into its Stakeholder Engagement Plan , 
as summarized in terms of planned activities , outputs and expected outcomes in the table below . The Sponsor plans to 
have an office in nearest community to improve to project benefits (procurement, temporary employment, and access 
to grievance mechanism), designate a “Women Champion” a s part of its environmental and social organizational 
structure, and engage with locally -based organizations and institutions which promote women entrepreneurs. The 
Sponsor will also work closely with the EPC contractor to ensure that the human resources p olicy will be establishing 
non-discrim ination in hiring will be applied by all contra ctors working on the Project.  
 
Activity  Output  Outcome  
Resourcing, set up office 
in Pica, liaison with EPC, 
Municipality, Civil Society, 
training; providing 
information and access  Nominate one Community Relations 
Officer and Women Champion,; list of 
women -owned enterprises or 
associations; screened & trained 10 or 
more women interested in employment 
during construction or operations; 
functional grievance mechanism  Improve d access, engagement and 
participation of women for vacancies, 
procurement opportunities; simplified 
access to grievance mechanism  
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the ben eficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)  
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/ programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for be neficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc).  
 
Level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups  
- The SING (northern power grid) in Chile currently has a predominance of coal -fired and LNG generated power 
plants s erving mainly the energy intensive and nationally important copper mining sector (nationally 
contributing 57% of national exports) which are subject to high energy prices and commodity price swings  
- The Atacama solar PV Project is a low cost alternative to new coal -fired power plants currently being planned 
in the SING  
- The Project is expected to reduce exposure to climate risk and to contribute to the reduction of CO2 emissions  
in a region which - due to hyper -arid climatic conditions and low population density - provides limited other 
Climate Change mitigation opportunities (such as reforestation)  
- The Project will contribute to helping Chile to achieve its mandate to generate 2 0% of its electrical power from 
renewable sources by 2025  
Does the country have a fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from addressing the needs?  
- The Project will be financed by the sponsor and senior debt from development financial and commercial 
institutions. Hence, Chilean fiscal are accounts are not a factor; and in any event; Chile has strong public 
finances  
- Chile may be experiencing a contraction of its budget and tax revenues due to contracting base metals and 
mining market (by  about 1/3 over last year), making Chile now even more reliant on private sector -driven 
projects like Atacama Solar to successfully achieve its ambitious renewable energy policies


---
*Page 35*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
Does the local capital market lack depth or history?  
- While the Chilean capital markets are among the most solid and developed in L atin America, the local banking 
market lacks depth and availability for new long term debt financing for renewable energy, including solar PV  
- The majority of long term project financing for re newable energy power projects over the past 5 years has been 
provided by development banks  
- Many of the development banks who have been active in financing renewable energy projects in Chile have 
withdrawn from the market, given the level of exposure and am ount of financing that they have provided to 
date 
- Local banks face the issues of size of the deals, tenor, currency, and in this particular case, elec tricity spot -
market price risks  
 
Needs for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity  
- Chile is  an OECD member country and has a robust regulatory framework and a well -established energy 
regulation . 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
- Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population  
 
The World Bank categorizes Chile is a High Income OECD country with related well developed institutional 
context. The Project site is located in a more remote, desert area which is devoid of population. The more 
remote, hyper -arid conditions and low popula tion density contributes to relatively lower rankings of the 
population centers near the Project related to Chile’s national human development index. However, the region 
has access to reasonably good infrastructure, including road and power (serving also t he regionally important 
mining sector), and social infrastructure, including education. Agriculture and tourism are also important 
economic activities in the region. The existing tourism infrastructure positions population centers such as Pica 
and Pozo Alm onte well to capture temporary economic opportunities associated with  the construction period 
lasting approximately over one year (construction start to mechanical completion for Phase I: 143MW).  
 
- Absence of altern ative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal o r balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs  of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market)  
 
At present, there is a financing gap with limited financing sources for solar merchant projects in Chile. 
Development banks that typically finance those types of projects have already reached their internal exposure 
limits and are reluctant to finance additional projects, leaving a substantial gap in projects that could be 
developed and available financing. Fo r instance, OPIC, IFC, IDB, and DEG have already financed over US$  2 
billion in solar PV projects. Furthermore, international commercial banks are only willing to finance projects with 
PPAs in place, leaving only local commercial banks as the financing sou rce for these type of projects on 
merchant basis; however, local commercial have limited lending capacity due to their relatively small size.  
 
- Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
No specific institutional strengthening or capacity building efforts are required or anticipated as part of the Project . The 
Project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan foresees a structured engagement and liaison with the EPC contractors and 
other stakeholders (including municipal committees) to make  Project benefits, such as employment and provision of 
goods and services, more accessible to local communities, including women and indigenous population. Also, the 
developer intents to engage in MOUs with academic and vocational institutions to provide r elevant capacity building 
opportunities and promote renewable projects in Chile.


---
*Page 36*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme  
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and  coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs  
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate -
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional 
framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.  
The Project will contribute to wards  Chile’s renewable generation targets.  
- In advance of its participation in COP21 , Chile submitted its climate action plan to the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in September 2015 . This “Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution” (“INDC”) includes the following commitments on Chile’s behalf:  
 Reduce CO2  emissions per capita by 30% versus 2007 levels (i.e., down from 1.02 tCO2e/million 
CLP$ 2011 to 0.71 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011)  
 Additionally, contingent upon receiving international grants, Chile commits to reduce CO 2  emissions per 
capita by 35 -45% versus 2007 levels  (i.e., down from 1.02 tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011 to 0.56 -0.66 
tCO2e/million CLP$ 2011)  
 Sustainable management and recovery of 100,000 hectares of forest, representing captures and 
reduction of greenhouse gases estimated at 600,000 tCO2e per annum beginning 2 030 
 Contingent on extension of Decree -Law 701 and the approval of a new forestry development act, Chile 
commits to reforestation of 100,000 hectares, representing captures of 900,000 -1,200,000 tCO2e per 
annum beginning 2030  
- A signature goal of the Chilean government's 2014 -18 energy agenda is the “20/25” objective, which calls for 
20% of Chile's power generation to come from renewable sources by 2025. As of September 30, 20 15, the 
installed capacity of renewable energy represented 2,269 MW (or 11.4% of tota l installed capacity ), the large 
majority of which (90%) located in the SIC.  
- Based on the pipeline of projects under construction, solar PV is expected to become the largest source of 
renewable energy in Chile by mid -2017. Furthermore, solar PV is expected to represent 60% of an additional 
28.0GW of renewable energy projects that are in pre -construction stage. Part of this acceleration in solar PV 
investments is attributable its declining levelized cost of energy (“LCOE”),  which is already less tha n that of 
natural gas CCGT and approaching parity with wind, small hydro and coal -fired technologies.  
In 2012, the Atacama Project had already developed a Project Design Document under the Clean Development 
Mechanism of the UNFCCC and, as part of that process, had received a letter of support (dated October 2, 2012) by 
Chile’s Ministry of Environment, Chil e’s designated national focal point under the UNFCCC [see Annex in Section I ]. 
 
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and  executing entities to deliver  
Accredited Entity: CAF  
CAF is a development bank created in 1970, made up by 19 countries - 17 of Latin America and the Caribbean, Spain 
and Portugal - as well as 14 private banks in the region. With headquarters in Caracas, Venezuela, CAF has offices in 
Buenos Aires, La Paz, Brasilia, Bogota, Quito, Madrid, Mexico D.F, Panama City, Asuncion, Lima , Mont evideo and 
Port of Spain. It promotes a sustainable development model through credit operations, non -reimbursable resources, 
and support in the technical and financial structuring of projects in the public and private sectors of Latin America. CAF 
offers s everal products and services: loans, structured financing, guarantees and collaterals, credit lines and technical 
cooperation.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
 
In addition to above climate finance sums, CAF has a successful and measurable track -record of integrating climate 
change into its development mandate; enjoy trust from both donor and recipient countries governments and private 
sectors in the region; could contribute substantially to catalyzing additional climate finance and has extendedly 
demonstrated capacity to develop and impl ement climate programs at scale in a timely and efficient manner.  
Specifically, in Project Finance related deals, CAF has a strong track -record in energy related deals, acting primarily as 
leading financial institution (please see credentials annexed).  
For evaluating this Project Finance transaction, such as the Atacama Solar, CAF has perform ed the following activities:  
i. Evaluate the strategic issues around the Project, including understanding of the Sponsor, needs in the country 
and the specific sector .   
ii. CAF set up a multidisciplinary team to perform the due diligence, and to coordinate the analysis work of  
external consultants . 
iii. The team was led by the Structured Finance Team, and is composed of: i) a Sector Specialist and a Sector 
Business Manager; ii)  an in -house Environmental and Social Specialist; iii) an in -house legal counsel; and iv) a 
local business manager.  
iv. Independent engineers and external legal counsels were  engaged, for supporting on the due -diligence.  
v. Results of the due diligence (legal, technical, environmental and social, and financial) were  presented to the 
Structured Finance Head, the Sector Vice -presidency (energy in this case) and to CAF’s Credit Risk team . 
vi. General and specific monitoring covenants were  agreed, as well as risk mitiga tion structures.  
vii. The Project was then presented to a Credit Committee, which recommend ed its approval to the approving 
bodies.  
viii. CAF reviews each disbursement, as well as follows up on quarterly information showing advance in the 
development of the Project.   
ix. Specific monitoring of the Project’s  financials, environmental and social aspects,  emissions,  legal,  etc., is 
engaged by CAF  throughout its entire life .   
 
It is important to mention that CAF’s approving and monitoring processes are constantly audited (bo th internal and 
external), as it is part of its obligations, not only for its shareholders, but for its bondholders.  CAF is the institution that 
has the largest and broader number of bond issuances in international markets of Latin America.   
 
Executing Entity: Sonnedix  
With regards to  the Executing Entity, Sonnedix’s  executive l eadership and managemen t consist of a group of  
executives with a proven track -record in developing, constructing, acquiring, financing, and operating solar PV assets  
globally. CAF has assess ed Sonnedix’s  capability to deliver  based on its standards of corporate governance , strong 
project -execution track record  and overall financial and market position.  
 
In terms of financial management, the AE feels comfortable with Sonnedix’s managerial experience in reputable 
financial, energy and engineering firms . Sonnedix boasts a well -diversified revenue base and works with credit -worthy 
off-takers and contractors, as reflected by their financial statements , which have been considered sati sfactory by CAF’s 
business and risk teams . 
 
The same applies to Sonnedix’s procurement capability and overall adequacy of its system of internal control for the 
Project. Sonnedix’s experience and capability is demonstrated by the fact that it owns more tha n 35 solar power 
projects at various stages of maturity in different regions  with control of more than 800  MW of production capacity and


---
*Page 38*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
is expanding its global operations . 
 
These arguments are reinforced by the fact that in 2014 institutional investors ad vised by J.P. Morgan  Asset 
Management joined Sonnedix’s  management and shareholders in a new  50/50 joint venture platform company,  
Sonnedix Power Holdings, to pursue opportunities in the global solar market.  The due diligence undertaken prior to 
closing the deal was comprehensive.  
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs , civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
 
- Previously, a s part of the environmental permitting process, the developer submitted an environmental and social 
impact declaration (DIA) and received the required environmental approval/license, the Resolution of 
Environmental Qualification (RCA). The related studies and official records of notifications, evaluations, and 
meetings continue to be  disclosed to the public on the government’s website .  
- A Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) Project Design Document Form (CDM PDD) was generated for the 
previous version of the Project and filed (disclosed) with the UNFCCC , and was supported by the relevant 
Designated National Authority at that time: Chile’s Ministry of Environment . As part of this process, the developer 
conducted a stakeholder meeting in the town of Pica, followi ng notification via invites, web -posting, posters, and 
local radio announcements. Eleven representatives from the local communities, in addition to representatives from 
the developer and consultants, attended the meeting. Questions asked related to other s olar projects, opportunity 
for self -sufficiency at household level using solar, concerns about electromagnetic fields, and business 
opportunities for tourism. All attendees expressed their support for the Project .  
- The Project has developed  a Stakeholder Engagement Plan designed to continue to develop and maintain a 
constructive relationship with key stakeholders over the life of the Project. This plan has been designed to allow the 
views, concerns and interests of stakeholders, particularly of the local co mmunities to be heard, understood, and 
taken int o account in project decisions.  
- The Project is committed to implementing an effective two -way process of engagement that will be guided by the 
following four principles:  
1. Timely – mean ing that engagement begins early in the process of identification of risks and impacts, and will 
continue in a structured manner and on an ongoing basis;  
2. Accessible – mean ing that engagement is based on the disclosure and dissemination of relevant, transparen t, 
objective, meaningful and easily accessible information in the local language;  
3. Inclusive – mean ing that engagement is inclusive of all those directly affected; and  
4. Free – mean ing that  engagement is free of external manipulation, interference, coercion,  or intimidation.   
- The specific objectives of this plan are to:  
- Identif y key project stakeholders ; 
- Consult and allow for the meaningful participation of stakeholders ;  
- Provide for ongoing u pdates to the local communities;  
- Formalize a grievance mechan ism. 
 
Additionally, CAF has pursued several meetings with Chile NDA in order not only to strengthen the present proposal 
but also to create closer ties and to serve Chile’s national development and climate priorities acting as an regional


---
*Page 39*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
accredited entity able  to channel resources to the country.  
To this date, the interactions have been positive, and CAF expects to obtain the No -Objection Letter from the NDA .  
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private 
and other public investment.  
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achiev e, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 ( core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq) . 
The financial structure is necessary (see section E.6.2 below), as the Project faces market uncertainties, even though 
it is aligned with Chilean Renewable Energy Strategies , and, as explained in sections B and D2, it is financially viable 
with no subsidies around it.  
In that respect, without the support from the GCF and CAF:  
- The Project will not have access to the local and international financial markets, given the size of the 
financial requirements, the expected tenor and the electricity spot market risks.  
- Current global energy and commodities markets are passing through a downturn, and the participation of 
CAF and the GCF help in the promotion of these types of necessary projects.  In this respect, CAF and the 
GCF will be acting as countercyclical  financing providers . 
- The structure tries to mitigates main structural risks (Electricity Spot Market Risk), providing a framework 
for an exit strategy when market conditions improve.  
CAF do es not envision any risk of crowding out private or public investment in this sector : 
- Chile is a country with deficits in energy generation: ph ysical infrastructure still uses imported commodities 
for energy generation.  This Project will substitute not sustainable sources of energy, with reliable and 
clean sources of locally generated energy.  
- Chile has implemented a strategy to promote clean and  renewable energy.  However, the State is not 
subsidizing the sector, but has set up conditions for private and public sector to participate on a sustainable 
way: 
 Promotes private sector participation.  
 Promotes the entrance of lower marginal cost energy pr oducers first in the electricity grid.  
 Has provided longer tenor permits to renewable electricity producers, in order to assure the 
recovery of capital invested.  
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments  (mitigation only)  
Please  provide the co -financing ratio  (total amount of co -financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme)  and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long -term low emission investment.  
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) .


---
*Page 40*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
Sources  Amount (US$ M) % 
Base Equity  [116]  45% 
CAF Senior Debt [50] 20% 
GCF Senior Debt [49] 19% 
Local Senior Debt  [42] 16% 
Total  [257]  100%  
VAT Line 8 NA 
Total project cost [265]*  NA 
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based 
on the analysis conducted in F.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please notice that these calculations have been made at P90.  
 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.  
 
The Project is totally viable, given:  
i. Chile’s need of this type of electricity generation projects, in order to achieve energy independence, and to 
comply with its environmental commitments.  
ii. There are no subsidies around the Project, and energy is sold at Spot Market Prices.  
iii. Technology used has been widely proven.  
iv. Construction and operation are not complex.  
 2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  2025  2026  2027  2028  2029  2030  2031  2032  2033  2034  
  Base Case (Average 
Price=72USD/MWh)  1.50  1.53  1.88  1.47  1.71  1.86  1.92  1.93  1.86  1.93  2.04  2.10  2.09  2.05  2.07  1.98  N/A 
  Scenario with Price 
level=65 US$/MWh  1.89  2.15  2.47  1.68  1.67  1.66  1.61  1.61  1.63  1.64  1.64  1.63  1.63  1.63  1.62  1.61  N/A 
  Scenario with Price 
level=55 USD/MWh  1.59  1.74  2.06  1.41  1.41  1.43  1.39  1.40  1.42  1.42  1.42  1.41  1.41  1.40  1.39  1.37  N/A 
  Scenario with Price 
level=46 USD/MWh  1.30  1.35  1.60  1.11  1.08  1.09  1.03  1.07  1.11  1.14  1.15  1.16  1.16  1.16  1.15  1.15  2


---
*Page 41*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
v. The Project is Environm ental and Social friendly.  
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, 
etc.).  
The Project is structured in such a way that its financial sustainability is assured, providing the framework for a possible 
sell off of the loans to financial markets.  It includes not only the Project’s fundamentals, but also the financing structur e 
(see section D2).  
In that respect, as soon as the Project is operational, and the Interconnection betwe en the SIC and the SING occurs 
(see Section C.5) , providing the whole Chilean electricity market more stability and open access to all players, opening 
the possibility of signing Power Purchase Agreements by generators like Atacama Solar.  Such contracts would 
improve the bankability of the Project.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.  
 
The Project is using some of the best proven solar technology available in the market.  Through a competitive selection 
process, technical considerations were evaluated.  
The process included requesting the EPC Contractor Bidders to present an equipment proposal along with the general 
EPC considerations.  That process helped in the identification of the mix of equipment that would be used, even though 
such mix was not originally presented by the entity finally chosen . 
For more information on Technology for the Project, please refer to section F2.  
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, –  
 
(a) Total project financing  US$ 265 million * 
(b) Requested GCF amount  US$ 49 million  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  3, 697,439 tCO2eq  
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c)  US$ 71.67 / tCO2eq * 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c)  US$ 13.25 / tCO2eq  
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above.  
1. We assumed P90 power generation output and an expected lifespan of 20years . 
2. Specific emission data were taken from the web site of the Chilean Ministry of Energy: 
http://huelladecarbono.minenergia.cl/  and used in such a way, that until December 2017 the 2010 -
2014 fi ve years averages were taken for both SING and SIC transmission systems. From January 
2018 onwards, when the two systems are expected to be interconnected, a weighted average was 
calculated on the basis of the July 2015 installed capacity of 4,829.1 MW @ S ING & 18,458.4 MW @ 
SIC.  
An adjustment of 0.98%/year  efficiency deterioration was incorporated over the lifespan CO2e offset 
calculation.


---
*Page 42*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 50 
 
 
 E 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.  
A review of the Project against peers in the Atacama Desert (for which relevant data could be obtained) 
shows a peer leading position in various key categories, ranging from cost per tCO2e  to energy of Chilean 
household s offset. Please refer to table in Sec tion E.1.  
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
 
CAF is expected to r aise around US$ 49 million from the GCF, and this will help to mobilize US$ 21 6 
million * to this low-emission and climate -resilient Project.  CAF has approved US$ 50 million already for 
this Project, and is actively supporting the participation of local banks and/or other development agencies.  
Even though CAF would prefer to mobilize private sector funds, current financial and commodities markets 
situation are temporarily lowering the appetite for this type of Projects across the Region.  
Following CAF’s countercyclical role, efforts will continu e in promoting this Project, with funds from either 
private or non -private sectors.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)   
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 50 
 
 
 F 
 
 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3).  
i. The Project is financially feasible, as seen in the evaluation of CAF’s Base Case  Scenario (with solar r adiation 
at P90), and after evaluation of spot-market price sensitivities. Sensitivities included the analysis of results 
using average spot prices of 46 US$/MWh (equilibrium point) and scenarios of 55 US$/MWh, 65 US$/MWh 
and 72 US$/MWh (Base Case as per Market Consultants recommendations and expectations).  
ii. Solar radiation on the site is one of the best in the region.  
iii. The Project is technically sound and its operation present low complexity levels.  
iv. Being a low-emission and climate -resilient  Project, it requires support from institutions like C AF and GCF, more 
so, during the current  volatile global environment.  
v. Economic, technical, operational and, obviously , environmental sustainable viability are found in this Project.  
 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2.  
i. Chile needs support in its strategy to increase the development of non -conventional renewable energy.  
ii. Current market conditions are preventing other regular players to finance t he Project, and CAF and the GCF 
would act as countercyclical entities in this financing.  
iii. The financial structure and the fundamentals of the Project assure its long term viability and sustainability.  
iv. Tenor is hard to obtain by local players, and Construction Risks as well as Spot Market Energy Price r isk 
prevent this Project from ra ising funding from more traditional sources.  
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.  
Solar Photovoltaic (PV) is a method of generating electrical power by converting solar radiation into direct current 
electricity using semiconductors that exhibit  the photovoltaic effect . 
PV power generation employs solar panels composed of a number of solar cells containing a PV material .  Solar PV is 
now, after hydro and wind power, the most important renewable energy source in terms of global installed capacity . 
The Sponsor has chosen proven technolog ies and proven technology providers for the development of the Project.  
Hatch, the independent engineer, is of the opinion that the technology to be used is robust .  
The following are pictures of the Pilot, on the s ite of the Project:   
Pilot Pannels on the Project Site (operational)  Project’s Pilot Plant being connected to grid (Nov 2015)


---
*Page 44*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 50 
 
 
 F 
 
 
 
 
 
Low Voltage Transmission Line  to site  (connected)  
 Electric Subestation  (owned by Transelec)  
 
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
The Project  has developed  a high-level Environmental  and Social Management System  (ESMS) , which is scaled  to the 
limited  and readily  manageable risks associated with the Atacama Solar Project. The key components of  the ESMS 
are: 
(i) Sustainability Policy;  
(ii) Identification of risks and impacts (ESIA pr ocess, stakeholder engagement);  
(iii) Managemen t and emergency response plans;


---
*Page 45*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 50 
 
 
 F 
(iv) Organizational structure  and competency;  
(v) Stakeholder engagement  and grievance managemen t; and  
(vi) Monitoring and review.   
With regards to Gender considerations, CAF has developed a Gender Assessment plan and report  to provide 
contextual gender -related information and  performance of Chile, as well as to develop an action plan ensuring equal 
gender participation and women empowerment.  The Project’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan contains measurable 
gender mainstreaming initiatives and expected outcomes, as summarized below . 
Activity  Output  Outcome  
Resourcing, liaison with 
EPC, Municipality, Civil 
Society, training; providing 
information and access  Set up Women Champion role, office in 
Pica, lists of women -owned enterprises; 
screened & trained women interested in 
employment; grievance mechanism  Improved access, engagement and 
participation of women for vacancies, 
procurement opportunities; simplified 
access to grievance mechanism  
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing.  
The Executing Entity ’s procurement policy is aligned with that of CAF’s Manual on Goods and Services Proc urement, 
as reviewed by the GCF . Similar ly, Sonnedix’s  financial management policies are aligned with CAF’s to ensure strong 
internal control . 
Construction Procurement  and O&M Contractor  
The contractor s for EPC and O&M w ere selected through a competitive bidding process . The selection was based on 
the following criteria: experience, quality of equipment, price, energy production, scheduled time to perform the work, 
leverage and bankability.    
Financial Management  
Financial management and other accounting, administrative a nd asset management services will be provided to 
Atacama Solar via an administrative services agreement with a Sonnedix affiliate in Chile.   
Those services will be further enhanced by a support agreement with Sonnedix UK Services Limited in London where a  
centralized team of experts for the Sonnedix Group provides additional accounting and asset management services  to 
all subsidiaries, including Europe, South Africa and Japan . More details on Sponsor’s involvement on the management 
of the Project are inclu ded in Section C.4.  
CAF’s Monitoring  Activities  
CAF performs a series of Monitoring activities to all operations it enters , without prejudice to binding GCF monitoring 
and performance framework conditions to be detailed in the Accreditation Master Agreement and that CAF is willing to 
follow once the AMA is finalized between the Parties. Subject to that, CAF’s monitoring will ensure that the Executing 
Entity is compliant with CAF’s policies and requirement s. 
CAF’s oversight policies applied to the Atacama Solar Project will  include, but are not limited to, the following activities:  
- Disbursement and Administration up to Project Completion . 
- Administration after Project Completion.


---
*Page 46*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 50 
 
 
 G 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent t he 
project/programme objectives from being achieved.  Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1  Spot Market Risk  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Lower than expected electricity prices in the long -run.   
 Financial  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
- Leverage level (60/40) is lower than similar projects with signed Power Purchase Agreements (up to 90/10), in 
order to lower the annual cash flow requirements to serve debt.  
- Tenor (20 -years) is relatively extended, in order to lower the annual cash flow requirements to serve debt.  
- Electricity demand is expected to continue its long -term growth in Chile (average of 5% per annum).  
Selected Risk Factor 2  Energy Volume Risk  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of not having the right to dispatch power to the 
Chilean electricity grid.  In Chile, as well as in several 
other countries in Latin America, lower -marginal -cost-Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures 
can be elaborated in G.2.  
1. Spot Market Risk – Risk of lower than expected electricity prices.  
2. Energy  Volume Risk – Risk of not having the right to dispatch power to the electricity grid.  
3. Construction Risk – Photovoltaic Plant – Risk of having schedule delays and/or costs overruns in the 
construction of the photovoltaic plant.  
4. Construction Risk – Transmis sion Line – Risk of having schedule delays and/or cost overruns in the 
construction of the transmission line required by the photovoltaic plant.  
5. Technology Risk – Risk of adverse effects in  the technology used in the photovoltaic plant.  
6. Operation & Mainte nance Risk – Risk of mismanagement of the photovoltaic plant.  
7. Solar Radiation Risk  – Risk of having lower than expected solar radiation.  
8. Environmental & Social Risk  – Environmental and social risks around the Project.  
These risks are further described in  the G.2 section (below)


---
*Page 47*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 50 
 
 
 G 
electricity -generators have a priority to dispatch energy 
generated , to the respective electricity grid.   
This right allows the promotion of e fficiencies in 
electricity generation activities, and promotes the pass 
through of savings to the final consumer.      
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
- There are no explicit mitigation measures to this risk.   
Selected Risk Factor 3 Construction Risk – Photovoltaic Plant  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of having schedule delays and/or costs overruns 
in the construction of the photovoltaic plant.  
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
- The construction of the plant has a low level of complexity, and civil works are less than 20% of total EPC costs.  
The EPC is mainly composed of the value of the equipment.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 Construction Risk – Transmission Line  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of having schedule delays and/or cost overruns in 
the construction of the transmission line required by 
the photovoltaic plant.  
 
The Transmission Line will be built, owned and 
operated by the Chilean company: Transelec.  
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5 % of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
- Construction delays, due to technical issues, are expected to be minimal, given the low complexity of construction 
of the Transmission Line.


---
*Page 48*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 50 
 
 
 G 
Selected Risk Factor 5 Technology Risk  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of adverse effects in the technology used in the 
development of the photovoltaic plant.  
 Technical and 
operational  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
- The Sponsor has chosen proven technologies and proven technology providers for the development of the Project.   
Selected Risk Factor 6 Operation & Maintenance Risk  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of mismanagement of the photovoltaic plant.  
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
- The operation of a photovoltaic plant of the characteristics of the one to be developed by the Project is of low 
complexity.   
Selected Risk Factor 7 Solar Radiation Risk  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Risk of having lower than expected solar radiation  
 Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
- The site is recognized as one of the best places in Latin America for this type of projects, given the solar 
irradiation levels and almost non -existent precipitation levels.   
Selected Risk Factor 8 Environmental & Social Risk  
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
 
Environmental and social risks around the Project  
 Social and 
environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?


---
*Page 49*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 50 
 
 
 G 
- The completed required studies and , through EPC,  will continue to develop and implement related environmental , 
social (E&S) and health & safety related management plans , also monitored by developer . 
- No critical aspects were identified.


---
*Page 50*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 50 
 
 
 H 
H.1.  Logic Framework .   
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level3 
Paradigm shift objectives  
Shift to low -emission 
sustainable development 
pathways  Please elaborate on the paradigm shift objectives to which the project/programme 
contributes.  
- The Project involves a large -scale, “shovel ready,” private sector -led, solar PV, which 
will result a long term, readily quanti fiable, significant and cost -effective CO2 emission 
savings.  
- Project, supported by risk -taking and patient capital, demonstrates ability of a sound 
projects to take a long -term view of electricity spot -market risk relevant to Chile and 
other markets, out -competing fossil fuel power generation options.  
- Project would assist and support the government of Chile’s ambitious commitment to 
generate 20% of electrical power from renewable energy sources by 2025, despite of 
challenging financial and commodity markets  impacting Chile’s economy.  
- The project is located in the Atacama Desert in the SING (northern power grid) where 
power is predominantly generated by coal -fired and LNG power plants serving 
nationally important and energy intensive copper mining sector; the  project is a low 
cost, clean and renewable alternative to new coal -fired and/or LNG generated power.  
- Following GCF financing, local financial institutions will feel safer to increase their 
exposure to large -scale renewables, thus help increase Chile’s ren ewable generation 
capacity (and associated CO2 displacement).  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term  
(if 
applicable)  Final  
Fund -level impacts  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-emission 
energy access and 
power generation   
Tonnes of carbon  
dioxide equivalent  
(t CO2eq) reduced 
(core indicator)  Annual CO2 
performance 
monitoring 
reporting 
and 
validation.4  Zero (no 
Project)   184,872 
tCO2e per 
year Participation of 
other investo rs; 
Regulatory 
support;   
  
                                                             
3 Information on  the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the 
following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf  
4 Project to commit to developing an annual CO2 performance monitoring plan before disbursement. This plan will be applicable a fter 
Projec t Completion and will be based on on GCF’s initial monitoring and evaluation framework. Plan to include annual self -reporting 
(self-certification), externally validating annual self -reporting at least every 5 years, including prior to GCF’s exit. Given rea dy access to 
Chile’s sophisticated merit order based dispatch grid system and related statistics and conversions factors, there is no need  to 
duplicate these by attempting to apply CDM methodologies and incurring associated transaction costs and current un viable state of 
the carbon credit market (see also Section H.1.2).


---
*Page 51*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 50 
 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-
term (if 
applicable)   Final  
Project outcomes  Outcomes that  contribute to Fund -level impacts  
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low -emission 
power suppliers  6.3 MWs of 
lowemission  
energy  
capacity installed,  
generated and/or  
rehabilitated as a  
result of GCF 
support :  
Installed  144 MW 
solar park  Commission
ed and 
project 
completion 
certificates  0    143MW  Participation by 
other investors; 
supporting 
government and 
regulatory 
environment  
Specify other expected 
results        
Specify other expected 
results        
Project outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
       
1. Built 45.5 km 
transmission line, 
connect ed to grid  Project 
completion, 
power sales  0  45.5 km 
t-line, 
connecti
on Successful 
lease,agreement 
and construction 
by Transelec  
2. Power generation 
delivered to grid   Metering, 
power sale  0  412GWh/
year Successful 
lease,agreement 
and construction 
by Transelec  
3 Implementation of 
Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan  1 SEP 
delivered & 
distributed  0  1 Participation by 
community, 
municipal and 
other stakeholders  
4. Completed gender 
Mainstreaming  Policy 
developed, 
and report 
on liaison 
with relevant 
staleholders  0  1 annual 
report  Participation by 
key stakeholders


---
*Page 52*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 50 
 
 
 H 
5 Developed capacity  MOUs, list 
of trained 
participants  0  3 MOUs. 
List of 20 
trained  Participation by 
academic and 
other partners, 
applicants for 
training  
6 Implemented local 
hiring and 
procurement  Document 
adverts and 
outreach  0  Summary 
report, % 
of local 
staff & % 
of value 
of local 
procurem
ent Presence of 
qualified, 
interested and 
competitively 
priced local 
applicants, and 
suppliers of goods 
and services  
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1. Completed BOOT agreement with 
Transelec,  1.1.1.  Negotiated agreements  
1.2. Developed, constructed, connected 
AS PV Plant to Lagunas Substation  1..2. 1. Detailed engineering, 
procurement, and construction 
by Transelec  
2.1. Completed Solar PV Plant  
2.1.1. Detailed engineering, 
procurement and construction, 
Commissiong and testing, 
Final Completion  
3.1 Stakeholder engagement  
3.1.1  Quaterly meetings and related 
actvities  
4.1 Implemented a non -discrimination 
policy.  
4.1.1  Distributed policy, nominated 
women champion; conducted 
related meetings with EPC, 
municipality and other 
stakeholders; generated list of 
women -owned enterprises 
and/or associations  
5.1 Developed MOUs and generated 20  
trained & qualified graduates within 
construction period  5.1.1  Completed training and 
workshops with or through 
vocation and academic 
centers or civil society for 
target of 20 trainee  
6.1 Posted adverts via appropriate 
channels  
6.1.1  Outreach to local 
municipalities for vacancy and 
procurement announcements; 
identified  and collate d register 
of qualified job seekers and 
enterprises/associations which 
can be trained or used to


---
*Page 53*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 50 
 
 
 H 
 
 serve project needs to simplify 
local hiring a nd procurement 
by EPC/O&M contractor;  
H.2.  Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi -annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid -term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing.  
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key out comes o f the project/programme.  
 
It is noted that the GCF is still in the process of reviewing and fine -tuning its development indicators and its overall 
performance measurement framework (see also GCF web -published Compilation of Submission: Further development 
of indicators in the performance measurement frameworks, dated 20 April 2016, 181 pages).  
Financial managem ent, procurement, and other accounting, administrative and asset management services, including 
non-financial performance reporting, will be provided to Atacama Solar via an administrative services agreement with a 
Sonnedix affiliate in Chile.  Those servi ces will be further enhanced by a support agreement with Sonnedix UK Services 
Limited in London where a centralized team of experts for the Sonnedix Group provides additional accounting and 
asset management services.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 50 
 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☐ NDA No -objection Letter  
☐ Feasibility S tudy 
☒ Integrated Financial M odel that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format , if applicable ) and 
Projected Financial Statements   
☐ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment  (If applicable)  
☐ Project/Programme Confirmation /Term Sheet  (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement , Annex I  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
  
☒ Project Gender Assessment  
☒ Project  Stakeholder Engagement Plan  
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  (If applicable)  
☐ Evaluation R eport  of the baseline project  (If applicable)  
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  
☒ Chilean E lectricity Market  Report  
☒ CAF’s Project Finance Experience – Energy Sector Credentials


---
*Page 56*
---

 
 
Page 1 
 
 
Env ironmental and social report (s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Climate Action and Solar Energy Development Programme  in the 
Tarapacá Region in Chile  
Accredited entity  CAF – Banco de Desarrollo de América Latina  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) (if applicable)   
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -05-27 
Language(s) of disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Link to disclosure  https://www.caf.com/es/sobre -caf/que -hacemos/acceso -a-la-
informacion/proyectos -caf-gcf/  
Other link(s)  http://  
 
 
________