=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20160630183808+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
/Keywords: 
/ModDate: D:20160630183808+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
/Subject: 
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
  Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP 015 
 GCF/B.1 3/16/Add. 07 
8 June  2016  Meeting of the Board  
28 – 30 June 2016  
Songdo , Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda i tem 12(e ) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three  parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled “ Tuvalu coastal adaptation project ” submitted by United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) ; 
b) A no-objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point ; and 
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure . 
The documents  are presented as sub mitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point , respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.13/16/Add.07  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point  
                 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure


---
*Page 3*
---

 
Project/Programme Title:  Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project  
Country/Region:  Tuvalu  
Accredited Entity:  United Nations Development Program me 
Date of Submission:  30/03/2016


---
*Page 4*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY    
 
Section B  FINANCING / COST INFORMATION   
 
Section C  DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  
 
Section D  RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 
Section E  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section F  APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 
Section G  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section H  
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 
Section I  ANNEX ES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template     
• Sections A, B, D, E  and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such  as project appraisal document.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes ) is expected not to exceed 50.  
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 1 OF 66 
 
 
 A 
A.1.  Brief Project  / Programme Information  
A.1.1. Project / programme  title Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project  (TCAP)  
A.1.2. Project or programme Project  
A.1.3. Country (ies) / r egion                     Tuvalu  
A.1.4. National designated a uthority (ies)  Hon. Enele Sosene Sopoaga , Prime Minister  
A.1.5. Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme  
A.1.5 .a. Access modality  ☐  Direct  ☒  International  
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary  Executing Entity:  United Nations Development Programme  
 
Beneficiary:  Climate Change Policy Unit, Department of 
Environment, Public Works Department, Department of 
Lands and Survey, Department of Rural Development , 
Ministry of Education  
 
Total number of beneficiaries (# of people):  approximately 
3,100  direct beneficiaries and 3,499 indirect beneficiaries  
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)  ☐  Micro (≤10)  
☐ Medium (50<x≤250)  ☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250)  
A.1.8 . Mitigation / a daptation focus  ☐  Mitigation  ☒  Adaptation  ☐  Cross -cutting  
A.1.9. Date of submission  
          Date of r e-submission  3 October  2015  
2 December 2015  
30 March 2016  
2 May 2016  
A.1.10.  
Project 
contact 
details  Contact person, position  Yusuke Taishi  
Organization  United Nations Development Programme  
Email address  yusuke.taishi@undp.org   
Telephone number  +66-2-304-9100 Ext. 5015  
Mailing address  United Nations Service Building, 4th Floor  
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue, Phranakorn 
Bangkok 10200 Thailand  
   
A.1.1 1. Results areas  (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from:  
☐ Energy access and power generation   
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ Low emission transport   
(E.g. high- speed rail, rapid bus system , etc.)   
☐ Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)  
 
Increased resilience of:  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities


---
*Page 6*
---

 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 2 OF 66 
 
 
 A 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)  
☐ Health and well -being, and food and water security  
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)  
☒ Infrastructure and built environment  
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)  
 ☐ 
 
  
A.2.  Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)  
1. The proposed GCF project  will enable the Government of Tuvalu (GoT) to implement measures that are urgently 
required to reduce the impact of  increas ingly intensive wave action on key infrastructure as a result of climate change 
induced sea- level rise and intensifying extreme events. Financial and capacity constraints at all levels –  from technical to 
community awareness – that have prevented a sustainable coastal protection solution will be addressed. With GCF 
financing, i t is expected that 35% of high- value vulnerable coasts ( 2,780m in length) will be made more resilient to 
withstand the effects of increased wave intensity , compared with the baseline of 7% (57 0m). The targeted GCF 
investments will occur at locations that have high concentration of residences . Expected direct benefits  are significant 
with 3,100 people or 29 % of the total population in Tuvalu benefiting from the mitigated impact of future wave overtopping 
events . The project  will also strengthen institutional and community capacities for sustaining and replicating project 
results.  
 
2. Building coastal resilience is an urgent national  priority  and the formulation of this project  has been led at the highest 
political level and the scope of the project has been fully discussed and devised by a Technical Working Group comprising key Government departments and NGO associations, representing communities.  
 
3. The proposed project  leverages domestic financing ( USD2.86 million ) and is a non- revenue generating public good.  
Grant funding is therefore requested. The Prime Minister of Tuvalu, who is the NDA to the GCF, has issued  a letter of 
no-objection for the proposed project that is  very much country -driven and owned and has had significant input into the 
proposal . 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone  
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)  29 September 2015  
Expected financial close (if applicable)  TBD (Date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GCF)  
Estimated implementation start and end date  Start: 01/10/2016  
End: 30/09/2023 
Project/programme lifespan  40 years


---
*Page 7*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 66 
 
 B 
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme  
4. Grant financing is requested from the GCF  to reduce the impact of increasingly intensive wave activity , through the 
compounding effects of sea- level rise and intensifying storm events,  that is amplifying coastal inundation and erosion.  It 
is evident and well accepted that  the effects of climate change will only worsen coastal inundation and erosion in Tuvalu. 
The GCF grant  will increase the coverage of  coastal protection from the baseline 570m to 2,780m benefiting nearly 29% 
of the entire population. The GCF investments on coastal protection are directed at coastlines  in three  islands  (Funafuti, 
Nanumea and Nanumaga) along areas that have a high concentration of houses, schools, hospitals and other social and 
economic assets (henceforth referred to as “high- value” coastline)1.  
 
5. Tuvalu is a Least Developed Country  with a total population of 10,640. The relatively high per capita income is  
considered “barely sufficient to cover the high economic cost of  business in Tuvalu given its geographic remoteness and 
relatively limited economic size2. National income is heavily dependent on volatile foreign aid, and external indebtedness 
is high.  
 
6. Tuvalu’s livelihood and economic assets were recently devastated by Tropical Cyclone Pam. According to the Tuvalu 
Tropical Cyclone Pam Report and Recovery and Vulnerability Reduction Plan, the total loss and damages were estimated 
to be approximately US$10.34 million or 26.9% of the GDP3. Moreover, short, medium, and long- term recovery and 
vulnerability reduction activities across eight sectors4 are estimated to require a further  US$67.64 million.  The economic 
damages and the cost of rec overy mean that many years’, if not decades’, worth of development was undone in the 
matter of days and impose additional burdens on the sustainable development path for Tuvalu. Tropical cyclones are 
expected to increase in intensity as climate change become s more pronounced, and compounded by rising  sea level s, 
the protection of the country’s vulnerable coastlines becomes  of utmost importance.  Two of the three target islands in the 
GCF project (Nanumea and Nanumaga) are among the four islands hardest hit by Cyclone Pam.  
 
7. Despite the extreme level of vulnerability, Tuvalu  currently does not have a single engineered coastal protection 
infrastructure project that is thought to withstand current and future impact s of sea- level rise and intensifying tropical 
storms . The only  except ions are two interventions that are currently being designed for a length of 57 0 m in Funafuti and 
Nukufetau. The combined factors of high upfront investments required for coastal protection, the public good and non-
revenue nature of the required solutions, and t he inability of the Government  to service loans, have permitted the 
Government and the community to implement the recognized solutions only at a slow pace and in a highly fragmented 
manner in the past. Because available resources are generally far smaller than what is required for impl ementing 
appropriate response measures , the past initiatives have often resorted to community -scale interventions that hardly 
withstand the current wave energy, let alone integrating climate change risks into the design. Without GCF support, this sub-optim al practice is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. It is within this context that GCF grant (i.e. 100% 
concessionality) is requested for the proposed project  so that , in conjunction with domestic co- financing,  Tuvalu can, 
finally, take comprehensive and systemic steps to manage coastal inundation risks . 
 
8. The GoT has c ommitted US$2.86  million to co -finance the proposed measures of the project . It comprises the 
Infrastructure Maintenance Budget (US$2.3 million) as well as in- kind co- financing  (US$0.56 million) . The Infrastructure 
Maintenance Budget will be used to finance the necessary monitoring and operation and maintenance (O&M) of the 
coastal protection infrastructure construc ted in the project . This will be used both during, if needed, and beyond the project  
implementation. In- kind support will come from the time dedicated by the central government officers and outer island-
level administrators on project  management and monitoring. It will also support the office rent for the project manag ement 
unit.  
 
9. A breakdown of cost estimates by sub- component in local and foreign currency  is provided below
5: 
 
                                                             
1 In this proposal, “high- value” areas are consistent with those identified in the Tuvalu Coastal Protection Definition (the World Bank , 2015 ).  
2 UNCTAD (2012). Vulnerability Profile of Tuvalu  
3 US$38.32 million in 2013 (current US$). Source: World Bank.  
4 Includes investments in environment, infrastructure, health, agriculture, telecom, debris management, disaster risk management, and education.  
5 While not included in this proposal as per the instructions of the GCF Secretariat, an additional cost of 9 % of the value of the project will be necessary 
to cover quality assurance and oversight services performed by UNDP as a GCF Accredited Entity over all phases of the project cycle. This includes as 
follows: (i) oversight of proposal development; (ii) appraisal (pre and final) and oversight of project start -up; (iii) supervision and oversight of project 
implementation; and (iv) oversee project closure.  UNDP awaits confirmation from the GCF Board on this matter and expect that the AE fee, over and 
above the project cost, will be approved by the GCF Board prior to commencement of implementation activities.


---
*Page 8*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 66 
 
 B 
Component Output  Activity  Financing  
(MUS$)  Total Cost per output 
Component 
1 Increased 
resilience of 
Tuvaluan 
coast      GCF  GoT Foreign 
Currency 
(US$)  Local 
Currency 
(AU$)6 
Strengthening of institutions, human 
resources, 
awareness and knowledge for 
resilient coastal 
management  1.1 Technical capacity, 
knowledge and awareness 
strengthened for 
monitoring, protection and 
maintenance of coastal 
protection infrastructure  0.973 0.102  
3,137,440  4,480,266  
1.2 Long- term national 
human resource capacity and awareness enhanced 
for sustainable coastal 
protection  1.960  0.102  
Vulnerability of 
key coastal 
infrastructure 
including homes, 
schools, hospitals 
and other assets is reduced 
against wave 
induced damages 
in Funafuti, 
Nanumea and 
Nanumaga  2.1 Coastal protection 
design, site-specific 
assessments  and ESIA 
undertaken in all islands in 
a participatory manner  2.609  0.256  
30,364,128  43,359,975  
2.2 Coastal protection 
measures implemented 25.200  2.300 
A sustainable 
financing 
mechanism 
established for long-term 
adaptation efforts  3.1 All Islands Strategic 
Plans and annual budgets integrate island- specific 
climate risks through gender sensitive, 
participatory processes  5.056  0.080 
5,368,432  7,666,121  3.2 Capacity of Kaupules, 
Falekaupules and 
community members 
strengthened for 
monitoring coastal 
adaptation investments  0.212  0.020 
Total project financing    36.010 2.860 38,870,000  55,506,362 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
6 Exchange rate used is as of 1 October 2015 (UN Operational Rates of Exchange)


---
*Page 9*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 66 
 
 B 
10. Similarly, the expenditures by types of activities are presented in a table  below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Activity Type  Amount  (US$)  Percentage of Total  
Capacity building  2,360,900  6.56%  
Travel   990,040  2.75%  
Equipment  and supplies  190,437  0.53%  
Coastal protection  24,930,072  69.23%  
Contractual Services  3,500,364  9.72%  
ISP mainstreaming and strengthening  929,927  2.58%  
Contingencies  248,260  0.69%  
Project Management Cost7 2,860,000  7.94%  
Total  36,01 0,000  100%  
B.2. Project Financing Information  
 Financial Instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
(a) Total 
project 
financing  (a) = (b) + (c)  38.870  million USD 
($)  
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient   
(i) Senior Loans  
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans  
(iii) Equity  
(iv) Guarantees  
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *  
(vi) Grants *  
 …………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
…………………  
 
36.010  Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
million USD 
($) (  )  years  
(  )  years  
 
 
 
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
  
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1  for the concessionality that GCF  is expected to  
provide, part icularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E . 
Total r equested  
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)  36.010  million USD 
($)  
(c) Co -
financing to 
recipient  
 Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Currency  Name of 
Institution  Tenor  Pricing  Seniority  
Grant  
Options  
Options  
Options  2.86 
……………  
……………  
……………  million USD 
($) 
Options  
Options  
Options  GoT 
………………  
………………  
………………  (  )  years  
(  )  years  
 (   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR  
 Options  
Options  
Options  
Options  
Lead financing institution: Not Applicable  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment  in section I  issued by the co -financing institution.  
                                                             
7 See Annex V (a) for the breakdown of Project Management Cost


---
*Page 10*
---

 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 66 
 
 B 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE  
(if applicable)  In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly  to the recipient , (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE)  or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped.  
 
If there is a  financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE , which entails a financial instrument and/ or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the propos ed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE.  
Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  Pricing  
Choose an item.  ………………….  Options  (  )  years  (   ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or  terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE.  
B.3. Financial M arket s Overview (if applicable)  
11. Not applicable


---
*Page 11*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 66 
 
 C 
C.1. Strateg ic Context  
12. Tuvalu is the fourth smallest nation in the world. It comprises nine inhabited islands with a population of 10,640 . The  
total land area is 26 km2. Funafuti atoll, where the national capital is located, is home to about half of the population. With 
the average elevation of 1.83m, Tuvalu is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to the impacts of climate 
change, particular ly to  projected sea -level rise and increases in the severity of cyclones. When combined with 
considerable development challenges, a narrow resource base economy and chronic capacity constraints, the high levels 
of vulnerability to climate change impacts are likely to have s evere long term effects on sustainable development  of the 
country . 
 
13. Distance from international 
markets, remoteness of nine 
inhabited islands  of the country , the 
size of the country and  economy , 
which are extremely vulnerable to 
external shocks, and a limited natural 
resource base are factors that make economic development extremely challenging for Tuvalu. The economy 
of Tuvalu and the government revenues rely significantly on foreign 
aid, fishing license fees from foreign 
fishing vessels, and remittanc es from seafar ing, which is thought to provide employment to 15% of the adult male 
population. There is also reliance on income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund. T he economy is fragile as fishing revenues and 
foreign aid are highly volatile and remittances from seafarers highly dependent on the global economy. IMF reports that 
Tuvalu’s public debt had reached 41% of GDP by the end of 2013, with external debt accounting for 35% of GDP. The 
debt is expected to have risen to 56.9% in 2014 due to a recent loan agreem ent on a fishing joint venture. The share of 
external grants (% of GDP) and public debt are presented below
8. The right panel indicates the degree to which Tuvalu 
is, even among other SIDS in the region, highly dependent on foreign aid.  
 
14. Considering the small size and fragility of its economy, in addition to its physical and environmental vulnerability,  
Tuvalu is expected to be affected severely by the impact of climate change. The Pacific Climate Change Science 
Programme (PCCSP) study recently concluded that tropical cyclones are expected to decrease in number by the late 
21st century but increase in the proportion of more intense storms. These predictions are  likely to have significant 
implications on future damages in terms of human lives, infrastructur e and livelihood assets as research indicates that , 
globally , 10% of intense tropical cyclones are presently responsible for 93% of damages9. The study also points out that 
the sea level near Tuvalu has risen by about 5 mm per year since 1999 (a total of 9 cm over this period). Under a high 
emissions scenario, a 4- 14 cm rise is expected before 2030 and 19- 58 cm before 2090. The combination of two 
manifestations of climate change – continu ally intensifying cyclone events and sea level rise – will have dire impacts on 
Tuvalu. Wave overtopping events during king tides and cyclones cause damages to natural assets such as Tuvalu’s 
fragile groundwater lens and many other economic/social/cultural assets.  
 
15. Impacts of climate change are already felt in Tuvalu, most recently during Tropical Cyclone Pam in March 2015 which  
caused widespread damage by large waves and storm surges. Damage included seawater flooding and destruction of 
agriculture and infrastructure, contamination of water supplies, coastal erosion and scouring. It is estimated that 45% of 
the total population w as internally displaced and the total economic loss and damages were Aus$13.95 million (US$10.34 
million10). Bringing lives and livelihoods back on track will take years and the recovery efforts will put further strain on the 
Government that is already suff ering from limited human capacity and financial resources.  In addition to Cyclone Pam, a 
storm surge in 2010 affected 467 households or nearly 30% of the total households in the country11. King tides are 
another type of extreme events affecting the country. A study analyzed 28 king tide events that have caused flooding 
between 1994 and 2012, five of which have occurred since 2010. All of these events  are thought to have flooded half of 
                                                             
8 IMF Country Report No.14/253  
9 Mendelsohn, R., Emanuel, K., Chonabayashi, S., Bakkensen, L. (2012). The impact of climate change on global tropical cyclone dama ge. Nature 
Climate Change. 2, 205– 209 
10 Government of Tuvalu. (2015) Tuvalu Tropical Cyclone Pam Report: Recovery and Vulnerability Reduction Plan indicates damages and losses 
from TC Pam to be AU$ 13,954,076.  Using the UN Operational Exchange Rate of 1.349 (as of 15 Jul 2015), the loss and damage fro m TC Pam is 
estimated at US$ 10,344,014.  
11 Tuvalu National Population Housing Census 2012


---
*Page 12*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 66 
 
 C 
the island of Tuvalu12 based on the average elevation of the islands of Tuvalu. The same study estimates that warm 
water contributed to the king tide phenomenon by an average of 5.1% and a maximum of 7.8%. This indicates that the 
effect of king tides will be g reater under a warming climate where warm water will compound with a rising sea level.   
 16. Tuvaluan coasts , extending nearly 82km
13, are not currently effectively protected by infrastructure against the impact  
of tropical storms, king tides, other wave- overtopping events  and shoreline retreat . These events are already  inflict ing 
economic damages – reported or unreported – on economic and social infrastructures. Internal displacement has also 
taken place in the past , the most recent of which was Cyclone Pam  in 2015.   
 
17. Rising sea -levels and intensifying tropical storms, as  projected under climate change, are expected to aggravate 
damages  that Tuvalu is all too familiar with . Thus, vulnerability reduction to these events becomes one of the most critical 
element s of climate change adaptation for Tuvalu. To this end, this project  is designed to strengthen coastal protection 
in three out of the nine inhabited islands of Tuvalu and to pave the way for, ultimately , reduc ing the vulnerability of all 
inhabited islands that make up Tuvalu to future impact of climate change.  
 
18. This project  is in line with all of the key government strategies and policies. Te Kakeega II 2005- 2015 is Tuvalu’s  
national development strategy, which recognizes that climate change poses significant threats to the achievement of the 
national development goals. Te Kaniva, the Tuvalu Climate Change Policy, with its vision “To protect Tuvalu’s status as 
a nation and its cultural identity and to build its capacity to ensure a safe , resilient and prosperous future”  guides the 
country’s efforts in both adaptation and mitigation. Goal 4 of the policy specifically focuses on developing and maintaining Tuvalu’s i nfrastructure to withstand climate change impacts  and aims to deliver coastal protection following best practices 
appropriate for Tuvalu’s situation.  Tuvalu also launched its national gender and youth policy in 2013 and 2015, 
respectively, which aim  to bolster participation of women and youth in decision -making  and promote t heir economic 
empowerment, among others . The women and youth engagement approach adopted in this project is fully in alignment 
with this view.  
 
19. It is also worth noting that Tuvalu’s historic contributions to the current concentration of carbon dioxide in the  
atmosphere are negligible; and yet, the country is facing an existential threat because of climate change. It is in this 
context that Tuvalu is seeking urgent financial assistance from donors through the Green Climate Fund. Accordingly, a 
key design pr inciple that underlies this project is this commitment of the Government expressed in Te Kaniva –  protecting 
the nation’s sovereignty , which goes well beyond the realm of the physical territory of the country, but also includes  the 
sense of self -fulfillmen t people derive from the ability to make decisions about their own future and the sense of dignity 
people derive from living in a country or culture to which they belong.  
 
C.2. Project  / Programme  Objective  against Baseline  
Baseline Scenario  
 
20. The PCCSP study14 highlights the following climate change trends  and future projections  in Tuvalu:  
 
• Temperatures have increased  and will continue to increase  with more very hot days in the future. Projections 
show that by 2030, under high emission scenario, temperature may increase in the range of 0.4 – 1.0°C .  
• Rainfall is generally projected to increase over this century with more extreme rainfall days expected. Wet 
season and dry s eason increases of rainfall are expected, mainly due to the projected intensification of the South 
Pacific Convergence Zone. However, there is some uncertainty in the rainfall projections and not all models show 
consistent results. Drought projections are inconsistent across Tuvalu.  However, the frequency and intensity of 
extreme rainfall events are projected to increase.  
• By the end of this century projections suggest decreasing numbers of tropical cyclones  but a possible shift 
towards more intense categor ies. Projections in Tuvalu tend to show a decrease in the frequency of tropical 
cyclones by the late 21st century and an increase in the proportion of the more intense storms.  On a global basis, 
there is a growing level of consistency between models that t he frequency of tropical cyclones is likely to decrease 
by the end of the 21st century by 6 -35%. There is also a general agreement between models that the mean maximum 
                                                             
12 Lin, C.C., C.R. Ho, & Y.H. Cheng. (2014). Interpreting and analysing king tide in Tuvalu. Natural Hazards and Earth S ystem Sciences . 14, 209- 217.  
13 This figure does not include the length of coastlines of uninhabited islands.  
14 Pacific Climate Change Science Program. (2014). Current and future climate of Tuvalu . http://www.pacificclimatechangescience.org/


---
*Page 13*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 66 
 
 C 
wind speed of cyclones will increase by 2 -11% and that rainfall rates will increase in t he order of 20% within 100km 
of the cyclone center15.  
• Sea level near Tuvalu has risen and will continue to rise  throughout this century  (very high confidence) . Since 
1993, the sea level has risen by about 5mm per year (or a total of 9cm over this period), which is 28- 44% higher than 
the global average. By 2030, under a high emissions scenario, the rise is projected to be in the range of 7 -18 cm and 
39-87 cm befor e 2090. The sea- level rise combined with natural year -to-year changes will increase the impact of 
storm surges and coastal flooding.  
• As atmospheric CO 2 concentrations continue to rise, ocean will warm and continue to acidify . In all of the three 
projections used in the PCCSP study, the aragonite saturation state, a proxy for coral reef growth rate, will continue 
to decrease as atmospheric CO 2 concentrations increase ( very high confidence).  This is consistent with a study 
carried out by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) in which  ocean pH is projected to decline (i.e. increase 
in ocean acidification) by the end of the 21st century  in two emission scenarios16. As the ocean warms, the risk of 
coral bleachin g also increases  (very high confidence ). The projections of increasing ocean acidity and risk of coral 
bleaching, compounded by other stressors such as storm damage, are expected to further increase Tuvalu’s coastal 
vulnerability as coral reefs provide an important ecosystem function, among others, to attenuate wave energy reaching the foreshore.  
 
21. These observed and projected changes suggest that climate change poses an existential  threat to Tuvalu. With the 
projected sea- level rise, it is possible that significant areas of the country will be submerged. One of the impacts of more 
intensive tropical cyclones, coupled with the rising sea level, is stronger wave actions against Tuvaluan coasts.  The 
Tuvalu Climate Change Policy argues  that maintaining the sovereignty of Tuvalu is a critical policy objective and a nation-
wide relocation is not considered an official solution to climate change. Furthermore, with the highly limited land 
availability, neither is facilitating internal reloc ation a pragmatic option. This means that vulnerability reduction in all of the 
inhabited islands in the country  is an important adaptation objective for the country . The urgency of the issue also led to 
the establishment of the Climate Change Advisory Uni t under guidance from the National Advisory Council on Climate 
Change Policy (NACCC).  
 
22. There are several ongoing initiatives that contribute to reducing the vulnerability of the country, particularly focusing 
on reducing coastal vulnerability. The proposed GCF project  will build on and complement the following initiatives:  
     
• The “Increasing Resilience of Coastal Areas and Community Settlements to Climate Change” (LDCF 
US$3,060,000; DFAT AU$ 1,000,000, UNDP) (2009- 2016 ) project is  the first project that addresses NAPA priorities 
and designed to increase the resilience  of coastal community  in all inhabited islands of Tuvalu. A preliminary coastal 
assessment has been carried out in the island s of Nukufetau and Nanumea , and it has identified a range of coastal 
protection options including geo-textile  container revetments  and ecosystem -based approaches such as coastal 
vegetation. Building on this report, construction of a geo- textile revetment  along 390 m of coastline is expected to 
start in 2016 using the Tuvalu Climate Change and Survival Fund resources as part of Cyclone Pam recovery work . 
This preliminary assessment was one of the very few coastal assessments ever undertaken in the country and offers 
an important basis for possibl e coastal protection options that are technically feasible especially in the outer island 
context. The proposed project incorporates feasibility lessons from this technical assessment  (See Feasibility Study , 
Annex II) . 
 
• The “Effective and responsive island -level governance to secure and diversify climate resilient marine- based 
coastal livelihoods and enhance climate hazard response capacity”  (LDCF  US$4,325,000, UNDP ) (2013- 2017) 
project is the second NAPA follow -up project . It has a component that aims to build the capacity of outer island 
administrations for integrating climate change priority actions into their Island Strategic Plans and financing them 
from domestic unconditional grants. This component will be an important basis  for establishing a sustainable financing 
mechanism for climate change adaptation actions (refer to the Project Output 3).  
 
• 
Implementing a ‘Ridge to Reef’ approach to protect biodiversity and ecosystem functions in Tuvalu (R2R 
Tuvalu) (GEF US$3,762,844, UNDP ) (2015- 2020)  aims “to preserve ecosystem services, sustain livelihoods and 
improve resilience in Tuvalu ” through an approach that encompasses all areas from ridge to reef . This project also 
                                                             
15 See also Knutson, T. R., McBride, J. L., Chan, J., Emanuel, K., Holland, G., Landsea, C., Held, I., Kossin, J. P., Srivastava, A. K., and Sugi, M. 
(2010). Tropical cyclones and climate change: Nature Geoscience , v.3, no.3, p.157- 163. 
16 Bell, J.D., Johnson, J.E., Ganachaud, A.S., Gehrke, P.C., Hobday, A.J., Hoegh- Guldberg, O., Le Borgne, R., Lehodey, P., Lough, J.M., Pickering, 
T., Pratchett, M.S. and Waycott, M. (2011). Vulnerability of Tropical Pacific Fisheries and Aquaculture to Climate Change. Secretariat of the  Pacific 
Community, Noumea, New Caledonia


---
*Page 14*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 66 
 
 C 
has a component, complementary to the sec ond NAPA project , which improve evidence -based planning, decision 
making, and natural resource management  at the outer island level , which will be an important baseline for the Project 
Output 3.  
 
• The Project for pilot gravel beach nourishment against c oastal disaster on Fo ngafale Island  (JICA, 
approximately JPY 195 million)  (2012- 2017)  builds on the findings from the “Study for Assessment of Ecosystem, 
Costal Erosion and Protection/Rehabilitation of Damaged Area in Tuvalu” conducted in 2009- 2011.  In this study , 
beach nourishment was found as a potentially  appropriate coastal protection option and the project intends to pilot 
test its effectiveness. It is expected that the investment will cover 180m of a stretch in Funafuti and the construction 
has recently commenced and that the effectiveness in terms of wave energy dissipation and erosion control will be 
presented by 2017. This project will offer an important option for the GCF project to replicate  once proven effective.  
The proposed project incorporates feasibility lessons from this technical assessment  (See Annex II).  
 
• Tuvalu coastal protection scope definition: Cyclone Pam r ecovery (World Bank, 2015) has been conducted in 
response to Tropical Cyclone Pam.  This exercise resulted in the identification of vulnerable coast lines and possible 
options for coastal protection. Based on this preliminary assessment, the World Bank is currently in discussion to 
provide  up to US$5 million grant financing on coastal protection initiatives in Tuvalu. The proposed project 
incorpor ates feasibility lessons from this technical assessment (See Annex II).    
 23. In addition to these donor -financed initiatives that present a basis on which the proposed GCF project  is built, the  
GoT has produced a Tuvalu Tropical Cyclone Pam Report and Recovery and Vulnerability Reduction Plan. It is a disaster 
recovery and vulnerability reduction plan with key priorit ies for community resilience building, risk reduction and 
preparation for future disaster s with identified financial gaps of  US$60.6 million, although sources of financing are yet to 
be identified.  One of the three priority areas is to “support the construction and repair of damaged infrastructure (coastal 
protection, sea walls, permanent shelters and community infrastructures). The proposed  GCF project  will deliver on the 
disaster recovery and vulnerability reduction efforts under the Tuvalu TC Pam Recovery and Reduction Plan.  The GoT 
is also currently using its own  resources to conduct short -term, temporary coastal work s in preparation for this cyclone 
season.   
 
Existing and future coastal protection work and GCF contribution  
 
24. The total length of coast in the nine inhabited islands
17 is 81,900m . Of this, according to the WB preliminary coastal 
assessment, 21,300m is considered vulnerable coastlines that require foreshore protection.  Of this length of vulnerable 
coastlines , 7,930m is considered “high- value” vulnerable coastlines based on the concentration of houses and other 
social and economic assets.  
 
25. In contrast , the existing coastal protection structures are extremely sparse and limited. In Funafuti, there are two 
stretches of coastlines, totaling about 70m in length that have a vertical concrete seawall. One is in front of a hotel (about 50m in length) constructe d with support from a bilateral donor  and the other is structurally part of a wharf (about 20m). 
The former is thought to be reaching its product life and unlikely to withstand strong wave or wind energies
18. The level 
of structural durability of the latter  requires  a more detailed assessment . The JICA study concludes that a lmost all other 
coastal protection in Funafuti and outer islands is ad- hoc and poorly designed, unable to withstand wave energies , with 
the result being a severely degraded shoreline in terms of both the physical and ecological characteristics and functions 
(Annex II presents some photographs of these structures). These measures have been financed by both donor grants 
(such as gabion baskets and concrete blocks built several decades ago) and private/communal funds (such as simple 
materials /bulkheads  to armour the foreshore) . Table below shows existing coastal protection measures  in the country.  
 
Location  Measure  
Funafuti  Drum filled with concrete – has been damaged, protection business  
Laloniu  Concrete cement protected private residence  
Falesa  Concrete cement protecting private residence – partly damaged  
Siliga  Concrete wall – protect residence  
Poulasi  Concrete wall – protect residence  
                                                             
17 In the Funafuti atoll, there is a small community living in an island north of the main island of Fogafale. However, to avoid confusions and follow the 
local convention, Funafuti is considered one island throughout this proposal, but the length of coastline for Funafuti includes these two islands. 
Assessment was carried out by Alan Resture in 2013 (unpublished).  
18 Personal communications with a JICA -contracted coastal engineer working on the beach nourishment project.


---
*Page 15*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 66 
 
 C 
Tafue  Concrete wall – protect residence  
Takutaku  Rock wall and groyne – protect land and agriculture  
Nukulaelae island  Traditional protection measures – made of coconut and pandanus tree trunks  
Nukufetau Kaupule  Rock wall – protect land  
  1978 – Gabion Baskets all islands  
  1985 – Block seawall - Nanumauga, Nukulaelae , Nukufetau, Funafuti, Nanumea  
 
26. The f ollowing table summarizes the existing coastal conditions  in the country.  
Island name  Length of 
coastlines  
(m)*** Land area  
(km2) Population  
(2012)  Wave/wind 
direction  Vulnerable 
coastlines  
(m)**** High-value 
coastlines*** Existing or 
known future 
coastal 
protection  (m) 
Nanumea * 18,560  1.19 612 SW-NE 1,900  760  
Niutao  6,200  2.35 694 West -East 1,300  580  
Nanumaga * 7,060  3.01 551 West -East  780 450  
Nui (Fenuatapu)  8,690  1.38 729 Westerly  1,420  750  
Vaitupu  12,660  5.24 1,542  SW-NE 1,800  850  
Nukufetau (Savave)  2,530  0.21 666 SW-NE 1,100  390 390 ( GoT) 
Funafuti (Amatuku)  1,520 0.006  5,436  West  0 0  
Funafuti 
(Fogafale) * 18,930  1.42 West  9,000  3,600  180 (JICA)  
Nukulaelae 
(Fagaua)  3,150  0.23 364 West  1,600  550  
Niulakita* 2,600  0.42 46 West  0 0  
Total  81,900  15.46  10,640   18,900  7,930   
* Islands where GCF investments are proposed 
** Niulakita, unlike the other islands, has an average elevation of over 4m which is high by the standards of Tuvalu. For this r eason, zero is recorded 
as the length of vulnerable coastlines is recorded.  
*** Inhabited islands only  
**** Based on the WB prelim inary assessment report  
 
27. Currently there are ongoing projects  that focus on coastal protection ( a government -financed project  focusing on 
390m of high- value  coast  in Nukufetau building on the initial work of UNDP/LDCF ; JICA support focusing on 180m of 
high-value  coast in Funafuti). Once the constructions complete, they are expected to provide valuable empirical 
information about how the structures interact with the local coastal/environmental conditions and how the local communit y 
interacts with them.    
 
Key Barriers addressed by the project  
 28. Despite Tuvalu’s aspiration to reduce its vulnerability to climate change and ongoing international support in this 
regard, there are several barriers that need to be removed in order to bring about  transformational impact that is both 
effective and sustainable.  
 
29. Limited national financial resources and dependency on fragmented external financing: Coastal protection 
and site- specific assessment to finalize  the design of the protection is expensive. Tuvalu’s narrow economic base makes 
it extremely difficult for national budgets to be invested in  for this purpose. As a result, past coastal protection investments 
have been financed through the small discretionary budgets available for outer island administration, private financing, or donor funding. All of these sources are often too small and fragmented to provide a comprehensive, lasting solution. 
Lack of financ e often leads to a design that is not based on detailed site-specific  hydrodynamic modelling that enable the 
final structure to be perfectly aligned with the coastal processes (for improved performance and longevity of the structure) and enable future climate conditions to be incorporated into the design. “Best Practices from the Pacific” (USP, 2015) 
highlights that poor seawall designs in the Pacific have in the past resulted in maladaptation. Both the WB and JICA 
assessment reports revealed that  many (if not most) privately or communally financed attempts in Tuvalu to armour the 
foreshore have f ailed or are failing due to insufficient or complete lack of site- specific assessments . Similarly, an LDCF 
assessment report points out that concrete blocks that were supplied by a development partner 25 years ago were not robust enough to withstand the im mediate wave energy forces
19. Without GCF investments, it is likely that the GoT will 
continue to rely on unpredictable donor financing and/or small community -level financing to build ad hoc structures (e.g. 
                                                             
19 At the time of production of the re port, it pointed out the risk of collapse in the next high- wind/wave event, and in fact, it was destroyed during 
Cyclone Pam in March 2015.


---
*Page 16*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 66 
 
 C 
gabion baskets, concrete blocks, stone pitch seaw all) that repeatedly fail to withstand the increasing intensity of tropic al 
cyclones and sea- level rise ( More details are found in Annex II).  
 
30. Ineffective use of small, but available domestic (outer island level) financing for coastal protection: There are 
several sources of discretionary grants that are available for outer island administrations. While there is a growing recognition among the island administrations and local populations that the local development plan, called the Island Strategic Plan ( ISP), should govern the use of such grants, the current ISPs still have the characteristics of a development 
wish list and are not constrained by the available financing or skillsets to execute priority actions . Ecosystem -based 
approaches , for example, would be potentially an effective option for coastal protection that utilizes locally available 
materials and skillsets, but outer island communities are currently constrained by limited knowledge about such an 
approach and weak planning capacity.  
 31. High staff turnover and a limited number of qualified professionals: Although 69% of the workforce in Tuvalu 
work for the public or semi -public sectors
20, the small total population size makes the core group of climate change 
professional s to a handful of staff  and the impact of staff turnover is significant once a qualified professional leaves the 
country . For Tuvalu to attain sufficient capacity to tackle the consequences of climate change in an effective and 
sustainable manner, t echnical  skillsets needed for effective coastal monitoring, protection and O&M need to be developed 
within relevant Ministries and Departments.  At the same time, the Climate Change Policy Unit, a newly established entity 
whose mandate is to provide inter -ministerial coordination support and lead climate change policy formulation, requires 
capacity building support to effectively fulfill their mandate.     
 32. Exclusive focus on short -term capacity building : Despite the high level of coastal vulnerability, Tuvalu does not 
have a support system for building long- term national capacity for coastal management professionals. External 
development projects almost always focus on building short -term capacities by focusing solely on existing  government 
officials ; little a ttention is paid to building the long- term technical/professional capacity by targeting those currently  outside 
of the government system  such as youth, s ome of whom are expected to move into the Government system in the near 
future. Regional mobility is high among skilled professionals in the Pacific, and in the absence  of conscious investments 
in long -term capacity building of the nation, the departure of one technical officer from the government  could leave a 
significant gap in responding to urgent issues  in the country. To ensure that Tuvalu maintains a consistent level  of 
technical capacity for coastal protection, it is imperative that the conventional capacity building strategy is altered: A  
support system needs to be established to build the long- term capacity in the specific areas that the country considers 
their national development priority, such as coastal protection.   
 
33. The proposed GCF project  will address these barriers that prevent Tuvalu from reducing its vulnerability to climate  
change in an urgent,  effective and sustainable manner. These barriers will be addressed through a coherent project 
framework which comprises three “sub- components” (which refer to the O utputs as per the GCF logic framework).  First, 
the project  will tackle the issue of institutional and human capacities constraints in Tuvalu for effective coastal protection. 
This will be achieved  through capacity building support to current government officers  and community members . It is 
expected that, by the end of the project , the country will possess the necessary skills within both communities and the 
Government: within communities , the focus i s on building capacity to collect key data on coastal dynamics through simple 
beach profile surveys ; and within the Government , it is expected the capacity of technical departments will be built to 
coordinate multiple stakeholders  for effective adaptation actions , synthesize and analyz e climate, but particularly coastal, 
data. Capacity building at these two levels will be a building block for  expanding effective coastal protection interventions  
beyond the GCF project  lifecycle . At the same time, Tuvaluan youth will be specifically targeted for capacity development 
as a potential cadre of future professionals  in the clima te change field, particularly related to coastal protection. Local 
community members will be trained on skill building for O&M of the coastal protection investments. Second, the project  
will undertake an island- level hydrodynamic modelling to finalize the design of the coastal intervention in the three 
targeted islands. Third, in order to maintain and sustain coastal protection investments, the project  will support the 
ongoing efforts of mainstreaming climate change adaptation into the ISP process. The project  will strengthen Island level 
planning and budgeting process so that resilience- building initiatives identified in the ISPs can be financed by either 
domestic or external resources and executed.  In so doing, women’s group will be engaged as an agent to improve the 
balance of power in the context of island- level decision making process.  
 34. By implementing the project , 2,210m  
of coastal defense measures will be constructed to alleviate damages to key 
infrastructure from wave overtopping events in the islands of Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga.  This means that GCF 
investments will increase the length of coverage of coastal protection to 3 5% of the high -value coastlines compared 
                                                             
20 ILO. (2010). Decent Work Country Programme: Tuvalu


---
*Page 17*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 66 
 
 C 
against the baseline of 7%.  It is expected that the project  will have direct benefit to 3,100 people in the country  (1531 
men and 1569 women) , nearly 29% of the total population. Future damages expected from wave overtopping events, 
amplified by the rising sea- levels and intensifying cyclones, will be alleviated . This in turn will contribute to the overall 
vulnerability reduction of the country in the long -run.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description  
35. The Project  Objective  is to reduce the vulnerability of three islands of Tuvalu to coastal inundation and erosion.  This 
Objective is attained through the achievement of three Outputs (each of which corresponds to sub- component). The 
Outputs and project activities are detailed below:  
 
Output 1: Strengthening of institutions, human resources, awareness and knowledge for  resilient coastal 
management  
36. US$2. 7 million or 8 % of the total project  resources  will be used to strengthen the national capacity and overall national 
conditions for long- term viability and sustainability of the coastal interventions . As described earlier, institutional and 
human resource weaknesses underlie many of Tuvalu’s development challenges , and climate change impact will interact 
with these weaknesses  and further aggravate the vulnerability of the country . The needs for coastal protection have been 
poorly addressed to date because, in addition to financial constraints which will be addressed under Output  2, the 
interrelated barriers of technical capacity, awareness and knowledge, have not been sufficiently  addressed at all levels 
of the country from decision makers to community members. The project  resources will be used to address this multi -
layered capacity barrier  in a coherent and comprehensive manner,  thus avoiding a fragmented approach to barrier 
removal, which historically has resulted in a piecemeal set of solutions that fell short of realizing a paradigm shift. This 
Output comprises three key activities.  
 
1.1. Technical capacity, knowledge and awareness strengthened for monitoring, protection  and maintenance of 
coastal protection infrastructure  
 37. The jurisdiction of coastal protection is shared across the Department of Lands and Survey (DoLS), Public Works 
Department (PWD) and Department of Environment (DoE). However, none of these departments currently have the technical capacity to monitor the dynamic processes of coastal change over time nor the capacity to design potential 
coastal interventions . Nor is there sufficient capacity within the Climate Change Policy Unit (CCPU) to coordinate the 
work of these departments for effective coastal protection.  Due to this limitation, the Government is not able to carry out 
vulnerability assessments,  site assessments and coastal design, make informed decisions about pragmatic solutions for 
coastal protec tion, and identify potential funding sources for implementation. Instead, they generally have to wait for a 
donor, often with particular areas of financing priority, to approach them. This lack of ability to carry out a preliminary 
technical assessment contributes to an increasing sense that the issue is out of their control and eventually to limited 
ownership.  Further , although the CCPU was newly established in 2015 to coordinate government’s actions for climate 
change adaptation and mitigation, medium - to long-term capacity building efforts are needed in the technical areas of 
climate change, coordination, project design and management, financial management, knowledge management and 
reporting.   
 
38. Development of technical capacities for coastal vulnerability assessments and technical assessments will require that 
technical officers in the three departments play mutually -reinforcing, and yet distinct , roles. In particular, the role of DoLS 
technical staff is monitoring and assessment; PWD is responsible for preliminary design of interventions; and DoE is 
responsible for overseeing the environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) process  while the CCPU plays a 
coordinating role . The GoT will use the project resources to train staff members from each of these departments through 
hands -on trainings offered by international -level experts, including regional institutions like SPC (Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community)  Geoscience Div ision and SPREP (the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme). The 
same staff members will also join site -specific assessments (conducted by an international contractor)  and 
implementation of coastal protection measures  (under Output 2) s o that they are exposed to new techniques and 
knowledge . It is important to note that the training on coastal protection design will cover both hard- engineering and 
ecosystem -based adaptation (EBA) approaches  such as coastal vegetation , ridge and dune restoration, coral 
transplantation or seagrass plantation . This is to maximize the replication potential of GCF investments beyond the project  
to the remaining high-value vulnerable coastlines in the country .  
 
39. The existing government staff from whom the target of 12  individuals , of which 5 are women,  will be selected for 
technical training include the following:


---
*Page 18*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 66 
 
 C 
• 4 DoLS staff (Survey Technician; 2 Survey Assistants; Surveyor) on synthesizing and processing profile data and 
GIS 
• 4 PWD staff (Civil engineer;  4 designers) on coastal design, EBA coastal design, operation of heavy machineries for 
construction and maintenance 
• 1 DoE staff (EIA officer) on EIA specifically on coastal infrastructure construction  
• 4 CCU staff (Project Development Officer; Data & Infor mation Officer; Policy Coordinator; and one technical position 
which is currently in the approval process) on project development and management focusing on climate change and 
disaster risk management; V&A assessment; progress performance measurement tools ; data and knowledge 
management; CBA.  
 
40. At the outer island level, similar but tailored set of trainings will be provided for real-time monitoring of the coastal 
environment and maintenance of the implemented coastal protection measures . This will involve training in the collection 
of beach profile data, monitoring sediment and beach changes as well as the possible maintenance and monitoring of 
geo-textile containers. The parameters to be collected in beach profiling include the extent of sediment movement 
(erosion and deposition), overall sedimentation budget  and the level of inundation during king tides and other wave 
overtopping events, both in and outside the locations receiving GCF interventions. For this work, a land clerk, a position 
that exists in each of all the islands, will be trained. Currently four out of nine land clerks are women. In addition, local 
youth and women will be trained so that in each island at least five individuals (one existing land clerk and four new 
recruits) are trained for this purpose.  The data collected will be transferred to DoLS for synthesis and simple analysis and 
then to SPC which has a regional repository of data from member countries including Tuvalu. The reposition of data at 
SPC is to ensure continuity in data and to avoid unnecessary investment in a data management system at the country 
level.  
 
41. Beach profil ing is a simple, low cost and effective tool for monitoring long term changes in beach and coastal  
morphology as well as for monitoring and quantifying the long- term effects of the adaptation measures . In beach profiling, 
simple transects of the topography across the beach are measured using standard survey equipment. Profiles are measured along paralle l lines spaced 50 to 100m apart with profiles starting 100 to 200 m inland and continuing out in to 
the water to a safe wading depth. Profiles will be measured monthly and after any significant wave events for the first 
year and bi -monthly or quarterly (as  well as after significant storm events) in subsequent years. P rofiling will start 
immediately after the GCF project  begins to establish a firm set of pre-
intervention baseline data. Following 
implementation of the adaptation measures, profiling will  conti nue at monthly intervals for one year and quarterly 
thereafter.  
 
42. The data collected from beach profiles will show seasonal changes in the beach shape as it responds to changes in 
the wave climate. The act of collecting profiles, plotting and reducing the data to a useable form, conducting preliminary 
analyses and transferring it to the government agency is a valuable opportunity for raising awareness .  
 
43. Since Tuvalu currently does not have any engineered coastal protection infrastructure, the technical capacity for basic  
maintenance does not exist . While the interventions  proposed in this project  (Output 2) have been chosen because they 
should not require major overhauls for 25- 50 years , the need for  minor maintenance can be expected. This could be in 
the form of repair of geo- textile revetment  that are proposed in the outer islands  or repairing of auxiliary facilities such as 
wave return wal ls or a wooden walk way built over the structure. This could also be in the form of monitoring and 
maintenance of predefined coastal access ways designed to reduce dune ridge degradation from  pedestrian traffic. Thus, 
skill building related to these measures will be provided to both staff in PW D and community members . Engagement of 
local youth and women provides a valuable source of employment and income for local communities. Their engagement 
is guided by a specific strategy as shown in Section E.5.3 and Annex XIII . 
 
44. The following indicative inputs will be financed and implemented for Activity 1.1.  
 
• Training of beach profiling workers  in outer islands  on the use of survey equipment; agreement of contracts including 
the frequency of data collection and transfer.   
• Training of DoLS staff on the synthesis and digitization of survey data collected from outer islands.  
• Training of DoE staff on environmental and social impact assessment  
• Training of PWD staff  on the structural maintenance of the GCF investments (Seabee, wave reflection wall and sand-
filled geo -textile containers bags ) 
• Training of PWD staff members, NGOs, and CSOs on the application of ecosystem -based coastal protection  
• Comprehensive training program designed targeting CCPU staff members


---
*Page 19*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 66 
 
 C 
• Two r egional conference s and/or workshop on coastal protection  organized   
 
1.2. Long -term national human resource capacity and awareness enhanced for sustainable coastal protection  
 
45. In the specific context of Tuvalu, the capacity building support conventionally delivered in donor -supported projects  
has been insufficient to establish a foundation for  sustainability. This is because typically the capacity building support in 
these projects is exclusively targeting the existing government staff, which is small in number , and the progress is 
immediately undone if the staff members leave the government system . This approach to capacity building represents 
numerous missed opportunities for transforming the country. Climate change adaptation is defined by UNFCCC as a 
series of “adjus tments in ecological, social, or economic systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli and 
their effects or impacts” and by nature, it is an iterative, long- term process. Adaptation efforts in SIDS like Tuvalu must 
embrace, in their core prin ciple, a strategy to build capacity of the entire country that goes well beyond that of the 
government system .  
 
46. This activity in the GCF -financed project  will establish a foundation for building a cadre of national experts in the long-
run who will work in the relevant sectors for coastal  adaptation. To this end, the project  resources will expand the existing 
Government scholarship program and provide targeted support to at least 9 male and 9 female students  who are currently 
outside of the government system. GCF resources will support students to study relevant  disciplines for coastal 
management including environmental science, geography, earth science, civil and coastal engineering, oceanography 
and meteorology.  Students  currently enrolled in high school or undergraduate level studies will be targeted to pursue 
higher studies in one of the pre- identified institutions in the region.  Students will be selected on the condition that they 
will work in the project  (or other climate change adaptation projects) after completing the study for a predefined time 
period so that the newly gained skills are immediately put to use in the country. This coastal management scholarship 
program  will be implemented in the first 4  years of the GCF project  so that the students will have at least 2 years to apply 
their knowledge and expertise in the country and also obtain hands -on experience during the project  implementation.  
 47. In addition,  6 students (minimum) who are currently enrolled in a master’s level programme s in one of the disciplines  
described above will be recruited by the project  to train them on coastal engineering, site planning, civ il engineering, 
coastal vulnerability and feasibility assessments, design of coastal protection measures, and environmental and social 
impact assessm ent. These two types of capacity building support will help retain skilled labour, which may otherwise 
leave t he country due to limited employment opportunities. For all the skill building activities envisaged, the gender target 
of 50% will be encouraged.   
 
48. Long- term capacity building and awareness raising will also be expanded to school children based on the premise 
that children can be the most effective agent of change in society. GCF resources will be used to work with the Ministry of Education to refine/ modify the primary school curriculum to include topics such as general awareness about climate 
change, climate change impact on atolls and coastlines, the concept of “moving islands” in which dynamic coastal 
processes are part of the natural island formati on process, and anthropogenic stressors to coastal erosion apart from 
climate change. School teachers will be trained so that they become well -versed with these topics. The following indicative 
inputs will be financed and implemented for Activity 1.2.  
 
• A scholarship program is designed with the Ministry of Education; criteria for selecting eligible candidates agreed by 
the second Project Board meeting 
• Scholarship agreement made with at least 18 students  
• At least 6 new  graduates are identified and recruited to assist the government in implementing the project  and in 
carrying out coastal vulnerability and environmental and social impact assessment  
• Contractual agreement signed with the selected 6 students  who are in a master’s program  relevant for coastal 
protection  
• Training of trainer events organized specifically targeting school teachers  
• Primary school curriculum modified and approved  
 
Output 2: Vulnerability of k ey coastal infrastructure including homes , schools, hospitals and other assets is 
reduced against wave induced damages in  Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga   
 
49. This Output , accounting for 7 7% of the total GCF investments , represents the investments in minimizing damages on 
high value assets in coastal areas  in the three target islands of Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga. The design of the 
intervention is guided by  the Feasibility Study (Annex II) and three  assessments, supported by UNDP , JICA  and the World


---
*Page 20*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 66 
 
 C 
Bank, which identified a range of coastal defense infrastructure options  both in Funafuti and outer islands21. The angle 
and the protection of the toe of the structure will be finalized based on local  hydrodynamic and coastal processes ( wave, 
tide and current information ) and topographic data. Th erefore, the final adjustment of the design will be done during the 
first two years  of the project . The adjustment  of detailed drawings  and production of BoQs  will serve as a key milestone 
for the disbursement of the GCF grant for the subsequent projects  (i.e. the construction of the coastal protection 
measures) .  
 
50. The World Bank study investigated the extent of the coastal protection needs and categorized the foreshores into  
three priorities of 1) vulnerable, higher value zones; 2) vulnerable, lesser value zones; and 3) less vulnerable zones. The findings from the preliminary assessment is summarized below
22: 
 
Island  Length of protection 
needed (m)  Height of protection (m)  
Nanumea – All 1,900  3.0 
Higher value  760  
Niutao - All 1,300  3.0 
Higher value  580  
Nanumaga – All  780 3.0 
Higher value  450  
Nui – All  1,420  3.0 
Higher value  750  
Vaitupu – All  1,800  3.0 
Higher value  850  
Nukufetau – All East & West  1,100  3.0 
Western exposure only  390  
Funafuti (Lagoon side) – All  11,400  2.0 
Bulk of community  9,000  Extensive beach rock permits 
higher toe  High value south of port  3,600  
Nukulaelae – All 1,600  3.0 
Higher value  550  
Niulakita23  4.5 
Total – All (incl. Funafuti)  21,300   
Total – Higher value (incl. Funafuti)  7,930   
Total – All (excl. Funafuti)  9,900   
Total – Higher value (excl. Funafuti)  4,330   
Proposed length to be protected 
through GCF  Funafuti: 600  
Nanumea: 760  
Nanumaga: 450   
Total coastline  81,900   
 
Selection of Priority Islands  
51. Alongside the review of suitable coastal protection options, discussions and selection of priority islands were carried 
out by national stakeholders. As a result, the main island of Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga have been selected as 
target islands for the proposed GCF project . The selection of Funafuti was on the basis of several factors. The 
concentration of economic, social, political and institutional assets are likely to generate the largest impact from the GCF 
investment. Moreover, the JICA initiative has produced a feasibility  study for the gravel beach nourishment work, which 
includes the detailed hydrodynamic and coastal processes , an ESIA, and financial and economic analysis. Nanumea and 
Nanumaga were among the four islands that have been severely damaged by recent Cyclone P am.    
 
                                                             
21 Note that the coast al investments financed by JICA (gravel beach nourishment) and Government  (geo- textile  sand retainer  in Nukufetau) are still 
underdevelopment and the final results in terms of coastal protection impact have not been produced.  
22 Note a caveat in the tentative conclusion drawn in the WB assessment as a site inspection did not take place. The conclusion has been drawn from 
the assessment of aerial images only.  
23 Unlik e all other atolls, Niulakita has an average elevation of about 4m above sea level. Hence, the level of urgency in coastal  protection is relatively 
lower. For this reason, any coastal interventions with GCF resources are not proposed.


---
*Page 21*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 66 
 
 C 
52. Based on the technical feasibility study  (Annex II) , it is proposed  that the project resources finance locally appropriate 
coastal protection measures along the high value zone in Nanumea and Nanumaga (760m and 450m respectively) and 
1,000m of high value zone in Funafuti . The proposed GCF project  will also pave the way for interventions in the other 
islands , through site specific assessments in all of the islands in the project,  which the Government of Tuvalu is keen to 
move on to in a subsequent application for funding to GCF . 
 
Selection of Relevant Coastal Protection Options  
 
53. The report s produced  by UNDP, WB and JICA and Annex II  discuss coastal  protection options that have been tested 
around the world, especially in similar island settings. Table below presents some of the key options that have been 
reviewed in these reports with notable advantages and disadvantages . The cost estimates are based on the industry 
standard while incorporating relevant information such as the experience from the gravel beach nourishment  work 
supported by JICA in Funafuti and similar work on remote islands in the Torres Strait.   
 
Intervention 
options  Pros Cons  Rate per m  
(Outer islands ) Rate per m  
(Funafuti ) 
Rock armor  
revetment  
 Structure is highly robust, which 
is an advantage when facing 
dynamic, worsening impact of climate change.  Materials need to be imported; 
the need to use heavy machinery limits  local employment 
opportunities; landing facility is 
needed at site;  
Limits access to foreshore.  $12,054  $8,036  
Pre-cast concrete 
(Seabee)  
revetment  Use of less material; high 
potential for local labor 
participation; if constructed on a 
gentle slope, it allows good 
access to the sea . Needs a good foundation to avoid 
failure; landing materials in outer 
islands can pose a serious 
problem  $15,068  $10,045  
Rigid seawalls 
(Stone pitch)  Undersized rocks could possibly 
be sourced locally.  Failure rates have been high in 
Tuvalu and therefore it has been 
excluded from the option (and no 
cost estimates are provided) . N/A N/A 
Quasi permanent 
Geo-textile 
container 
revetment  Suitable where there is limited 
landing facilities, as is the case 
in Tuvaluan outer islands; offer 
flexibility under uncertain level 
of climate threats; 25 years of 
design life or longer can be expected; potentially us e of 
local materials ; opportunities for 
local employment . Not considered a permanent 
solution (susceptible to vandalism or degradat ion from UV) , and 
thus, this option is excluded from 
Funafuti.  $8,370  N/A 
Offshore wave 
break (Tetrapod)  In addition to attenuating the 
wave, it can create a boat 
haven; a milder wave climate 
reaching the shore allows the build-up of sand and the 
reduction in overtopping . Degradation of  water quality of 
lagoons in Funafuti; requires 
significantly larger units (than on 
the shore).  
Given these issues, the cost will be significantly higher than other 
options.  N/A N/A 
(Gravel) Beach 
nourishment  There is little influence on the 
surrounding coast; there is no 
hindrance to future regeneration 
of beaches with a supply of earth and sand.   A need for auxiliary  facilities to 
maintain the design section due  
to littoral movement of earth and sand; gravel  may be washed up 
on beaches during storms ; the 
risk mitigation potential from 
severe storm may be smaller 
compared with some other hard-
engineered solutions . N/A $9,86624 
Wave return wall 
(optional)  Reduces the amount of water 
that enters into the community 
and to reduce the destructive 
force of water bores  Additional cost to the base 
structure  $1,488  $1,488  
                                                             
24 The cost presented here is based on the actual investment currently undertaken in Funafuti.


---
*Page 22*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 66 
 
 C 
 
54. Wave return wall presented above is an optional structure that is intended to reduce the amount of water that enters  
into the community and reduce the destructive force of wave bores. Thus, it will be incorporated into the crest of the pre-
cast concrete revetment option  that has been chosen in Funafuti .  
 
55. Based on the comparison of the coastal protection options as well as their advantages and disadvantages, stone  
pitch walls and offshore wave break have been eliminated. Pitch wall was considered to have a  high risk of failure while 
offshore wave break is expected to be too expensive and pose environmental risks in the marine ecosystem , especially 
under the current condition s in Funafuti where seepage of contaminated ground water into the lagoon, from septi c tanks 
and livestock pens, is uncontrolled and significant .  
 
56. In Funafuti, design considerations benefit from the fact that, inside the lagoon, the west -facing shores experience  
relatively small depth and fetch limited waves. This means that a higher degree of protection can be obtained with relatively smaller and less costly measures than on an open coast setting. As described in Annex II, it was concluded that 
rock armour revetm ent is most cost -effective option. However, this option’s drawbacks include disruption of foreshore 
access, a critically important factor for this small island community. Thus, the rock armour revetment option (which will 
be used along 600m of vulnerable c oastline) will be complemented by the limited use of pre- cast concrete (Seabee) 
revetment (along 400m) where maintaining access to foreshore is deemed needed.   
 57. In the two outer islands of Nanumea and Nanumaga, one local factor restricting the viability of many coastal protection 
options is the lack of landing facility in the islands, which precludes the two revetment options that are considered in 
Funafuti. As a result, geo-textile container revetment is considered a viable option. It can potentially be complimented 
with soft measures including beach nourishment and dune restoration.  This Output comprises two key activities:  
 2.1. Coastal protection design, site-specific assessments and ESIA undertaken in all islands in a participatory 
manner  
 
58. A detailed, participatory design and site-specific assessment  will be carried out in all the islands in Tuvalu. This 
process is needed not only to make final adjustments in the design of the coastal protection measures (such as the angle 
of the structure and protection of the toe of the structure) to maximize the effectiveness and longevity of the structure for 
the three targeted islands, but also to equip the other, non- targeted islands, with the necessary information for attracting 
donor resources in the future, including from GCF . The multi -stakeholder , gender -responsive  planning and design 
process will take place to ensure that beneficiaries ar e fully informed and are able to contribute to the detail design and 
functionality of the coastal protection measures in each of the islands. The process  will, for example,  look into how the 
target community  (men, women, youth, and elderly)  interacts with the ocean and coastline, which is an important design 
element of coastal protection infrastructure. The assessment  will result in a set of adaptation options, detailed technical 
drawings, bill of quantity, tender documents and detailed cost ing of the interventions. As described earlier, this process 
will be used as an opportunity to provide hands -on trainings for government staff from the DLS, PWD and DoE.  
 
59. In conjunction with the island- level assessment, a permanent survey benchmark will be established in each of the  
nine islands. Currently, there is plenty of survey replication on certain islands, and each time, a new permanent survey 
benchmark has to be established. Streamlining this process by creating one permanent survey benchmark on each island is necessary for ensur ing consistency and continuity in data obtained through the survey work (to be promoted under 
Output 1 above).  The following indicative inputs will be financed and implemented for Activity 2.1. for each island:  
  
• Organizat ion of community consultations to inform the engineering design and ESIA. It will be ensured that men and 
women will be given separate opportunities to express their views and concerns.  
• Collection of wave, current and sediment data, public consultations  and E SIA 
• A national consultation and validation of the findings of the assessment . 
• Establishment of a permanent survey benchmark  engaging youth organizations to carry out surveys . 
 2.2. Coastal protection measures implemented  
 
60. GCF and government resources  will be used to put in place a robust coastal protection infrastructure along 2,210m  
of vulnerable coastlines  of Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga to defend high value assets of the targeted islands . This 
translates t o targeting nearly 28% of the high value zone of the country, which currently has no protective measures. Also 
this represents 10 % of all vulnerable coastlines in the country. T he design criteria are set such that the design will reflect 
the projected sea level rise and notional 200 -year return period storm surge events. Geo-textile container revetment s in


---
*Page 23*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 66 
 
 C 
Nanumea and Nanumaga  will have minim um design life of 25 years;  but, with the appropriate selection of vandal resistant 
bags for the top layer walls  and, training of PWD and community members for monitoring and simple repair,  the life 
expectancy is expected to be longer.  
 
61. In Funafuti, a combination of r ock armor  revetment and pre- cast concrete revetment options  is considered most cost -
effective. These options  can potentially  be complemented by softer, ecosystem -based coastal protection approaches that 
are considered locally appropriate. In Nanumea and Nanumaga, as described  above and in the Feasibility S tudy (Annex 
II), the  geo-textile container revetment  is considered a technically feasible option. This will likely be complemented by 
EBA approaches including beach nourishment and dune restoration/management.  
 
62. Along with the island -level assessment s proposed under Activity 2.1, the construction process will offer critical  
opportunities for providing  a real exposure for government officers to the new  coastal protection technologies that have 
never before been introduced to Tuvalu. PWD  staff as well as those Tuvaluan students who are financially supported by 
GCF resources to obtain technical skills in higher studies are relevant target audience for this  opportunity . The proposed 
interventions also offer loc al employment opportunities  especially during the construction. During the construction 
process, it is expected that 20 temporary jobs in each island are created (60 jobs total).   
 
63. The GoT has made a commitment to allocate approximately US$ 2.86 million  for the duration of the project  (or 
US$128,713 per year  over the 15- year period).  This comes from a recently established expenditure in the central 
government system called the Infrastructure Maintenance Budget  (see confirmation of co- financing in Annex IV ). 
 64. The following indicative inputs will be financed and implemented for Activity 2. 2. 
 
• Construction of coastal protection infrastructure in Funafuti, N anumea and Nanumaga covering 2,210m of vulnerable 
coastlines  
• Organization of community consultations  for handover of the assets  
• Engaging youth based organizations to play a role in monitoring on a quarterly basis during and after project  
implementation  
 
Output 3: A sustainable financing mechanism established for long -term adaptation efforts  
 
65. Adapting to climate variability and change requires iterative adjustments in ecological, social and economic systems,  
and the availability of financial resources is a key prerequisite for successful adaptation efforts. Yet, the GoT’s  high 
dependence on foreign aid, and its volatility, makes the long- term planning for public investments difficult. Foreign aid is 
often earmarked to specific purposes leaving little possibility for facilitating autonomous adaptation. In outer islands, 
however, there are Falekaupule Trust F und (FTF)  and Special Development Expenditures (SDE) , which provide a 
somewhat steady income to island administrations for executing priority investment activities . There is a  growing 
recognition that the Island Strategic Plan (ISP)  should be used to identify development priorities in each island and to 
allocate finite financial resources for achieving the priorities. There is also a recognition that the process of formulating the ISP should become more participatory, pro- poor, gender -responsive and climate- smart . Notwithstanding Tuvalu’s 
negligible contributions to climate change, island communities are already investing their own resources for responding 
to climate threats. In support of this, UNDP is currently assisting island admi nistrations to explicitly linking the ISPs and 
FTF/SDE while integrating adaptation and coastal natural resource management concerns into ISPs . The Department of 
Rural Development is currently pilot testing the use of a performance- based fiscal transfer mechanism in three islands to 
incentivize the island administrations for effective formulation and use of the ISP.  
 
66. The implementation architecture for this sub- component will leverage the basel ine developed by the two preceding 
UNDP  supported projects. Currently, there is a team in these projects supporting the iterative process of island 
development planning, budgeting, execution , and monitoring.  Importantly, the proposed GCF project  will also build on 
the foundation in terms of community awareness about these process, which can take a long period to establish. T o 
leverage the ongoing UNDP efforts in this regard and maximize transformational potential of GCF investments, all outer islands will be supported through this Output. A Public Financial Management officer , who is in place in the Department 
of Rural Development  has responsibility to monitor the use of top- up discretionary grants provided to island administration. 
The complement arity between the ongoing UNDP -support and the proposed GCF project  as well as the additional 
contributions of the latter, in the context of enhancing climate- sensitive planning and budgeting process at the outer island 
level, are presented in a table below:  
 
LDCF/GEF TF projects  GCF project


---
*Page 24*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 66 
 
 C 
• Initial awareness raising activities about ISPs, climate 
change and the need for stronger island- level 
development planning, budgeting and execution for 
climate resilience  
• Compilation and analysis of existing ISPs  
• Training of facilitators from each island for reviewing 
ISPs  
• Formulation of disaster readiness plan  
• Conducting the first Climate Public Expenditure and 
Institutional Review  
• Climate resilient ISP formulation and budgeting support 
(2016- 2019) focusing on marine based coastal 
livelihoods, DRM  and ecosystem management  
• Compilation and analysis of new ISPs (2017- 2019)  
• Review of ISP performance (2016- 2019) using 
community scorecards and participatory videos.  • Expansion of performance -based resources made 
available for priority critical procurements as a financial incentive for more participatory, gender -responsive, 
pro-poor and climate- smart ISP planning, budgeting 
and execution.  
• Continued training on facilitators for participatory ISP 
formulation and budgeting with focus on coastal 
protection (2017- 2023)  
• Follow -up analysis on Climate Public Expenditure 
(conducted by project staff and Ministry of Finance)  to 
monitor the progress/trend on climate- responsive 
budgeting at the island and national level  
• Compilation and analysis of new ISPs (2017- 2023)  
• Review of ISP performance (2017- 2023) using 
community scorecards and participatory videos.  
 
It is important to emphasize that the most notable GCF contributions for this Output is the extended continuity it brings to 
support this new concept of island level  planning and budgeting process. It is commonly understood that the process of 
introducing/strengthening accountability, transparency and responsibility to subnational administrations takes many years  
of assistance. The ongoing UNDP support is crucial in i ntroducing climate change and ecosystem management concerns 
into the existing ISP process while the GCF project  will enable continued assistance in a seamless manner, extending 
the timeframe of assistance from 4 years to possibly 9- 10 years.    
 67. For sustain able financing mechanisms to support adaptation efforts, it is also important to look at GoT’s financial  
capability to immediately assist those affected by climate change induced natural disasters including tropical cyclones. 
This is because no coastal protec tion is sufficient to  completely  eliminate future damages, especially when super 
cyclones, such as  Cyclone Pam , hit the country. While the GCF investment will alleviate damages to key infrastructure 
assets by attenuating  wave energy directly  striking the land, it is equally important to ensure that  GoT is capable of  
immediately extend ing support to those affected by  extreme events without waiting for external donors support. To this 
end, GCF resources will be used to rebuild key economic and social assets in the aftermath of natural disasters. The 
operational process of selecting beneficiaries and releasing financial resources will follow an existing national mechanism. 
For example, in the Tuvalu Climate Change and Survival Fund (CCSF)
25, a com munity seeking support puts forward a 
request for assistance, which is assessed by a Committee, comprising government departments and Tuvalu National 
Council of Women. After d amages from a natural disaster are independently assessed, an approval decision will be made 
by a Board that comprises a Minister, a government officer and the General Secretary of Tuvalu Red Cross. The most 
appropriate fund management modality will be explored with currently considered options being the CCSF and/or UNDP 
managing the fund. Annex XII I Additional Background Details contains the management structure of the CCSF.  
 
68. This Output comprises the following activities:  
 
3.1. All Island  Strategic Plans and annual budgets integrate island -specific climate risks through gender 
sensitive, participatory processes  
 
69. Tuvalu is transitioning to a new development paradigm. Previously, public service delivery to outer islands was  
primarily driven by the central government, whose development finance in turn was largely dependent on foreign aid. The 
Falekaupule Act of 1997, which is also known as the Local Government Act, ushered in the current two- tiered governance 
system that comprises the national  government and island- level administrations . This act devolved the local governance 
authority to the island council ( Kaupule), which is the executive arm of island assembly ( Falekaupule), to implement 
national  and community -level development priorities. In principle, this puts local communities, led by respective Kaupules , 
at the center of local development process. The Act also gave rise to the ISPs  and to financial allocation systems to 
support the implementation of the development priorities identified in ISPs. Falekaupule Trust Fund (FTF) was established 
with donors’ financial assistance (New Zealand, Australia, Japan, and Republic  of Korea) along with the enactment of the 
1997 Act to supplement the financia l needs of outer island development. FTF distributions to outer islands are on average 
$64,000 per year for fulfilling their development needs.  
                                                             
25 The CCSF was established as of 1 January 2016 and the Government of Tuvalu and Australia has already committed to inject an initial 
contribution of approximately US$5 million and US$3.5 million, respectively, into the Fund.


---
*Page 25*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 66 
 
 C 
 
70. Financing from the LDCF and GEF Trust Fund is currently  supporting Kaupules  to build basic skills for accounting  
and facilitating a participatory development planning process, while integrating climate change and natural resource 
management concerns into the ISPs and using SDE/FTF as a financing source for implementation. With multifaceted 
constraints – institutionally and financially – that dictate the way development is carried out in the country, the use of 
these two sources of funds underpinned by the ISP presents one of the most reliable sources of financing for development 
in the country.  Since 2016, the Department of Rural Development  is further advancing the ISP support  by introducing an 
incentive mechanism in three pilot islands of Nanumea, Nukufetau and Nukulaelae. In the pilot test, those Kaupules  
whose performance is evaluated satisfactory (based on pre- determined criteria such as participation, result -orientation, 
accountability, etc. ) would receive additional discretionary grant . This will give an incentive for Kaupules  to accelerate 
their effor ts for integrating climate change concerns into ISPs and generally improving local governance.  
 
71. Successful climate risk mainstreaming into ISPs and effective use of available domestic financing will facilitate island -
led actions,  enhance planned and autonomous adaptation, and ultimately, increase resilience at the island level.  In the 
context of coastal interventions envisaged in the GCF project , a strengthened ISP process will improve longer -term impact 
and replication potential of the GCF investment s as domestic resources , allocated through ISPs,  are expected to be used 
to maintain the GCF investments and to expand the coastal protection coverage.  For the expansion of coastal protection 
measures beyond donor -assisted projects,  lower -cost ecosystem -based approaches  are a more realistic option given the 
limited available finance domestically . This activity will strengthen the critical foundation to facilitate this process.  
 
72. In addition, GCF resources  will be made available to address urgent procurement needs to address recovery and 
response after the aftermath of extreme events  in full alignment with an existing process such as the  CCSF. The 
underlying rationale for such support is that the extent of GCF contributions towards t he overall vulnerability reduction of 
the country will be enhanced if the project supports the costs of both anticipatory adaptation (through Output 2) and early 
response and recovery needs from residual damages. With GCF support, the GoT will be able to p rovid e immediate vital 
services to the people of Tuvalu in combating the devastating impact of climate change and nat ural disasters  and allow 
the GoT and the people to respond to disaster events in a coordinated, effective and timely manner. To ensure efficiency, 
the process of approval will likely follow an existing national mechanism  such as that of  the CCSF . The most appropriate 
fund management modality will be explored with currently considered options being the CCSF and/or UNDP managing 
the resources for the duration of the project. Under the CCSF, the fund account is held at the National Bank of Tuvalu. 
The fund is governed by the CCSF Board comprising of the Minister of Finance and Economic Development, General 
Secretary of Tuvalu Red Cr oss, and Permanent Secretary for the Ministry of Home Affairs. The fund becomes accessible 
only after a national state of emergency arising from a list of pre- identified natural disasters (See Annex XIII –  Section G) 
is declared.   The need for financing for early response and recovery, for which the financial support from the fund is 
requested, must be presented by the community affected by a natural disaster in the form of a proposal a (template will be made available). Decisions to support such requests w ill be based on a review of a proposal by a nine- member 
committee against criteria that is made public. The committee will include a representative from the Tuvalu National 
Council of Women. The committee also prepares a financial report on the utilization of the Fund on an annual basis for 
the review by the National Advisory Council on Climate Change (NACCC), N atural Disaster Committee (NDC), the 
Cabinet  and UNDP . The use of the fund for operating expenses of the CCSF committee or to be reversed into the g eneral 
account will be prohibited. Every six months, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development will be required to 
transmits the Auditor -General the account showing fully the financial position of the CCSF; and the Auditor -General is 
expected to prepare an audit report and present it to the Parliament.    
 
73. To reduce vulnerability of Tuvalu and, ultimately, build the resilience of the country  to future impact of climate change, 
a combination of options are needed. Construction of coastal defense, which is supported under Output 2 of the project , 
is one option. Yet, the country also needs financial resources at their disposal to kick -start early response and recovery 
work after natural disasters, from which the existing defense is incapable of eliminating the damage. The following 
indicative inputs will be financed and implemented for Activity 3.1.   
 
• National training of trainers (ToT) workshop organized for incorporating climate c hange risks , including coastal 
threats , into ISPs targeting kaupule representatives, minority groups, Department of Rural Development staff, NGO 
staff and women’s group representatives. This workshop will also cover skill building for prioritization and budgeting 
of adaptation action items in an annual budgeting process . Youth and women’s groups  will also be included in these 
trainings  
• Facilitation of outer island works hops to integrate climate risks  into the existing ISPs and to produce/enhance annual 
budgets  and presentation of the new ISPs to communities


---
*Page 26*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 66 
 
 C 
• Compilation, analysis and reporting of all outer island annual bu dgets . This report will be shared with all other islands 
and used in the following year to guide iterative planning and budgeting process  
• Release of performance- based resources to meet costs of priority procurements as a financial incentive for more 
participatory, gender -responsive, pro- poor and climate- smart ISP planning, budgeting and execution  
• Operational and financial arrangement finalized for community -based disaster early response/recovery support  
 
3.2. Capacity of Kaupules , Falek aupules  and community members strengthened for monitoring coastal 
adaptation investments  
 
74. GCF resources will also be used to strengthen the capacity of both outer island administrations and community  
members for monitoring, reporting and verifying the progress of adaptation investments  as an integral element of ISP 
support . Due to the special geographical condition of  Tuvalu where islands are several days away from the central 
government, upward accountability to the central government and downward accountability to citizens can easily be 
diluted among kaupules . Thus,  nurtur ing the sense of oversight among community members  becomes critical for ensuring 
transparent, sustainable, demand- driven service delivery . Support to ISP formulation, budgeting and execution, the focus 
of Activity 3.1, and support for community members for an independent oversight of the ISP process , the focus of Activity 
3.2, must go hand- in-hand. At the same time, outer island administrations also need to develop their capacity to report 
the use of resources and progress of investments to their constituents.  
 
75. To assist the process of increasing capacity for monitoring, and ultimately accountability, two specific tools will be 
supported, building on the work of the two UNDP baseline projects . First is a community scorecard where selected 
representatives from various interest groups such as women, youth, minorities, the disaster management committee, fisher’s association, and Red Cross volunteers, assess performance of outer island administrat ions in terms of the use of 
island resources for the agreed purposes as outlined in the annual budget and ISP. This scorecard entails criteria such as “completion of proposed projects”, “level of beneficiary engagement” and “targeting of proposed beneficiaries” , and 
they will be linked to the performance criteria described above. Secondly, a participatory video tool will be continually 
supported. This tool has been tested in the region to enhance the accountability and information exchange of community -
based climate change small grant projects. Video footages provide visual verification of successful executions of ISP 
priorities by kaupules . Women’s group members are provided with a hand- held video with which they record the public 
service support delivered.  The videos are periodically collected and compiled by the ISP Officer recruited in the project 
and shared with kaupule members and other community members as best practices. This tool has been used in countries 
like Samoa where monitoring by central government is similarly difficult and has proven to be effective in raising 
awareness and sense of accountability. A national level ToT in Funafuti will train members of women’s association to use 
a camcorder, develop a story -board, record their planned approach  and edit their video to present their message.  
 
76. Financial assistance from GCF  will be sequenced and/or  combined with the ongoing baseline UNDP projects that  
support the architecture for ISP formulation and budgeting and for nurturing a stronger sense of  accountability framework . 
The LDCF and GEF Trust Fund project s have been under implementation since 2013 and 2015, respectively, and will 
run for the period of 4 years. Building on the foundation of these two initiatives, the GCF project  will continue the support 
to building the capacity of Kaupules , falek aupules  and community members for effective and transparent governance for 
climate change adaptation and natural resources management. The following indicative inputs will be financed an d 
implemented for Activity 3.2.  
 
• Outer island level awareness raising events organized targeting different interest groups such as women, youth, 
disaster management committee, fisher’ s association, and NGOs about monitoring and maintenance needs of the 
coastal investments (in the island of Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga) and the needs for ecosystem -based 
adaptation for all the islands (Following Activity 1.1)  
• A national ToT  events  organized inviting representatives from these interest groups for particip atory video.  
• Technical assistance on t he use community scorecard is provided once a year in which representatives from 
communities, covering different interest groups assess the performance of outer island administrations  
• National level consultation s organized targeting Kaupule, Falekaupule and community members to review the 
process of annual budgeting, monitoring and evaluation  for coastal protection .  
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor  (Executing Entity ) 
77. The United Nations Development Programme has been requested by the Government of Tuvalu to execute  this GCF  
project . UNDP has extensive experience as the Executing Entity of climate change adaptation projects globally. The total 
size of the climate change adaptation portfolio in which UNDP is playing the role of the Executing Entity amounts to 
US$40  million.


---
*Page 27*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 66 
 
 C 
 
78. UNDP’s experience in supporting Pacific SIDs has also been significant, and growing, delivering an average of 
approximately US$30 million per annum across 15 Pacific SIDs through 4  offices26. In partnership with national 
governments, UNDP support hard and soft investments at all levels, from communities to local and national government 
and regional entities in order to strengthen inclusive growth, better services, environmental sustainability, good 
governance, and security that are fundamental to building r esilience and sustaining development results. As a Global 
Environment Fund (GEF) agency and Adaptation Fund (AF) Multilateral Implementing Entity (MIE), UNDP has past and ongoing initiatives related to enhancing climate change and disaster risk resilience in food, water, and energy sectors.  
 79. In Tuvalu, UNDP has a long history of successful partnerships with the Government in the area of governance, trade, 
climate change, gender, and environmental /natural resource management at both national and internationa l levels. These 
include, but not limited to,  successful joint efforts in: NAPA, NAP, SNC and NBSAP, mainstreaming of environmental 
sustainability into national policies, pl anning frameworks and programs , local governance strengthening, parliamentary 
suppor t, and trade advisory services, etc. In addition, UNDP, in collaboration with Tuvalu Association of NGO ( TANGO ), 
has been assisting the GoT  in promoting community -based management of marine resources through GEF Small Grant 
Programme (SGP). Furthermore, supporting the government’s aspiration for enhanced outer island- level governance and 
participatory decision making has been an important area of UNDP’s work. UNDP’s assistance for local governance reform in Tuvalu dates back to 1997 when the Falekaupule Act  was enacted and the process of devolution of authority 
first began. Since 2005, support for more institutionalized outer island development framework has been provided through 
the Strengthening Local Governance project. Capacity of Kaupule to formulate IS P was strengthened.   
  
80. At the regional level, UNDP, in partnership with other regional agencies and UN agencies, supports Pacific SIDs in 
addressing critical sustainable development challenges in the areas of: climate change adaptation and mitigation, fisheries, integrated water resource management, disaster risk resilience. Recent and/or ongoing initiatives include:  
 
• The Pacific Adaptation to Climate Change Programme (and PACC+). $20 million over 5 years to support policy 
development, governance and implementation capacity for 13 PICs (including all host countries) to pilot food security, 
water security and coastal management resilience projects  
• The Pacific Island Greenhouse Gas Abatement through Renewable Energy Project (PIGGAREP)  $8.225 million over 
6.5 years to support and enabling environment for RE investment and delivery of practical RE solutions  
• “PAS: Implementing Sustainable Integrated Water Resource and Wastewater Management in the Pacific Island 
Countries - under the GEF Pacific Alliance for  Sustainability (Pacific IWRM) Project, ” GEF TF US$ 9.03M, 14 Pacific 
SIDs, GEF Agency: UNDP, Executing Agency: SPC -South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC), Focal 
Area: Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM), Completed  
• “R2R: Testing the Integration of Water, Land, Forest & Coastal Management to Preserve Ecosystem Services, Store 
Carbon, Improve Climate Resilience and Sustain Livelihoods in Pacific Island Countries, ” GEF TF US$ 9.83M, 14 
Pacific SIDs, GEF Agency: UNDP, Executing Partner: SPC -SOPAC, Focal Area: IWRM  
• “Enhancing Capacity to Develop Global and Regional Environmental Projects in the Pacific ” GEF TF US$ 1M, 14 
Pacific SIDs, GEF Agency: UNDP, Executing Partner: SPREP, Focal Area: Multi -focal  
• “Pacific Risk Resilience Programme (PRRP) ”, Australia US$ 16.1 million, Fiji, Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Vanuatu, 
Direct Implementation by UNDP, Executing Partner: Live and Learn, Focal Area: Disaster and climate risk 
management and governance 
• “Enhancing Capacity to Develop Global and Regional Environmental Projects in the Pacific,”  GEF TF US$ 1 million, 
14 Pacific SIDs, GEF Agency: UNDP, Executing Partner: SPREP, Focal Area: Multi -focal  
• “Pacific Islands Oceanic Fisheries Management Project (PIOFMP 1) ,”  GEF TF US$ 10,946,220, 14 Pacific SIDs, 
GEF Agency: UNDP, Executing Agencies: Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA); Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community (SPC), Focal area: Fisheries, Completed  
• “Implementation of Global and Regional Oceanic Fisheries Conventions and Related Instruments in the Pacific Small 
Island Developing States (PIOFMP 2) ,”  GEF TF US$ 10 million, 14 Pacific SIDs, GEF Agency: UNDP and FAO, 
Executing Agencies: Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA); Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), 
Focal area: Fisheries, Ongoing  
 
                                                             
26 Pacific  office, Samoa Multi -country office, Solomon Islands Sub- office, and PNG Country Office. These offices collectively c over 15 countries in the 
Pacific Islands (Samoa, Tokelau, Niue, Cook Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Fiji, Vanuatu, Solomon Islands, Nauru, Kiribati, Federated States of Micronesia, 
Palau, Papua New Guinea, and Republic of the Marshall Islands).  Tuvalu is covered by the Pacific Office. Total Programme Expenditures between 
2010 – 2014 are estimated at US$ 147 million.


---
*Page 28*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 66 
 
 C 
81. Globally, UNDP works in nearly 170 countries and territories and it focuses on helping countries build and share 
solutions in three main areas of sustainable development:  democratic governance and peacebuilding, and climate and 
disaster resilience, all of which contribute to the achievement of poverty eradication, reduction of inequalities and 
exclusion . Long- term capacity building of partner countries is a critical element of UNDP’s approach to work. The 
proposed GCF project  is in line with the underlying pr inciples of UNDP’s mandate: The project  contributes to reducing 
the vulnerability of a SID to imminent climate risks while contributing to the capacity building of the nation at all levels.    
C.5. Market Overview  (if applicable)  
82. Coastal protection fulfills the characteristics of “non -excludability” and “non -rivalry” and thus it is considered as a  
pure public good. Thus, there is no market and services of coastal protection need to be provided through government 
interventions.   
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance  (if applicable)  
83. Based on Section 8  of the “ Environmental Protection Regulations 2007/2014 ,” a preliminary environmental impact  
assessment27 is required before the commencement of the project . During the project  implementation, a full -fledged E SIA 
will be carried out. In addition, the project will be subject to UNDP standard Social and Environmental Safeguards (SES) 
Policy and the screening procedure (SESP).  
 
84. Foreshore and Land Reclamation Act 2008 is another regulation relevant for the proposed GCF activities. In particular, 
the Act stipulates the following aspects which are part of the proposed project activities: a) ownership of the foreshore; 
and b) license to extract aggregates from the foreshores.   
 
85. As per the Act, the foreshore is owned by the Crown (Section 3.1 of the Act). Thus, if the coastal protection  
interventions will be implemented only in that section of the coast, it is expected that no obstacles exist for the project 
(provided a full endorsement is obtained through public consultations). In case the coastal protection interventions will be implemented beyond the foreshore, authorization form the Minister is required for reclamation of land over and upon the 
foreshore (Section 4.1 of the Act) (See Annex XIII for the Letter of Authorization) . For extracting aggregates from the 
foreshores, an approval from the kaupule will be required (Section 3.3 of the Act).  Project Manager will be responsible 
for obtaining and maintaining the licenses and permits that are required for the project intervention.   
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s 
86. The project  will be implemented following UNDP’s Direct Implementation Modality ( DIM) at the request from the 
Government of Tuvalu and the GCF National Designated Authority. The official request from the Government is included in Annex XIII. UNDP’s role in this project  is two -fold: 
 
87. First, a s an Accredited Entity to GCF, UNDP ’s overall role is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its 
Headquarter, Bangkok Regional Hub (BRH) and Pacific Office  units.  This role includes: (i) project  preparation oversight; 
(ii) project  implementation oversight and supervision, including financial management; and (iii) project  completion and 
evaluation oversight.  It also includes oversight roles in relation to reporting and knowledge- management.  The ‘ project 
assurance ’ function of UNDP is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent project oversight 
and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project  management milestones are managed and completed. 
Project assurance is independent of the Project Manager  and Project Management Uni t; therefore, the Project Board 
cannot delegate any of its assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager  or other members of the PMU . A UNDP 
Programme Officer, or M&E Officer, at the Country Office with support from the UNDP’s Global Environmental Fina nce 
Unit, typically holds the Project Assurance role on behalf of UNDP.    
 
88. Second, at the request of the GoT, UNDP will serve as Executing Entity for this project . In this capacity, UNDP will 
be establishing a Project Management Unit which will be responsible for the execution of the proposed GCF project  in 
close collaboration with the GoT and other non- government partners. Any inputs  related to Project Execution ( e.g. the 
costs of project management staff for the duration of the project; costs for project inception, Steering Committee and 
other stakeholder meetings; costs of independent external evaluations; and costs for monitoring/evaluation- related travel 
of project staff to the field sites) have been costed and budgeted in the Project Management  Costs .  
 
                                                             
27 For the purposes of the UNDP process, the term “environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) i s used


---
*Page 29*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 66 
 
 C 
89. Under the DIM arrangement, UNDP assumes the responsibility for mobilizing and applying effectively the required 
inputs in order to reach the expected outputs. UNDP assumes overall management responsibility and accountability for 
project implement ation . Accordingly the PMU is subject to UNDP policies and procedures.  
 
90. Throughout the lifetime of the project , the project assurance and execution roles of UNDP will be strictly separated.  
 
91. The Project Board (PB) will be co- chaired by UNDP’s Resident Representative or his/her deputy and the National 
Designated Authority. The PB is comprised of the OPM, DoE, PWD, DLS, DRD, MoE and a representative from the NGO 
association (TANGO) and Tuvalu Co uncil of Women.  The DRD and TANGO will be the Senior Beneficiary. PB28 meets 
twice a year and is responsible for approving , by consensus, the Annual Work Plan prepared by the Project Manager, 
and making management decisions when guidance is required by the Project Manager. PB decisions will be made in 
accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, 
transparency and effective international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final 
decision shall rest  with the UNDP Resident Representative.  
 
92. UNDP also participates in the PB as ‘ senior supplier ’ to represent the interests of the parties which provide funding 
and/or technical expertise to the project (designing,  developing, facilitating, procuring, implementing). The senior 
supplier’s primary function within the Board is to provide guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project . The 
senior supplier role must have the authority to commit or acquire supplier resources required. If necessary, more than one person may be required for this role.  
 
93. The Project Manager  (PM) will run the project , under guidance of the Project Board and day -to-day supervision by 
UNDP  and GoT  within the constraints laid down by the PB . The PM
29 function will end when the final project  terminal 
evaluation report, and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, has been completed and submitted to 
UNDP.  The PM is responsible for day -to-day management and decision- making for the project  within the Annual Work 
Plan approved by the PB  and reviewed by UNDP . The PM’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project  produces 
the results specified in the project  document, to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of 
time and cost.  The Project Manager will have a matrix reporting arrangement to the UNDP Pacific Office  and the GoT.  
 
94. Project -support: The PM will be part of and supported by the Project Management Unit (PMU) which comprises 
of a group of project -financed staff. The PMU will be located in Funafuti with several staff members outposted in 
the UNDP Pacific Office . The PMU will be responsible for supporting the PM in carrying out day -to-day activities 
of the project , the overall operational and financial management, and liaison with relevant stakeholders for the 
project. The PMU will be located within the Climate Change and Policy Unit. The PMU comprises of the following 
positions:  
 
Funafuti -based  
• Deputy Project Manager : The DPM is responsible for assisting the PM in every aspect of project management 
but will specifically be responsible for liaison with key stakeholders in the project.  
 Fiji MCO -based  
• Project Admin Officer: The AO is responsible for setting up and maintaining the project  accounting system, 
monitor quarterly and activity -wise expenditures vis -à-vis Annual Work Plan, prepare budget revision, process 
payment requests, update financial plans, and prepare status reports and other financial reports.  
• Project Finance Officer: The FO is responsible for the financial management of the project  including the overall 
budget expenditures according to the Project Document, advising the Government, PMU and UNDP on the need for budget revision and/or off -track activities, and presenting fi nancial analysis at Project Board meetings.  
 
• Communications Specialist : The Communications Specialist  is responsible for internal and external 
communications  for the project  including periodic update and dissemination of results achieved, synthesis and 
analysis of lessons learned, and production of various communication materials such as videos, photo stories, blog articles, etc.  
• Procurement Officer: The Procurement Officer will oversee every procurement that takes place in the project  
including individ ual contracts and institutional contracts.  
                                                             
28 Sample ToR for Project Board: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603TORProjectBoard.pdf  
29 Sample ToRs for project manager: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603TORProjectManager.pdf ; Sample ToR for 
Project Ad ministrative and Financial Assistant: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603TORProjectFinanceAdmin.pdf


---
*Page 30*
---

 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION   
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 66 
 
 C 
• Chief Technical Advisor: The CTA is responsible for bringing in international best practices to the 
implementation of the project and train the technical personnel in the PMU. The CTA will be an international 
staff under UNDP contract. CTA will be hired for the duration of the project.  While the CTA will be based in Fiji, 
he/she is expected to spend 70- 75% of time in Funafuti.  
 
95. Responsible Party: UNDP will invite the Ministry of Education as a responsible party who will bear the direct 
responsibility for the execution of the activities related to scholarship project . This is based on the fact that the MoE has 
been administering national scholarship programmes over years and it is considered more effective and efficient if the focal agency for all scholarships remains the same.  
 
96. The management arrangements for this project are summarized in the chart below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 97. Construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements : Construction of coastal  protection 
measures will be carried out by a construction company selected through an international tender  (where local companies 
will also be able to bid) . Furthermore, before the selection of the international tender for a construction company, island-
level assessm ents will be carried out  by an institution that is different from the one responsible for the construction.  The 
assessments and construction of the coastal protection measures will be carried out by entities identified through a competitive tender process according to UNDP  policies and guidelines . The assessment  process will result in, inter alia, 
detailed technical designs and Bill of Quantity for the specifications based on the design. The detailed design will in turn 
be used to inform potential vendors the scope of work required so that they can submit their bid. Independently, a site 
supervisor will be recruited who, on behalf of the Government (PWD) and UNDP, will play a liaison with the construction 
company while ensuring that the construction is carried out as per the specifications, timeline and environmental and 
social safeguards agreed.  
 
98. Operational arrangements post -construction: The built infrastructure financed with GCF financing will be handed 
over to the Government of Tuvalu and community in the final PB meeting of the project as per standard UNDP procedures.  
Putting in place mechanisms for monitoring, operations and maintenance (O&M) of coastal protection measures, and building associated institutional and community capacities for the O&M , during and beyond the project  implementation,  
is one of the important design principles for this project. For more details, please refer to Section D.2 Exit Strategy and 
Annex XIII –  O&M Plan.   
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation  
99. The implementation schedule with detailed activity progress timeline and output completion is provided in Annex 
X. 
PROJECT ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE  
Senior Beneficiary : 
Depart ment of  Rural 
Development; TANGO  
Executive:  
GoT and Resident 
Representative /UNDP  
PROJECT BOARD  
Senior Supplier : 
UNDP  
Project Support:  
• Deputy Project Manager  
• Project Admin Officer  
• Project Finance Officer  
• Procurement Officer  
• Communications Specialist  
• Chief Technical Advisor  
Project Manager  
 Project Assurance:  
UNDP


---
*Page 31*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 66 
 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement    
100. Scale up investments in critical coastal infrastructure: GCF will deliver real benefits , in terms of reduced risks 
from cyclone or wave overtopping events,  to 29% of the population in one of the most vulnerable countries in the world 
to climate change. The level of coastal protection will significantly increase from the current 570m to 2,210m after GCF 
involvement.  GCF involvement in setting up coastal defense in Tuvalu is required due to the combined impact of sea 
level rise and intensifying tropical storms. At a rate of 5mm/annum since 1993, sea level rise in Tuvalu is between 28-
44% higher than the global average.  More concerning, it is significantly faste r than the rate of natural island 
formation/reformation process. In the absence of climate change, a natural island formation process are commonly in a state of dynamic equilibrium, although in many cases, islands actually increase in size through consiste nt upwelling.   In 
a state of equilibrium, natural erosional force on one side of the island is usually compensated by the deposition on other parts of the island or cyclone events create natural berms by corals and rubbles that are washed up, which overtim e 
increases the overall resilience of the island to cyclones. Longshore drift through hydrodynamic process then move the 
sediment across to other areas of the island.   In cases where sea level rise is faster than the natural island formation 
process, coupl ed with intensifying cyclones, it inevitably calls for robust coastal protection that is being proposed as part 
of this project.
   
  
101. The existing  level of coastal  infrastructure,  or lack thereof,  suggests  the counterfactual  of what  Tuvalu would  look 
like without  GCF  involvement.  Despite the periodic  devastation inflicted  by tropical  cyclones , other wave- overtopping 
events in the past and the country ’s evident  vulnerability,  Tuvalu does not have a single engineered coastal protection 
infrastructure that has been designed to withstand higher sea- levels and stronger wave actions. The first two initiatives  
(LDCF/UNDP /GoT  and JICA)  are only now underway to protect key assets under some level of protection along 570 
meters  of Tuvalu’s 82km coastlines (of which 7.9km is considered high- value vulnerable coastlines) . Underinvestment 
on coastal protection in the country  is due to a mix of barriers . Some of these barriers  have roots in Tuvalu’s  limited and 
dispersed land mass as well as geographic remoteness. Tuvalu is doubly disadvantaged due to its small economy : the 
size of the country and economy  makes Tuvalu highly vulnerable to climate change effects by limiting resources at their 
disposal  to promote adaptation; and the viability of development support activities, in economic terms, is diminished more 
for smaller economies. Without support to reduce the vulnerability of Tuvaluan coastlines , it will inevitably be only a matter 
of time, if climate change continues unmitigated, that relocation away from the Pacific is the only economically cost -
effective option, which is not considered as an option by the GoT. 
 
102. Address financial and technical barriers to coastal adaptation : Solutions to reduce the vulnerability of  Tuvalu 
to the future impact of climate change require a large financial investment and  long- term engagement, which the GoT 
cannot currently draw upon from either the domestic resources or the existing fundi ng sources such as LDCF . Not only 
is the design and construction of robust coastal protection expensive (and in light of Tuvalu’s limited economic standing, 
it is unlikely to pass a cost -benefit test) , highly technical skills are needed for successful execution, which  relevant 
departments such as PWD  and D oLS do not possess ; and, yet, large capital investment required usually put coastal 
protection beyond the scope of projects conventionally financed by bilateral donors or other adaptation funds  that are 
available to t he country today . The scope envisaged in the proposed GCF project  is such that it allows the GoT to address 
both the financial needs for robust coastal protection as well as the long- term support to build the technical capacities 
within th e Government to d esign, monitor  and maintain the results expected from the GCF investment.  
 
103. The lack of technical capacity within these departments is compounded by the small (economic and geographic)  
size of the country –  unique to SIDs in the Pacific  and around the world . With the total population barely over 10,000, the 
country is significantly disadvantaged even in comparison with other LDCs in terms of the potential  for building national 
capacities and preparing for the new set of climate change- induced challenges it will face in the future. The types of 
capacity building support targeting broader Tuvaluan society (such as youth), which is critical for long- term sustainability 
of the results from the project, would be beyond reach without GCF involvement.   
 
104. Significant outreach to support the most vulnerable : The proposed GCF project  will put additional 3,100  people 
directly (or 29% of the total population)  and another 3,499 people indirectly  under coastal protection coverage along 
2,210m  of vulnerable coastlines . Considering that, as of today, the country is devoid of any robust coastal protection 
infrastructure (with the exception of 570 meter of coastlines along which UNDP /GoT  and JICA projects are currently 
designing one), the magnitude of vulnerability reduction expected from the proposed GCF involvement is significant. The


---
*Page 32*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 66 
 
 
 
 D 
value of its involvement, in turn, is expressed in the form of reduced or avoided  damages borne by the most vulnerable 
populations in terms of economic damages to houses, crops and other public infrastructures and social disruptions. The 
economic analysis presented in Section F.1  and Annex XII shows that the annual benefits of the project in terms of 
reduced damages could reach up to $667,000 over 40 -year time period for which analysis was undertaken. As described 
earlier, without GCF involvement, it is likely these populations will continue to be exposed to the rising sea -levels and 
intensifying cyclone eve nts. 
 
105. Catalyzing additional coastal adaptation finance : The scale of the proposed GCF project  allows multifaceted  
barriers to be addressed in a comprehensive manner within a single project  framework which past donor support has not 
been able to do. In particular, this project  has an element of  supporting Island Strategic Plans (ISPs)  as an  integral part 
of the project’s  sustainability and replication strategy for the results achieved. Due to the small economy, it is likely that 
the country will face fiscal constraints in using central government expenditures on expanding coastal protection beyond 
the GCF project  at a siz able scale. However, outer islands have access to unconditional grants which are supposedly 
guided by ISPs. In conjunction with the capacity building activities envisaged under Output 1, especially those focusing on the application of EBA measures, it is expected that the GCF investment will become a conduit for leveraging island-
level financing for future coastal protection activities that are within the realm of the technical skillsets and funding available to the community.   
 106. Without GCF involvement, it  is likely that Tuvalu and its vulnerable citizens will continue to be exposed to increasing 
threats from tropical cyclones, king tides, and other wave overtopping events. At best, international support for constructing a robust coastal protection will com e at a very slow speed. Yet, even then, it is probable that, because 
coastal protection is expensive, much of the resources would be dedicated to the construction itself, leaving out the 
possibility for building the country capacities and for sustainabilit y. Eventually, left unaddressed, Tuvalu will become 
uninhabitable and push relocation to the forefront of a practical and cost -effective adaptation response. The loss and 
damage that will ensue at that time will be significant given the country’s rich historical cultural heritage.  
 
D.2. Exit Strategy   
107. The proposed project  has been designed through extensive consultations and involvement of government, NGOs, 
and CSOs to ensure ownership of the interventions and effectiveness of their impact. R elevant government departments 
and local com munities  have been involved in the proposed design and will be leading on implementation of project  
interventions. The project  builds on this commitment and ownership to ensure that the investments and impacts are 
sustai ned for the long- term through the following:  
 
108. Selection of long -lived coastal protection measures with an ex- post Operation and Maintenance plan: First,  
the selection of the coastal protection measures have been done so to achieve the minimum design life of 25 years for 
geo-textile revetment (in outer islands only) ; and with the appropriate selection of vandal resistant bags for the top layer 
walls, the life expectancy is expected to be considerably longer. For rock armour  and pre- cast concrete revetments , the 
design life of 50 years will be adopted following the standards for normal maritime structures.  This means that the coastal 
protection options that will be employed in the GCF project  will not require a major structural overhaul during their product 
life.  
 
109. However, for the minimal maintenance that may be required, such as  the repair  of wave return walls , monitoring of 
vandalism, visual observation of wear and tear, patrolling for preventing sand/gravel removal at  the site or in adjacent 
sites,  application of repair patches for geo- textile sand containers , planting and recovery of coastal vegetation, it is critical 
that there is secured sources of financing . To this end, the GoT has  agreed to allocate approximately US$2.3 million  for 
the duration of the project (or  approximately US $128,713/year for  15 years ) to be used for this purpose. This comes from 
the Infrastructure Maintenance Budget. In addition, additional measures are supported by the project  including training 
of government staff and communities to ensure ownership and capacity for post-project monitoring and maintenance. 
(See O&M plan, Annex XIII)  
 
110. Developing o uter island level conditions for exit strategy : Due to the remoteness of outer islands from the 
capital, public service delivery has been one of major development challenges in Tuvalu. To sustain the adaptation results 
achieved through the GCF project , it becomes critical that roles and responsibilities between the central government and


---
*Page 33*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 66 
 
 
 
 D 
                                                             
30 SDE expenditures include other block grants  island administration ( kaupule ) are clearly delineated and understood among all stakeholders. The proposed activities 
under Output 3 are geared towards strengthening the foundation for improved execution of public service delivery at the 
outer island level, the work currently supported by UNDP . This work will enhance the effective use of unconditional grants 
available at the outer island level towards general environmental conservation, climate change adaptation and 
maintenance of the GCF -financed infrastructure. Two sources of grants – Falekaupule Trust Fund (FTF) and Special 
Development Expenditure (SDE)30 – currently have annual distributions of approximately US$39,000 and US$64,000 
per is land, respectively , and the GCF project  will provide additional incentive through performance- based top- up grants . 
In partnership with the two UNDP -supported projects, GCF resources will  be used to strengthen the capacity of 
administrat ions for participatory ISP formulation, raise awareness about coastal processes and ecosystem -based coastal 
protection approach, and transparent execution and monitoring of the grants. Through this support,  it is expected that 
the periodic monitoring and m aintenance needs, which do not require technical assistance from the central government, 
will be financed out of the FTF and SDE.  
 
111. Targeted  capacity building at the central and outer island levels : Support on the ISP process will be  
complemented by capacity building activities at two levels. At the outer island level, community groups, including youth 
and women’s groups and other CSOs  will receive technical training on multiple areas including the following:  
 
• Collection of beach profile data by training 45 individuals in all the islands (at least half of them women)  
• Execution of simple ecosystem -based coastal protection work such as coastal vegetation, ridge and dune restoration 
and the use of native trees to c onstruct wave breaker structures and groynes  
• Coastal protection maintenance work  
• Monitoring and t he basic repair of the geo- textile sand retainer revetment   
 
112. Long- term monitoring of coastlines through beach profiling will enable the Government to respond more effectively, 
complemented by technical capacity building for implementing ecosystem -based coastal protection work. To assist timely 
and effective maintenance of geo- textile revetment, basic repair kit s sufficient for 4- 5 years will be procured and youth 
and women’s groups will be trained for the application of the kit . After the project  closure, the trained groups are expected 
to be employed by kaupules  once such repair work needs arise and will be pai d out of the FTF and/or SDE  (which is the 
focus of Output 3 of the project) . Not only will this approach contribute to building local capacities, it will also open a cash 
employment opportunity in outer islands which is currently highly limited.  
 
113. At the central government level, technical officers at PWD and DoLS , will receive special trainings. DoLS officers 
will build capacity for collecting, synthesizing and analyzing beach profile data collected by community members as 
described above. This will enabl e them to obtain periodic information on coastal processes. PWD officers will be engaged 
during the design stage of coastal protecti on measures in Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga, and they will gain hands -
on experience in the maintenance of the system as well as implementation of EBA  coastal protection work.  
 
114.  Building a body of knowledge, facilitate learning : It is important to emphasize that building climate resilient  
coastal protection structures is a new field in Tuvalu and many part s of the Pacific. Information and awareness gaps are 
still significant in the country in terms of coastal dynamics and locally appropriate solutions. Through monitoring of the 
effectiveness of the proposed GCF investments, awareness rai sing support, targeting all the islands, exchange visits 
(bringing island representatives from non- target islands), collection  of beach profile data by communities and synthes is 
by DoLS, and organization of regional knowledge sharing events, the project  builds  national and regional knowledge on 
coastal processes and climate resilient coastal protection options. Moreover, in the final year of the project , a technical 
assessment will be carried out by an expert to review the effectiveness of the coastal protection measures put in place 
in the project.  
 
115. This GCF project will become one of the first projects in the Pacific that deliver engineered coastal protection 
solutions in remote outer islands where landing facilities are non- existent and basic data are limited. The overall 
experience from the implementation of this project, therefore, will contribute tremendously to the national and regional


---
*Page 34*
---

 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 66 
 
 
 
 D 
body of knowledge. Accumulation of such knowledge in turn becomes critical to effectively expand and maintain coas tal 
protection works in the region.


---
*Page 35*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
E.1. Impact P otential  
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas  
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact  potential  
116. The design of the proposed GCF project  incorporates lessons and best practices from several other projects to bring 
about transformative impact that is effective, efficient and sustainable. These lessons include a) the use of locally -
appropriate technologies based on information available that  are expected to be most cost -effective; b) the effectiveness 
of comprehensive barrier removal strategy; c ) an innovative approach for capacity development  in the Tuvalu context; and 
d) the critical importance of leveraging available local resources for pr omoting longer -term autonomous adaptation. These 
lessons have been derived from experiences from the first LDCF -financed project in Tuvalu, and community -based 
adaptation initiatives in other SIDS from the region.  
 
117. Comparable efforts in the region and elsewhere have shown effective impacts related to savi ng lives and protecting 
assets with an appropriate mix of hard and soft solutions that are locally suitable. For examples, in Australia, the Gold 
Coast Beach Protection Strategy  included large- scale beach nourishment to widen sand starved beach es, dune 
rehabilitation efforts, and a large, submerged offshore reef together provide d a buffer against future storm events and 
improved the habitat for marine flora and fauna (Jackson et al., 1997, Jackson et al. , 2012).  In Tonga, a combination of 
hard and soft measures including permeable gryones and beach nourishment will build the resilience of about 3 ,000 people 
in low -lying communities.31 
 
118. The proposed GCF project  will contribute to the achievement of climate- resilient sustainable development in Tuvalu. 
Construction of coastal protection measures in the most vulnerable coastlines of the country along high value zones will reduce the vulnerability of Tuvaluans  to future impact of climate change including tropical cyclones and heightened wave 
actions that have caused significant damages to lives, livelihoods and economic assets in the past.  The proposed 
measures will enable communities living in the vicinity to not ha ve to bear the brunt of unabated coastal inundation and 
damages. This will ensure that businesses/livelihoods face lower disruptions, communities themselves do not incur the heavy economic losses, not to mention the cost of disruptions to people through forced relocations. 2,210m of vulnerable 
coastlines will be protected by coastal defenses to minimize risks from  wave over -topping events . Moreover, if large scale 
wave over -topping events occur which result in a national state of emergency, the support structure for community -based 
disaster early response and recovery will help the affected restore their livelihoods and other economic assets as soon as 
possible. Overall, the project  will contribute to Fund level impact of increased resilience of infrastructure and the built 
environment to climate change.  
 
a. The project  will benefit about 3, 100 people directly and about 3,499 indirect beneficiaries. This is about 62 % of the 
population of Tuvalu.  
b. The project  can potentially reduce annual losses (including statistical value of life) worth up to up to $667,000 over 40-
year time period (period of analysis for the economic analysis)  
 
119. The project  outcome will strengthen the adaptive capacity and reduce exposure to climate risks  through 
strengthening of institutions, human resources, awareness and knowledge for resilient coastal management , protection of 
vulnerable coasts in high- value asset areas , and establishment of a sustainable financing mechanism for long- term 
adaptation efforts . The project  will establish at least 3 coastal defence measures along vulnerable coastal lines in three 
target islands.  
 
120. The project  will result in strengthened institutions, human resources, awareness and knowledge for resilient coastal  
management. Local capacities will be enhanced through on- the-job training and experience building in monitoring and 
data collection of very dynamic coastal processes and design of coastal adaptation measures. The project  will build and 
improve technical capacit y of nationals to lead and take ownership in further development, implementation, and 
sustenance of coastal protection measures through the project , as well in the future. It will also Increase knowledge of 
targeted government officials and community members including women, youth and children, in order to broaden the 
awareness on the impacts of climate change on coastal vulnerability . The project  will enhance the technical capacity of at 
                                                             
31http://www.pacificclimatechange.net/components/com_booklibrary/ebooks/Tonga%20factsheet%20final.pdf


---
*Page 36*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
least 12 government staff  and support at least 24 students to obtain professional opportunities related to climate change 
adaptation.  
 
121. The project  will reduce exposure of vulnerable populations to climate risks by reducing the vulnerability of key  coastal 
infrastructure including homes, schools, hospitals, and other assets to wave over -topping events  (See Annex X showing 
assets to be protected) . It will support participatory design, implementation, and monitoring of coastal measures in Funafuti, 
Nanumeae, and Nanumaga. The project  will result in reduced vulnerabi lity of coastal assets along 2,2 10 m of high -value 
coast lines in the three target islands.  
 122. The project  will establish a sustainable financing mechanism for long- term adaptation efforts so that adaptation  
actions are financed and implemented through island level plans. It will empower community members, including men, 
women, youth, children, and the elderly to participate in a climate resilient planning process of the ISPs, taking into 
consideration climate change impacts and integrated coastal, land, and marine resource management principles. It will 
also result in enhanced capacities of communities to monitor, evaluate and communicate results and impacts of coastal 
protection adaptation investments. The project  will support financing and execution of at
 least 16 adaptation priority act ions 
(two each in 8 of the country’s islands), outlined in ISPs.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator  
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.  
GCF 
core 
indicators  Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only)  Annual  N/A 
Lifetime  N/A 
• Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries , disaggregated by 
gender  (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender  
(adaptation only)  Total  Approximately 3,100  direct beneficiaries  
3,499 indirect beneficiaries  
Percentage 
(%) 29% of total population (direct); 62% of 
total population ( direct and indirect)  
123. For estimating the total number of beneficiaries who will be under coastal protection through  the GCF investment s, 
in Funafuti,  a series of maps produced for Funafuti during an UNDP -supported LDCF project were used. These  include a 
detailed contour map sho wing the present elevation of the island and two maps showing potential inundation areas under 
sea-level rise (SLR+10cm and +50cm) (See Annex I X for detailed maps). These maps demonstrate that the areas in 
Funafuti where houses and other buildings are most concentrated are on highest elevation of the island on the beach ridge 
(approximately between 2.6- 3.0m). However, these maps, as well as the terrain profile of Fongafale (the main island of 
the Funafuti atoll)32, confirm that almost the entire island of Funafuti is at risk from coastal inundation especially under the 
combination of the following factors: projected sea- level rise of 4 -14cm by 2030 under a high emission scenario;  the king 
tide season of January -March; the tropical cyclone season of November -April; and compounding impact of warm water on 
sea-level. Based on this, all the households to the landward side of the proposed intervention area to the airs trip were 
counted and included as the direct beneficiaries.  
 
124. For all outer islands, including the two targeted islands in this project, detailed inundation maps do not exist. For  this 
reason, an aerial photograph was used to simply estimate the number of direct beneficiaries.  
 125. The total number of indirect beneficiaries include all of the households in the target islands. Due to the small  
economy, it is assumed that once a large scale wave overtopping or inundation event takes place, the entire economy of 
the island will be severely affected. Overall, the project  will directly benefit 1,569 women and 1,531 men in the targeted 
islands.  
 
                                                             
32 Yamano, H., Kayanne, H., Yamaguchi, T., Kuwahara, Y., Yokoki, H., Shimazaki, H., and Chikamori, M. (2007). Atoll island vulnerability to flooding and 
inundation revealed by historical reconstruction: Fongafale Islet, Funafuti Atoll, Tuvalu. Global Planet.  Change.  57, 407– 416.


---
*Page 37*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
Comp arison of project  indicator values with similar projects  
126. One project  that is similar,  in a comparable context , is the “Trialing coastal protection measures in eastern  
Tongatapu” project in Tonga, supported by European Union and SPC. This project aim ed to trial coastal protection 
measures (both soft and hard measures) in two pilot sites of eastern Tongatapu stretching 900m and 390m. In this project, 
reflecting that this was a pilot project, the project objective indicator is set as “Level of awareness about climate change 
adaptation and coastal management raised by 10% of population in Tongatapu”. This Objective is supporte d by four Key 
Result Areas (KRAs) related to 1) awareness; 2) coastal adaptation investments; 3) monitoring of effectiveness; and 4) 
capacity for planning for coastal change. The set of indicators for this project is in fact similar to the proposed GCF project, 
which is an indication that SIDS in the Pacific region are facing similar set of constraints/barriers.  
 
127. The Tonga project design document also states that the project aimed to “move from a piecemeal approach to a 
more comprehensive framework by looking at an entire geomorphological section of coastline and understanding the 
process and coastal dynamics33.” The project wa s also an attempt to demonstrate effectiveness of alternative approaches, 
such as permeable submerged groynes and beach nourishment , to a solid seawall solution so that local communities can 
see and learn about these new approaches. These considerations are also common with the proposed GCF project . The 
target number of beneficiaries for this project is approximately 3,000. Similar coastal protection work was undertaken in 
the Tonga Strategic Program for Climate Resilience  funded by the Climate Investment Fund and implemented by the Asian 
Development Bank. Preliminary results indicate that the project has resulted in significant impr ovements to the coast with 
respect to reduced erosion and inundation.  
 
  
                                                             
33 P.31 Project Design Document: http://www.pacificclimatechange.net/components/com_booklibrary/ebooks/2.%20Tonga%20PDD.pdf


---
*Page 38*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
E.2.  Paradigm Shift Potential  
Degree to which the proposed activity  can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment  
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
128. The proposed project  has three inter -related Outputs  that not only  aim to achieve impact potential as described 
above, but also to creat e enabling conditions for scaling up and replicating the project  impact beyond the immediate target 
areas . Each of these Outputs  comprises a set of activities, which in turn have been designed to remove specific barriers 
that impede the achievement of the climate change vulnerability reduction objective. The theory of change for this project  
described below demonstrates how the implementation of project  activities lead to s hort-term outputs of the project . These 
outputs lead to longer -term outcomes which include reduced vulnerability of Tuvalu to future impact of climate change, 
reduced loss from potential natural disasters, enhanced livelihoods and food and water security. All of these outcomes 
contribute to strengthening climate- resilient sustainable development of the country.  
 
129. Output  1 of the project  will improve the enabling environment f or reducing coastal vulnerability in the country. To  
achieve this output, two  activities will be implemented including technical capacity building within the government 
departments whose mandate includes  the protection and monitoring of coastal areas, engagement of youth in coastal 
protection technical trainings  with the intention to build long-term national capacity for resilient coastal management . It is 
important to emphasize that this Output  also includes technical capacity building for EBA coastal protection options that 
are within the technical and financial capability of implementation for the central or outer -island governments (see more 
below under Output  3). One of the outcomes that emerge s from the achievement of this output is that t he technical Fund -level impact : Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate 
 
Outcome : Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate 
 
Output 1: Strengthening of 
institutions, human resources, 
awareness and knowledge for 
resilient coastal management  
Activity 1.2.  
Long-term 
national human 
resource 
capacity and 
awareness 
enhanced for 
sustainable 
coastal 
protection  
Activity 1.1.  
Technical capacity, 
knowledge and 
awareness 
strengthened for 
monitoring, 
protection and 
maintenance of 
coastal protection 
infrastructure  
Output 2:  Vulnerability of key 
coastal infrastructure is reduced 
against wave induced damages in 
Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga 
Activity 2.1.  
Coastal protection 
design, site-specific 
asessments  and 
ESIA undertaken in 
all islands in a 
participatory 
manner  
Activity 2.2.  
Coastal 
protection 
measures 
implemented  
 
Output 3:  A sustainable financing 
mechanism established for long- term 
adaptation efforts  
Activity 3.1.  
All ISPs and 
annual budgets 
integrate island-
specific climate 
risks through 
gender -sensitive, 
participatory 
processes  
 
Activity 3.2.  
Capacity of 
Kaupules, 
Falekaupules and 
community members 
strengthened for 
monitoring coastal 
adaptation 
investments  
 
Barriers addressed by project activities  
 Limited national financial 
resources and dependency 
on fragmented external 
financing  Ineffective use of small, but 
available domestic (outer 
island -level) financing for 
coastal protection  High staff turnover and 
limited number of qualified 
professionals  Exclusive focus on 
short -term capacity -
building efforts


---
*Page 39*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
departments possess a sufficient level of technical expertise to monitor and assess high risk coastlines and possible 
causes of climate and/or non- climate risks  and identify practical coastal protection solutions . Another outcome is 
continuous  engagement of youth and women over time in coastal protection work. This includes both community -level 
monitoring of the effectiveness of the GCF investments as well as simple repairs that may be needed. Improved knowledge 
about and data on dynamic coastal formation process is also an expected outcome, including the availability of coastal 
inundation models. None of these conditions currently exists in the country, resulting in reactive, piecemeal, myopic 
investments in coastal protection. Leveraging improved skills and knowledge of youth and women, the project  will generate 
income earning opportunities for these groups, which will contribute to their empowerment in society. As discussed below, Output  3 imp roves  island- level financing mechanism s for adaptation actions through improvement of an adaptation 
planning and budgeting process and strengthening of  iterative monitoring of adaptation actions. However, the outcomes 
expected from Output  3 would not be sustained unless Output  1 leads to the outcomes illustrated above.  
 
130. Output  2 will  seek to  reduce coastal vulnerability of Tuvalu to climate change induced hazards. Underlying activities  
include  detailed island -level assessments  to finalize the coastal design , which also contributes to enhancing the currently 
limited body of knowledge about coastal dynamics and island formation pr ocess in the country . While the proposed GCF 
project  will put in place coastal protection measures in three islands , the assessments will be carried out in all the islands 
of the country. As described in the barrier section, detailed data on coastal conditions are simply not available because of 
the costs i nvolved in this type of assessment. The lack of data on coastal conditions, in turn, affect the GoT’s ability to 
attract international financing for vulnerability reduction investments. Thus, this Output is expected to equip the country 
with a prerequisite often required by donors  for funding. The process of the assessments, design and construction will 
provide opportunities for technical department staff to obtain hands -on skills and procedures for replicating the GCF 
investments beyond the project  lifecycle. Removal of coastal vulnerability  is a prerequisite for a small island nation of 
Tuvalu to attain the outcomes of resilient livelihood options, reduced economic loss and damage from sea- level rise and 
coastal inundation events, and protection of  the highly vulnerable groundwater resources.  
 
131. Output  3 will strengthen a sustainable domestic financial mechanism to sustain, replicate and scale GCF  
investments. This output will be supported through two activities: First is technical assistance for reflecting climate change 
adaptation concerns into the Island Strategic Plans (ISPs) and their budgets; and second is improving the iterative planning and budgeting process through proper monitoring (and reflection of the outcomes from the continuous monitoring in the 
next ISPs in the following year). As discussed earlier, ISPs present an opportunity for all groups of the community, includin g 
women, youth and other vulnerable groups, to express their different climate change concerns in the design of the ISP. 
On the other hand, disbursements of Falakaupule Trust Fund (FTF) and Special Development Expenditures (SDEs) 
represent the primary sources of unconditional development grants  to support the implementation of island priority actions. 
The improved use of ISPs as guidance for the effective use of FTF and SDEs, as well as transparent  monitoring and 
verification of the performance of the ISP implementation, wi ll catalyze a greater impact potential from sub- components 1 
and 2. In other words, without Output  3 activities, the expected impact from the other two O utputs  is unlikely to be sustained 
as the maintenance needs and/or replication/up- scaling needs would have to be financed by another foreign aid. Moreover, 
technical capacities for coastal protection obtained within relevant government institutions would not be immediately put 
to use. The expected result from this output  will help leverage the current annual distributions of approximately US $39,000  
and US$64,000 per island for FTF and SEDs, respectively, for the achievement of climate resilient development in the 
country.  The implementation of EBA coastal protection measures , such as coastal vegetation, storm ridge and dune 
restoration, and small -scale beach nourishment, is the type of investments that could potentially be supported using the 
island -level development budget and leveraging the capacity building exercises speci fically focusing on these techniques 
(under Output  1). GCF investments along 2,210m  of vulnerable coastlines, out of the 21,300m of total vulnerable coastlines 
in the country,  means that the potential for scale up , in theory,  is about nine times the length of the coastlines targeted in 
the project (after taking into considerations the baseline of 570m of existing coastal protection measures financed by JICA 
and UNDP/LDCF /GoT ). 
  
132. GCF resources will also be used to enhance the Government’s capacity for early response and recovery when the 
country is struck by a natural disaster. This will be done by making GCF resources available to cover the procurement 
costs of urgent response and recovery  needs . Due to severe limitation in available national budgets, the country is often 
dependent upon international assistance when they embark on early response and recovery from natural disasters, limiting 
the speed and flexibil ity in their response. Recognizing  that no coastal defense is capable of eliminating the future damage


---
*Page 40*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
from intensifying cyclones and other wave overtopping events, it is extremely important that the capacity for early recovery 
is also strengthened.  
 
133. Lastly, the knowledge accumulation and lessons sharing activity under Output  1 is expected to extend the project ’s 
replication potential beyond Tuvalu. Many Pacific SIDS face similar constraints in terms of accessing the needed finance 
for their coastal protection requirements and obtaining the needed data on coastal dynamics to even plan for such 
investments. Tuvalu’s  experience in a comprehensive barrier removal approach through GCF support will be shared in 
regional fora and other information outlets.   
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning  
134. Support for facilitating learning and building knowledge including fo r generation, dissemination and use, is  envisaged 
in four areas of project  activities. The first will target government officials from DLS, PWD and DoE who will receive 
trainings on synthesis and analysis of beach profile data, coastal protection feasibility assessments, basic maintenance of coastal protection infrastructure, and ecosystem -based coastal protection approaches. This will not only involve the in-
class type of pedagogy, but also outposted- assignments in institutions such as UNDP, SPREP and SPC Geoscience 
Division as well as hands -on trainings during the actual execut ion of Output 2 activities . CCPU will also be exposed to 
various learning opportunities as an entity responsible for coordinating and overseeing climate change initiatives in the country. In total, at least 12 officers are expected to be trained.   
 
135. The second area  targets students who are currently in a high school or university program so that they will obtain  a 
higher degree in disciplines related to coastal protection such as civic/coastal engineering and oceanography. This 
programme will be supported only in the first 4 years of the project implementation so that, during the lifecycle of the GCF 
project , the stude nts supported will have graduated and, as per the scholarship arrangement, come back to Tuvalu to work 
on the project to apply their knowledge and skills gained. The university partnership will also allow learning and knowledge-
generation to be dissem inated within and beyond Tuvalu, where academics and students will be invited to conduct 
research and or field- based studies . Not only will this allow young academics and experts in Tuvalu and in the region to 
interact with global experts in the field, but  also, the knowledge and learning from Tuvalu regarding coastal resilience 
building can then be shared throughout the world.  
 
136. The third area of knowledge sharing and learning will take place in the communities targeting both the administrators 
(the Kaupules and the Falekaupules ) and community members. The administrators will gain better understanding about 
the process for participatory, gender -responsive development planning, budgeting and execution while community 
members will enhance their awareness about the importance of independent monitoring of the performance of the 
administrators, judged against the ISP. Officers from the Department of Rural Devel opment will also enhance their 
knowledge of facilitating community dialogue for development planning as an independent facilitator of the process. In 
addition, this development dialogue platform will also be used to improve learning among community members  about 
climate risks, the notion of island formulation process and the ecosystem -based adaptation approaches, data collection 
for coastal monitoring, coastal design options, maintenance responsibilities, and costs. This provides an important opportunity to make their own decisions regarding their future. Training of trainers approach will also be used, as this will 
be an effective, efficient, and sustainable way to reach out, train, and empower a large number of beneficiaries that are located in remote atol ls. 
 
137. Lastly, the overall experience in project  implementation and results from monitoring of the impact of the investments 
on vulnerability reduction (gauged in terms of wave overtopping events or sediment transport at the island level) will be 
shared at r egional/international fora. The empirical evidence of the impact of climate resilient coastal protection is limited 
in the Pacific, especially from SIDS. Lessons learned and best practices will be proactively shared and the project  will 
make direct contributions towards the buildup of the regional body of knowledge in coastal protection, a development priority shared by many other SIDS in the region. The project  will also support sharing of lessons learned and best practices 
through the continuous monitoring and evaluation of the project. The M&E plan (Section H.2) will include provision for generation of lessons learned and best practices (reports, publications, and other communication and knowledge products 
for various media) to not only support adaptive project management but also to inform learning across national/sub-
national/community levels within the country and the region.


---
*Page 41*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
138. The project  will build on a baseline scenario that is currently shaping the way development activities  are carried out 
in Tuvalu. As described previously, the Falekaupule Act gave rise to the establishment of island administrations and FTF, 
which in theory, marked the beginning of a new developme nt paradigm -  one that tipped the scale of local governance in 
favor of local community and popularly elected island administration from the hitherto central government -driven approach 
to island development. UNDP’s  Support to Local Governance project was instrumental in responding to this aspiration of 
the Government by introducing the concept of ISP with the intention to better govern the way in which FTF distributions 
are used and to effectively encourage women and youth in the decision making process, groups that had previously been excluded in the process. Nonetheless, the principle of effective local governance is only slowly taking root in the society, 
and continuous assistance is currently being provided to integrate climate change adaptation and NRM concerns into ISPs 
and finance the priority actions through FTF/SDE. It is in this context that the proposed GCF project  is designed, especially 
activities in Output 1 and Output 3.  
 
139. This general trend introduces a development model in which central technical agencies become a service provider  
while the island community plays a more central role in deciding what development support they need from the capital and 
executing some development activities if they are wit hin the realm of the skillsets available at the island level and financial 
constraints imposed by FTF/SDE. Capacity building activities under Output 1 and support on a sustainable financing 
mechanism under Output 3 respond to this general principle of diff erentiated roles and responsibilities between the capital 
and outer islands and promote a paradigm shift towards participatory and climate- risk informed development. Technical 
capacities of CCPU, PWD, DoLS and DoE will be strengthened in the areas of coast al design, assessments and 
monitoring, and overall coordination, as these functions cannot be carried out by outer island administrations. At the same 
time, there will be another set of capacity building activities specifically focusing on EBA coastal protection options. PWD 
and NGOs will be exposed to more technical aspects of the EBA approaches; and, community members will be exposed 
to a series of awareness raising events about them . Output 3, will contribute to an enabling environment in which such 
coastal protection measures are expected to be discussed and financed through ISPs in a participatory process . This 
process will be a critical condition for  promot ing effective and sustained participation of the public sector in resilient 
developm ent. 
 
140. It should also be noted that the improved mechanism to channel unconditional island- level budget (FTF/SDEs) for  
resilience building activities is an innovative approach in the context of the Pacific region. Aid dependence in Tuvalu is 
high and the successful application of this approach means a fundamental shift in the ways community -level development 
activities are financed to supplement centrally driv en development assistance.  
 
141. The construction and maintenance of coastal defense in Tuvalu is the responsibility of the public sector as it does 
not offer any revenue generating potentials. Thus, this project  does not envisage the participation of private entities, 
although businesses  are a key of the beneficiary of the project .


---
*Page 42*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies  
142. National Climate change policies: The prop osed project  is in line with and contributes to the operationalization  of 
GoT’s key strategies and policies including the Te Kakeega II, which recognizes that climate change poses significant 
threats to the achievement of the national development goals and Te Kaniva, the Tuvalu Climate Change Policy, which, 
with its vision “To protect Tuvalu’s status as a nation and its cultural identity and to build its capacity to ensure a safe, 
resilient and prosperous future” , guides the country’s efforts in both adaptation and mitigation. Accordingly, a key design 
principle that underlies  this project  is this commitment of the Government expressed in Te Kaniva – protecting the nation’s 
sovereignty.  The project  supports the implementation of the priorities laid down in the Tuvalu National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA) and the National Strategic Action Plan for Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management 
(NSAP).  
 
143. Environmental Protection Regulations 2007/2014 (Section 8): The project  targets the DoE as a recipient of 
capacity building support on E SIA oversight. This will be done not through a class room based training, but  through direct 
engagement of an E SIA officer in the actual ESIA  process carried out by a contractor procured in the project . This will 
provide an opportunity for the officer to gain hands on experience in the E SIA process, which will be valuable in conducting 
his/her role.  
 
144. Island Strategic Plans (ISPs): The project  will strengthen local and national capacities for evidence- based Island 
Strategic Planning and implementation. The island -level assessments that will be conducted in all the islands of in Output 
2 will generate scientific, historical social, economic and environmental information through technical and participatory 
processes, which can be used for participatory island l evel planni ng and budgeting.  
 
145. National Youth Policy (2015) and Gender Policy (2013): Tuvalu recently launched its national youth policy (August 
2015) which underpins youth engagement in decision making. The Gender Policy focuses on five key policy measures of 
institutional strengthening, capacity building, economic empowerment, decision- making, and ending violence against 
women. The ISP support under Output 3 as well as targeted youth/women engagement in capacity building and local 
employment created in the project will contribute to the achievement of the policy objectives of these two policies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E.3. Sustainable Development Potential  
Wider benefits and priorities  
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact  
146. Investments in coastal protection along the vulnerable, high -value coastlines are expected to generate  
environmental, social and economic co- benefits, including benefits that are specifically enjoyed by women.  
 
Economic benefits  
147. The most unambiguous economic benefits from the proposed project  is avoided economic losses from coastal  
inundation events caused by storm surges. An economic analysis conducted for this project  reveals that it can potentially 
reduce annual losses (including statistical value of life) worth up to up to $667,000 over 40- year time period (See Section 
F.1 and Annex XII). These economic benefits are derived from the protection that coastal defense will offer for the following 
key economic or social infrastructure in the islands  of Tuvalu.  
 
• Funafuti : Homes to 2,174 individuals; the Government building; national radio station and radio tower; power 
generation facility; national bank; hospital; schools; churches; kaupule office; hotel and shops.  
• Nanumea: Pre -school and primary school; clinic; bank; radio station; police station; vegetable gardens; kaupule office; 
falekaupule office; telecom center; women’s handicraft center; bank; police post; cemetery.  
• Nanumaga : Primary school; hospital; church; cooperative store; jetty; kaupule office; community hall.  
 
148. In addition, this project  will create  short - and medium -term job opportunities for local labour force, especially youth 
and women. To strengthen the community -level data collection process for real -time monitoring of coastal dynamics, youth 
and women will be trained and paid to collect beach profile data. During the lifecycle of the project , their services will be 
compensated through the project budget. After the project , it is envisaged that island development budgets will be used.


---
*Page 43*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
36 jobs ( 4 per island)34 are expected to be created for this work. In addition, in selecting a list of relevant coastal protection 
options, the potential for local employment creation was also co nsidered. In particular, geo- textile  and pre- cast concrete 
revetment solution s are thought to contain some labour content  during the construction process . It is estimated that 60 
short -term jobs  will be created during the construction of coastal protection measures. After the construction, maintenance 
needs are expected to be fulfilled by local labour (financed by island administration). It is expected that six individuals for 
each of the three targeted islands will be trained for this purpose. In total, the project  is expected to create 10 2 short - and 
medium -term jobs . This will provide formal employment and cash- income opportunities for low skilled/vulnerable people 
and have a substantial impact on the unemployment rate of Tuvalu that currently is around 8.9% in Funafuti and 4.6% in 
outer islands. (Government of Tuvalu, 2012).  The selection of the individuals for carrying out these tasks will be based on 
self-selection, but youth and women’s groups will be given a priority with a target of 50- 50 gender balance.  
 
149. Given the lack of disaster insurances and other financial instruments that can provide resources to recover from  
disasters in Tuvalu, the government and external donors in general cover most of the recovery costs from natural disasters. 
By reducing the amount damages to infrastructures and private assets, the proposed project  will provide substantial 
savings for the government that could use their resources for longer term adaptation strategies and/or other pressing 
needs (e.g. education, fuel costs etc).  
 
150. In addition, the proposed project  will assist fast recovery from large- scale extreme events. This is based on a realistic 
recognition that no coastal protection measures are capable of reducing potential damages from wave overtopping or 
storm surge events zero, especially in the face of w orsening climate change impacts . The fund is expected to move the 
national/local economy back on track as soon as possible so that economic disruptions from such disaster events are kept minimum.  
 
Environmental benefits  
151. The proposed coastal protection structure will also generate co- benefits of coastal erosion prevention, especially 
when ecosystem -adaptation measures such as ridge restoration and coastal vegetation are implemented in the adjacent 
areas of the hard structur e. Severe erosion is often observed after strong tropical cyclones  causing losses of valuable 
natural resource assets for a country with 26km
2 of landmass.  
 
152. Wave overtoppi ng events and subsequent water logging can be a cause of saline water intrusion into the fragile 
groundwater resources  in islands where groundwater is still used for drinking purposes or aggravate bacterial 
contamination by accelerating seepage from septic tanks  and livestock pens . Many makeshift seawalls that have been 
privately built have collapsed due to the constant wave energy along the coasts of Tuvalu, especially in the main island of 
Tuvalu. Because of collapsed seawalls, the foreshore is turned rough, unsafe and access to sea has been limited.  Coastal 
protection measures that are appropriately designed and constructed are expected to ameliorate these environmental 
problems.  
 
153. The project  will also create habitat for marine fauna. The three dimension structure of the sea walls provides an ideal 
habitat and this will have flow on effects through the trophic system, therefore increasing the number of higher order 
animals such as fish. These fish can then potentially be caught by Tuvaluans therefore providing an additional source of food.  
 
Social benefits  
154.  The proposed project  will also generate a range of social benefits which will positively affect the overall well -being 
of the Tuvaluan citizens. First , a robust coastal protection and awareness about locally appropriate interventions bring the 
perception of safety. Reduced disruptions of economic and agricultural activities, education, public and medical services, 
and cult ural activities are directly linked to the level of resilience in society. Incidents of coastal inundation and water logging 
have direct impact on public health through the increased incidents of water borne diseases and overstretching the highly 
limited pu blic health facilities in the country. GCF resources will contribute to the realization of these social benefits through 
the reduction of  the number and magnitude of wave overtopping events.  
 
                                                             
34 It is expected that 45 individuals will be trained for this purpose. However, 9 of them are existing Land Cl erk who are employed by the Government. So 
in terms of new job creation in the project, it is 36 jobs.


---
*Page 44*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
155. The capacity building strategy adopted in the project  is likely to have additional social benefits . The long -term 
capacity building approach, by targeting not only those currently in the government system but also future generations, 
will address inherent development challenges of  the country. Due to the size  of the country, attracting skilled individual s 
into the country or government system is a continuous difficulty. The project  will contribute, through a targeted scholarship 
program, to long- term capacity development, socio -economic empowerment and wel l-being of the country . 
 
156. Impact on women’s and youth’s empowerment expected in this project  should not be undervalued. Through the 
support from Output 3, ways in which women are involved in the island decision making process are going to be altered systema tically. In addition to being invited as an integral interest group of the society into the decision making process, 
women’s group will be responsible for monitoring the performance of the kaupule. The project  has a dedicated indicator 
to monitor progress in this regard. Also, as described above, the project  consciously reflected in its design the challenge 
of the limited economic opportunities in outer islands, especially for women and youth, by creating job opportunities through 
the implementation of the project . Given the strong correlation in general between economic well -being and empowerment 
of individual s, the social benefits derived from the new employment opportunities in the project  are expected to be large.  
 
157. Lastly, i t should be acknowledged that the implications of protecting the low -lying islands of Tuvalu from encroaching  
impact of sea- level rise and erosion go well beyond what can be possibly be captured in the range of social benefits such 
as education, health, or even safety.  The project  strives to support Tuvalu’s key vision to protect its status as a nation and 
its cultural heritage by preventing, or significantly delay ing, the scenario of Tuvaluan islands becoming uninhabitable. The 
project  advances and supports the sovereignty of Tuvaluans. Through this, it assures intangible benefits  to the people of 
Tuvalu includ ing the sense of dignity  people derive from living in a country or culture to which they  belong and the sense 
of self -fulfillment people derive from the ability to make decisions about their own future.  
 158. Furthermore, the proposed GCF project  would alleviate the sense of inequity that is inherent  in climate change 
impacts – inequity that originates from  the cruel reality that a country that has contributed so little to the current 
concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is forced to bear  the brunt of the impact of climate change.   
 
Gender -responsive  development impact  
159. The project  is expected to bring a range of gender -responsive development impact s. First, women along with youth 
will receive targeted training on monitoring of coastal change, basic maintenance of coastal infrastructure, and implantation 
of ecosystem -based solutions  to coastal protection (Output 1). Not only will enhanced skillsets contribute to general 
empowerment of w omen, but this will directly be linked with increasing employment opportunities. Because the project  will 
generate both demand for such services by th e island administrations ( kaupule) (through Output 3 activities using available 
island -level unconditional grants) and supply (skilled labour for maintaining and expanding coastal protection), it is likely 
that the impact will be long- lasting.  
 
160. In addition, women’s group members will be trained in participatory video production, which will be a tool to monitor  
the transparent and effective use of island- level development finance by kaupules  in accordance with the Island Strategic 
Plan. Such a res ponsibility, which is recognized by community members and kaupules , is likely to have impact on general 
empowerment of women.  
 161. There are also other indirect benefits that women will receive from the project interventions . According to UNWomen  
(2015), women account for 78% of the population involved in informal subsistence economy, most importantly agriculture. 
The agriculture sector is currently extremely vulnerable to cyclones, king tides and other threats coming from the ocean. 
During TC Pam,  for example, up to 90% of the crops were affected in Nui and Nukufetau (OCHA, 2015). By reducing 
coastal vulnerability, and reducing the potential impact of wave actions on agricultural activities, the viability of women’s 
livelihoods is expected to be maintained even under a changing climate. This assertion will be explicitly verified through a 
technical review that will be conducted at the end of the project implementation and it is included as one of the project 
indicators presented in Section H.   
 
E.4. Needs of the R ecipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population  
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)


---
*Page 45*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
162. Despite the minimal contributions to global greenhouse gas emissions, Tuvalu is disproportionately burdened with  
the significant impacts from climate change risks. The root cause of this adverse condition is its high exposure and 
vulnerability to climate hazards, combined with limited adaptive capacity. A number of environmental, economic, and socio-
political factors contribute to its  vulnerabilities, and leads to increased risks of climate change impacts in Tuvalu.  
 
163. Small and low -lying islands: The geophysical features of the islands, characterized by their small land area with 
low elevation, make Tuvalu particularly vulnerable to climate change i mpacts including s ea level rise and coastal erosion. 
Tuvalu consists of nine islands  with the total national land areas combined adding up to 26km2, which makes  Tuvalu the 
4th smallest country in the world35.  The country’s maximum elevation is 4.6 meters above mean sea level36, observed on 
Niulakita Island, and the other islands are substantially lower. The small and low -lying land area limits the physical space 
and natural resources required for economic development and climate change adaptation.  
 
164. High coastal length ratio : The length of coastline relative to the landmass of the country has been acknowledged 
as an effective measurement tool for assessing the country’s vulnerability as well as adaptive capacity37. Tuvalu is among 
the countries that have highest ratio in the world (10th longest according to the World Factbook). Further, the feasibility 
and implications of adaptation is least understood for SIDS and large deltas that typically have a high coastal length ratio38.   
 
165. Geographic and economic isolation : The nine islands of Tuvalu are dispersed with the entire island  chain 
extending across 700 kilometers of ocean. The physical distance, combined with a limited number of vessels, high fuel 
costs, and unstable communication networks make the exchange of people, goods , and information between these islands 
extremely challenging. In addition, the small domestic market provides limited potential to achieve economies of scale.  
With the excepti on of Funafuti, the outer islands rely heavily on limited natural resources for  their livelihoods, with the 
majority of population, especially in the outer islands, involved in subsistence fishing and agriculture.  
 
166. Narrow economic base : Although incidents of  absolute poverty is low in Tuvalu with a GNI per capita at $5,260, 
many experience economic hardships, where they do not have sufficient opportunities to access financial resources to 
cover basic needs such as medical and education expenditures39. This is due to the high economic cost of smallness of 
the country. The national revenue base is heavily influenced by  the fluctuations of the global economy . Lack of jobs and 
opportunities compel youth in the outer islands to migrate to Funafuti40, only to face even more hardships, as they often 
do not have access to land to produce food, water, electricity, sanitation, waste management , or adequate housing.  
 
167. Over and above the baseline development challenges, climate change impact s are putting additional strains on 
Tuvalu’s efforts towards attaining sustainable development. Available climate change projections  suggest that Tuvalu will 
face rising sea- levels higher than the global average and less frequent but more intense tropical cyclone events. These 
two projections would pose a significant threat to the country where average elevation is barely above 4m and damages 
from wave overtopping are already reported during king tides and tropical cyclones.   
168. Despite the level of exposure and vulnerability of the country wit h vulnerable coasts extending for about 8km, the  
country currently does not have a single coastal protection structure that withstands  the future combined impact of sea-
level rise and intensifying cyclones (except for two structures that are currently under design for 570m of the coastlines). 
Once extreme events strike, as seen during Cyclone Pam, the country faces considerable setbacks in terms  of economic 
                                                             
35 UN Statistics Division. (2006). Demographic Yearbook —Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density. 
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/products/dyb/dyb2006/Table03.pdf   
36 Lewis, J. (1989). Sea level rise: some implications for Tuvalu. Environmentalist, 9(4), 269– 275. 
37 See, for example, IPCC CZMS 1992. Global climate change and the rising challenge of the sea. Report of the Coastal Zone Management Subgroup, 
Response Strategies Working Group of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Ministry of Transport, Public Work s and Water Management, 
The Hague, The Netherlands . 
38 IPCC, 1992;  Bijlsma L  Coastal zones and small islands. In Impacts, adaptations and mitigation of climate change: scientific –technical analyses 
Watson R.T, Zinyowera M.C, Moss R.H 1996pp. 289– 324. Eds. C ambridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.  
39 According to MDG Progress report, nearly 20% of Tuvaluans made less thanUS$1 per day in 2010. However, this universal indicat or does not capture 
definition of poverty in Tuvalu. In fact, there are no known cases of deaths as a result of starvation or proof that there are beggars in Tuvalu.  Instead, 
hardship or ‘poverty of opportunity’ is experienced by many people in Tuvalu. Source: UNDP. (2011). Tuvalu MDG  Report.  
40 Urban population in Tuvalu is estimated at 47%,  with annual growth rate of 1.4%.  Source: SPC. (2014). Population Datasheet. 
http://www.spc.int/sdd/index.php/en/downloads/doc_download/736- population- datasheet -jan-2014


---
*Page 46*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
growth, livelihoods and general well -being of the citizens. Due to the smallness of the country, a single shock can have a 
cascading effect in various sectors; and , due to the remoteness of the country, disaster recovery is slow and co stly.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
169. According  to the United Nations classification, Tuvalu  has been classified as a Least Developed Country for the last  
29 years. This is primarily because of the size of the economy including population, and geographic remoteness41, factors 
that are closely linked with a nation’s adaptive capacity. These have a significant bearing on the country’s human 
development status.  The causes of poverty and vulnerability are reported to include  limited access to quality basic services 
and infrastructure and limited income generation opportunities particularly for women and youth with low qualifications. 
These are areas that can be exacerbated by the impact of climate change and that are of direc t relevance for the focus of 
the proposed project.  
 170. Unstable macroeconomic conditions are an important factor affect ing the ability  of the Government to effectively  
respond  to climate change threats. The economy of Tuvalu,  and in particular government revenues , relies significantly on 
foreign aid, account ing for 51% of GDP in 2014, and potentially upwards of 55% in 2015. In addition, extra budgetary 
grants account ed for 21- 32% of GDP during 2010- 2015.  Fishing license fees from foreign fishing vessels  also account for 
a large part of government revenues, but fluctuates greatly between 15- 45% over the same time period.  As described 
earlier, Tuvalu’s public debt had reached 41% of GDP by the end of 2013, with external debt accounting for 35% of GDP. The debt is expected to have risen to 56.9% in 2014 due to a recent loan agreement on a fishing joint venture.  These 
macroeconomic statistics indicate that making planned, medium - to long- term public investments is extremely difficult for 
the GoT.  
 171. The private sector, in turn, is underdeveloped. Like many other SIDS, the public sector is the biggest source of 
employment (39% and additional 30% work in the public sector and semi -publi c sector or public corporations, 
respectively
42), and the private sec tor account s for only 28% of work force and 25% of GDP. For these reasons, the 
Government has historically relied on donor project financing to advance its development agenda. However, it is 
characterized by a similar set of challenges such as volatility and fragmentation of investments, as epitomized by the fact 
that the first climate resilient coastal protection support is being designed only now along the two stretches of coastlines in the country.  
 172. Weak institutional capacity is an additional factor contributing to the difficulty of the GoT in accessing the needed 
financial resources to build climate resilience, especially in the coastal areas. The GoT currently does not have the technical capacity t o carry out detailed feasibility assessments for coastal protection design and thus its ability becomes 
further limited to seek donor assistance. Furthermore, the assessment s typically needed for building coastal defense are  
highly technical and expensive and are usually beyond the capability of the GoT to produce.   
 
173. The proposed project , therefore, intends to build the foundation for the GoT  to gradually obtain the needed technical  
capacity to closely monitor the coastal dynamics of vulnerable coastlines, design locally -appropriate coastal protection 
measures and implement the measures that are within their technical and financial capabilities.  
  
                                                             
41 UNCTAD (2012). Vulnerability Profile of Tuvalu.  
42 International Labour Organization (2010). Decent Work Country Programme –  Tuvalu (2010- 2012) .


---
*Page 47*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
E.5.  Country O wnership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs 
and NAPs  
174. The proposed project  is in line with, and supports , the implementation of the followi ng national priorities : 
 
• Te Kakeega II: National Strategies for Sustainable Development 2005- 2015 (TK -II). It is envisioned that in the year 
2015, Tuvaluans will have more employment opportunities, higher economic growth, better health and education, 
improved basic infrastructure and with continued social stability. The vision is articulated in the Malefatuga Declaration, 
which is the foundation of TK -II and from which arises the Natio nal Summit on Sustainable Development.  A new 
national development plan beyond 2016 is currently under development.  
 
• Te Kaniva: Tuvalu Climate Change Policy:  The vision is “to protect Tuvalu’s status as a nation and its cultural  
identity and to build its c apacity to ensure a safe, resilient and prosperous future.” Goal 4, Developing and Maintaining 
Tuvalu’s Infrastructures to Withstand Climate Change Impacts, Climate Variability, Disaster Risks and Climate Change 
Projection, Strategy 4.2 Physical planning a nd development control for Funafuti and the Outer Islands. Expected 
outcome, “Coastal protection and causeways constructions followed best practices appropriate for Tuvalu’s situation 
and reduce vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, climate varia bility and ecological hazards.” GOAL 7: 
Guaranteeing the Security of the People of Tuvalu from the Impacts of Climate Change and the Maintenance of 
National Sovereignty.  
 
• Cross -Cutting Policy and Disaster Risk Management (2012- 2021) and Tuvalu National Str ategic Action Plan  
for Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management 2012- 2016 (NSAP, 2012)  recognizes the need to strengthen 
Tuvalu’s systems, institutions and individual capacities to better address land degradation in Tuvalu. These integrated 
policy and action plan development was coordinated through the MFATTEL, and proposes a framework that will build 
human capacity through addressing issues (such as food security, land and water) that affect Tuvalu’s natural 
resources and strengthen community resilience . 
 175. National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), 2007  highlights  7 key priorities:  
 
• Coastal protection through increasing resilience of coastal areas and settlements;  
• Agricultural protection, through the use of salt tolerant species;  
• Water access, in particular during frequent water shortages;  
• Health improvement, through the control of vector borne/climate sensitive diseases and access to quality potable 
water;  
• Fisheries conservation of highly vulnerable near -shore marine ecosystems;   
• Promoting alternative Fisheries resources and coral reef ecosystem productivity; and  
• Disaster preparedness and response through strengthened community capacities.  
 
176. National Adaptation Plans (NAP) : Initial consultations and scoping have been initiated for Tuvalu to embark on  
medium and long- term adaptation planning through the NAP process. Coastal protection is likely to be a vital aspect of 
island level medium and long- term adaptation planning priorities.  
 
177. 
The proposed project  has been designed and developed with full ownership of the GoT through a series of  
consultations, at all levels of the government and at island community level. Multi -stakeholder consultations including with 
government agencies, NGOs, CSOs, and partners w ere conducted during June 2015 culminating in a GCF concept for 
further development with guidance from relevant stakeholders. Representation of women was ensured through the 
participation of community -level organizations as well as by including female staf f members of the relevant partner 
agencies.  Furthermore, the Feasibility Study  (Annex II) was developed as a result of extensive stakeholder engagement 
and consultations with World Bank and JICA who produced two of the underlying feasibility studies on which the proposal 
is built. A series of consultations led by the Prime Minister’ s office (NDA) were conducted to gather feedback and obtain a 
buy-in on the proposal. All relevant stakeholders at the pre -appraisal meeting held on September 29, 2015 endorsed the


---
*Page 48*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
final proposal  (See Annex VII) . The NDA has issued a ‘no objection’ letter for the submission of the proposal reiterating 
GoT’s commitment and ownership of the proposal, which is in- line with the country’s national strategies and priorities.  A 
series of follow up meetings were held in 2 -9 February 2016 with participation from UND P, during which the scope of the 
project  was further strengthened.    
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver  
Capacity of Accredited and Executing Entity: UNDP  
178. See also Section C.4.  UNDP has the required operational, financial and technical capacities to effectively manage 
and guide this project  in Tuvalu under the umbrella of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (2008- 2012 
UNDAF for the Paciﬁc Sub- region) and the its extension (2013- 2017). The Tuvalu 2013- 2017 UNDAF country results 
matrix indicates four priority outcomes, including “4.1 Environmental sustainability and sustainable energy are 
mainstreamed into regional and national policies, planning frameworks and programmes. Pacific communities effectively 
manage and sustainably use their environment, as well as natural and cultural resources” and “4.2 Pacific communities 
effectively manage and sustainably use their environment, as well as natural and cultural resources”. The UNDP national 
level support to Tuvalu is detailed in the UNDP Sub- Regional Programme Document for Pacific Island Countries 2013-
2017 with one focus being ‘Environmental management, climate change and disaster risk management’.  
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs , civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders  
179. The proposed project  is informed by the several rounds of discussions with stakeholders at the national and island  
levels on climate change adaptation options and priorities in Tuvalu.  The project  builds on past and ongoing partnership 
between the GoT  and UNDP with financing from the LDCF, GEF Trust Fund and bilateral sources such as the Government 
of Australia.     
 
180. All of the country’s islands were visited in 2007- 2008 during the development and implementation of the NAPA 1  
project . Community members,  Kaupules  and Falekaupules  were consulted with regards  to their priority actions to address 
vulnerability and enhance climate change resilience, with more than 50% of the population engaged.  All islands indicated 
coastal protection was a priority action for climate change resilience and Nukufetau, Funafuti, N anumea and Nukulaelae 
selected coastal protection measures as investments to be supported through NAPA 1.   
 181. Multi -stakeholder consultations including with government agencies, NGOs, CSOs, and partners were conducted  
during June 2015 culminating in a GCF concept for further development with guidance from relevant stakeholders. Representation of women was ensured through the participation of community -level organizations as well as by including 
female staff members of the relevant partner agencies. Furthermor e, the Feasibility Study  (Annex II) was developed as a 
result of extensive stakeholder engagement and consultations with World Bank and JICA who produced two of the underlying feasibility studies on which the proposal is built. The study  reflects the learning, knowledge, and experience 
from the ongoing efforts and priorities and needs of the various stakeholders. The proposal was finalized with further stakeholder consultations facilitated during the pre- appraisal meeting that was held on  September 29, 2015. The meeting 
was led by the Prime Minister (NDA) and various government agencies, CSOs, as well as private sector. The list of the stakeholders and key outcomes of the meeting are summarized in Annex VII.  
 
182. The number of civil society or ganizations is limited in Tuvalu; there are no NGOs that have presence in all of the 
outer islands except for the Tuvalu Red Cross.  Therefore, at the island level, CSOs will be engaged, including Tuvalu 
National Council of Women, Church organisations and T uvalu Youth Development.  Furthermore, Tuvalu Association of 
NGOs (TANGO), Tuvalu Council  of Women’s Association (TCWA), and Tuvalu Red Cross will play an important role in 
the project  and Project Board to ensure that all stakeholders, including civil society organization, women, men, youth and 
children are engaged meaningfully in and benefit equally from the project  implementation.    
 
183. All consultations were led by the Climate Change Policy Unit of the Office of the Prime Minister and Department of 
Environment  and t he project  will continue to engage various stakeholders (government agencies, NGOs, CSOs, private 
sector, and communities) extensively during implementation to establish the sites for coastal protection, design and 
implement suitable adapt ation measures, support O&M and know -how, and to promote awareness on climate change and 
coastal protection and management. The detailed stakeholder engagement plan is provided in Annex XIII.


---
*Page 49*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
184. As described throughout this proposal, the project  will pay a p articular attention t o the engagement of youth  as a 
positive force for transformational change. The overall youth engagement strategy for the project  is guided by UNDP’s first 
corporate Youth Strategy “Empowered Youth, Sustainable Future, ” which is built on a four -pronged approach of 1) support 
through capacity development; 2) engage through advocacy and mainstreaming; 3) influence through thought leadership; 
and 4) sustain through national polity. For more details, see Annex X III.  
 185. For implementing development projects which have community (island) -based activities, a particular attention must 
be paid in the logistical arrangement and in the way island communities are engaged in project  activity. The strategy used 
in this project  will build  on critical lessons obtained within UNDP over years through the implementation of the two LDCF -
financed project. This is detailed in the Community Engagement Strategy in Annex XIII.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and E ffectiveness  
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme  
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency  
186. The proposed project  will reduce the vulnerability of three islands of Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga to coastal  
inundation and erosion. It is expected that this objective will be achieved in a cost -effective manner through the following 
considerations that have been reflected in the design of the project .  
  
• Selection of appropriate mix of coastal protection options , both soft and hard, based on detailed site- specific 
assessments and public consultations, taking into considerations the O&M requirements  
• A comprehensive approach to removal of multiple barriers  
 
187. In this project , the use of a mix of options, both soft and hard, for coastal protection will be explored and will  improve 
the cost -effectiveness of the coastal protection solutions considered. While 2,210m of high- value vulnerable coast will be 
equipped with hard- engine ered solutions, the project  also places emphasis on introducing EBA -based coastal protection 
measures in less high- value zones. During the implementation of the project , advantages and disadvantages of options 
such as geo- textile container revetments, dune restoration, or hybrid of the two, or even the possibility of relocating the 
boat access channel, will be fully discussed so t hat community acceptance to a range of options increases and optimal 
solutions can be obtained from the perspectives of society , economics  and engineering integrity.  
 
188. Second, as discussed in detail in the barrier section, the proposed project  will address a  range  of issues that arise 
from the  piecemeal approach to coastal protection in the past that have prevented effective solutions from emerging. Due, 
largely, to financial constraints, the limited number of support that did exist in Tuvalu focusing on building coastal resili ence, 
focused on removing a barrier or two at a t ime. The proposed project, on the other hand, will r emove a range of barriers 
under a single project framework, namely, the capacity barrier not only among the current but also future generations, 
financial constraints, and the local governance and domestic climate finance bottleneck. If addressed simultaneously, the 
development and transformational impact from the project are expected to be greater . 
 
Adequacy of financing structure  
189. The proposed investments in the areas of coastal protection, capacity building, and s upport in establishing a 
sustainable financing mechanism for continuous monitoring, maintenance and expansion of coastal protection, are 
considered a public good. Furthermore, this is an area for which the GoT has struggled to date to attract even international 
development finance because of the large capital investments required.  
    
190. However, this project  has been designed to crowd in potential public finance once the existing barriers are  sufficiently 
removed. Output 1 and 3 have been c onsciously designed to leverage  limited, but available domestic financing at the 
outer island level for the maintenance and expansion of coastal protection. The detailed island -level coastal  assessments, 
which are envisaged to be carried out in all inhabited islands of Tuvalu, and successful demonstration of coastal protection 
investments through this project , will remove an entry barrier for other donors to finance similar needs in the remaining 
islands.  
E.6.2. Co- financing, leveraging and mobilized long- term investments  (mitigation only)  
Not applicable


---
*Page 50*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability   
191. The proposed project  does not involve any revenue generating or cost -recovery based outputs. As such  beneficiaries 
of the project , largely people and their businesses, will not be expected to pay for any of the services (e.g. safety from 
intensifying wave action).  Hence, a financial analysis is not deemed relevant.  
 
192. That said, the GoT  will be investing in O&M related to the planned infrastructure developments for coastal  protection. 
Approximately $128,713  per year will be made available through the G oT’s own infrastructure management fund for this 
purpose for the course of 15 years after the project  completion. The technological solutions that are to be implemented in 
the three islands have been selected in part because they command relatively low maintenance requirements and are 
also deemed to be effectiv e in averting damages from coastal inundation. The draft O&M plan is presented in annex XIII 
and described in section D.2 above. Public Works Department, island kaupules  and local community will be responsible 
for the maintenance of the coastal protection works, under the oversight provided by the Office of Prime Minister. 
Commitments to ensure viability of the proposed public works has been made as outlined in Annex IV.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices  
193. The design of the proposed GCF project  incorporates lessons and best practices from several other projects to bring 
about transformative impact that is effective, efficient and sustainable. These lessons include a) the use of locally -
appropriate technologies based on information available that  are expected to be most cost -effective; b) the effectiveness 
of comprehensiv e barrier removal strategy; c) an innovative approach for “capacity development” in the Tuvalu context; 
and d) the critical importance of leveraging available local resources for promoting longer -term autonomous adaptation. 
These lessons have been derived from experiences from the first LDCF -financed project in Tuvalu, and community -based 
adaptation initiatives in other SIDS from the region.  
 
194. The coastal protection interventions pr oposed are based on the best knowledge available on coastal protection in 
the country and the region. T he globally recognized three broad strategies for coastal vulnerability –  retreat, accommodate 
and protect – have been carefully reviewed. The options pr oposed in the project  are a result of a review of options for 
Tuvalu against these strategies. Potential coastal protection options were also informed by the three assessment studies conducted by UNDP, World Bank and JICA which offer a portfolio of options  that are considered technically feasible in the 
context of Tuvalu. Based on a review of these reports as well as an assessment of local environmental, topographic and 
oceanic conditions
43 the following options have been proposed:  
 
• Geo-textile container revetment  (Outer islands only) have been proposed because they offer a sufficient level of 
protection while being logistically manageable compared with the options considered for Funafuti . Also an advantage 
of this option is that it  provides some flexibili ty when there is a high degree of uncertainty about the level of threat such 
as in Tuvalu. Their construction and design is less complex than permanent seawalls and can be constructed by local 
labor using aggregates extracted directly on- site. This intervention has an advantage for very remote islands where 
transportation costs and logistical challenges could limit the construction of more complex interventions.  (Found in 
Redcliff, Moreton Bay Australia; Manase, Samoa)  
• Rock armour revetment  are robust structures that provide a considerable level of protection. Design built with igneous 
rock provides higher protection, but need to be build using heavy machinery and using imported materials. (Found in Mission Beach, Queensland, Australia)  
• Pre-cast concrete (Seabee) revetment  combined with wave return wall are an effective solution to protect from 
flooding in high value asset areas. They involve local labor and need to be well designed and carefully constructed to 
resist overtime. Part of the materials will need to be imported. This option will be mixed with the rock armour revetment to overcome a drawback of the latter (Found in Boigu Island, Torres Strait, Australia)  
 
195. The review and selection of the above mentioned options were done with a full recognition that, presently, 
international best practice leans towards the implementation of coastal protection strategies that aim to work with the 
natural processes rather than  challenging the forces of the ocean head on. Also there was a recognition that the use of 
                                                             
43 For Funafuti and Nanumea, the existing JICA and UNDP reports, respectively, provide information on these conditions. For Nanumaga, the 
assessment is based only on an observation of a satellite imagery.


---
*Page 51*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
hard engineering structures should not be conside red as inconsistent with the use of softer solutions such as dune 
restoration and coastal vegetation. T he possibilit y of introducing, combining, or in some cases, substituting hard 
engineering solutions with softer solutions, will be assessed and validated during the project  implementation.  
 
196. Best Practices from the Pacific44 have also been taken into account in the desig n of the proposed project  in terms 
of implementation approach. The study reviews lessons learnt from coastal protection projects implemented across 17 
countries in the Pacific45 and concludes that:  
 
• In order for hard infrastructures to be an effective solution, it must be based upon rigorous sit e-specific feasibility 
studies.  The report highlights case studies in the Pacific where poor seawall designs have resulted in “maladaptation” 
where communities have been harmed, rather than benefited, by coastal protection measures  during  extreme events 
in which debris detached from the defense caused damages to houses, agricultural land and other assets.  
• Hard infrastructure investments for coastal protection must be combined with solid sustainability measures. Coastal 
protection structures can provide long lasting protection to the community, but in case they are not properly maintained 
their lifetime will be reduced substantially and might result in maladaptation as previously described.  
 
197. The Study For Assessment Of Ecosystem, Coastal Erosion And Protection/Rehabilitation Of Damaged Area In 
Tuvalu conducted by JICA in 2010 has also been reviewed, where the importance of maintenance is emphasized in order 
for the coastal protection measures to function, as well as to avoid unintended negative impact  to the surrounding 
ecosystem services.  Reflecting this, t he proposed project  has therefore included a strong maintenance component at the 
national and island levels within Output 3.  
 
198. Comprehensive barrier removal, long- term capacity building, and leveraging available local resources for promoting 
longer -term autonomous adaptation are all ideas that are only recently emerging in the region as a result of a trial -and-
learning process. Scholarship programmes targeting students and gover nment officers from the Pacific SIDS have existed 
for many years with financial support from countries like Australia and New Zealand. However, programmes that specifically aim to build climate change adaptation professional s are still limited to a few in the region such as the SPCR 
program in Tonga. Furthermore, programmes that specifically target students with the explic it intent to absorb them in 
existing adaptation initiatives after graduation is an innovative element of  this project .  
 
199. The importance of local governance and the effective use of available island- level finance has long been recognized 
in the region but extensive donor support in this area is sporadic. UNDP, in partnership with the Commonwealth Local 
Governance Forum, has provided technical assistance in this area (2005- 2013) to a number of countries in the region. In 
Kiribati, GIZ is also providing technical assistance in the same area.  
 200. The comprehensive barrier removal approach is largely a result of UNDP’s long years of  engagement in the countries 
in the region, including Tuvalu. In the area of climate change adaptation, UNDP was invited as a partner for NAPA 
formulation and an executing agency for the first and second NAPA follow -up projects financed by LDCF. The recognition 
for the crit ical need for designing projects that aim to remove complex, interrelated barriers for achieving sustainable 
development has gradually emerged in the process of this partnership.  
 
201. Lastly, the ways in which outer island communities will be engaged during the project  implementation are based on 
critical lessons obtained within UNDP over years through the implementation of the two LDCF -financed project. This is 
detailed in the Communit y Engagement Strategy in Annex XIII.  
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators   
GCF 
core 
indicators  Estimated cost per t CO 2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
                                                             
44 Peaniu et al.,(2015) Coastal Protection: Best Prac tices from the Pacific.  http://repository.usp.ac.fj/8219/ 
45 5 of them with comparable socio- economic and environmental conditions to Tuvalu


---
*Page 52*
---

 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 66 
 
 
 E 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)  
Not applicable  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)  Not applicable


---
*Page 53*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis  
202. An economic cost -benefit analysis of the project  was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Economic 
Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program (UNDP 2015). The feasibility of the investments was 
determined by computing the net present value of the proposed project  using a 10% discount rate. The period of analysis 
covers 40 years.  
  
203. The expected benefits of the proposed project  were estimated using the Country Risk Profile for Tuvalu prepared by 
the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative in September 2011 (Annex XIII). This is the most recent 
assessment that has credible estimates  of expected future losses in Tuvalu.  Table 2 of the Profile presents “Estimated 
Losses and Casualties Caused by Natural Perils” for cyclones and tsunamis with mean return period of 50, 100, and 250 
years. Damages therefore were estimated for a return peri od of 50, 100, and 250 years. While a more complete damage 
curve should also include a return period of 1 year, 5 year, 10 year, and 25 year, in the absence of estimates of damages for these shorter return periods , estimates of damages used in the analysis  are solely for 1/50, 1/100 and 1/250. The 
losses presented in Table 2 of the Profile include the cost of repairing or replacing damaged assets as well as emergency 
costs. It is important to note that the estimated losses presented in the Tuvalu Country Ri sk Profile do not include any 
other losses such as contents losses, cost of displacement, loss of environmental assets in terrestrial and marine areas, 
business interruption losses, and losses to primary industries other than agriculture.  
 
204. Based on the numbers presented in Table 2, we estimate an annual expected loss of $53.18 per capita in 2010. 
Once adjusted for inflation, this value becomes $59.42 in 2015. This annual expected loss is then assumed to remain constant in real terms over the period of anal ysis. Hence, in the absence of any adaptation, expected annual losses amount 
to $59.42 per capita per year in Tuvalu. This number includes estimates of the value of statistical life which is an intrinsi c 
part of cost -benefit analysis (and does not and should not be interpreted to reflect the “value of life”).  
 
205. Given the above numbers, and assumptions underpinning the analysis including frequency of return periods of 
extreme events and the estimated cost of the project , the net present value of the project  is negative and amounts to 
approximately $15 million upon using a 10% discount rate. The overall NPV remains to be negative even with a 0% 
discount rate. Table 2 also presents estimates of casualties as a result of these events.  It should also be noted th at in 
estimating the net present value of the proposed project , it has also been assumed that Tuvalu’s population remains 
constant over the period 2015- 2055. In doing so, the true expected benefits of the proposed project are thus under -
estimated.   
 
206. Conseq uently, the negative NPV for this project  should be treated with a significant amount of caution. First, not all 
benefits that ought to have been included in the analysis are accounted for; only those for which reliable estimates of 
damages exist have been  used. The absence of reliable damage estimates for a number of important impacts is a major 
constraint in accurately reflecting the benefits of the proposed intervention.  Second, there are social and cultural reasons 
for the proposed investment. The fact of the matter is that short of relocating Tuvalu’s population and assets away from 
Tuvalu no other solution is going to have any meaningful impact on reducing the current and future impacts of increased 
wave intensity that is affecting Tuvalu’s coastline. However, m oving people and assets from outer islands to Funafuti is 
not an option for so many cultural, ethical and practical reasons. Nor is it feasible to move people and assets within  
Funafuti . Moving people and assets away from Funafuti to outer islands is also not an option. Moreover , “cheaper” 
solutions including soft solutions such as mangrove plantations will not be possible in some locations because some of the islands are coral islands  and the soils are not conducive for mangroves to take root. Moreover, ecosystem based 
solutions alone will not be effective to safeguard people and assets that are already highly exposed to the elements.  Nor 
will building  concrete sea walls around each island be economically possibly nor  practical. Through this process of 
elimination, the only remaining options are a combination of engineered (‘hard’) coastal protection 
as proposed 
complimented with some ecosystem based solutions.  These options still warrant a high expenditure given Tuval u’s 
geographic remoteness and capacity limitations.  
 
207. On the above basis, the proposed project  is deemed to be justifiable on social  reasons . The people and assets of 
Funafuti, Nanumea and Nanumaga simply do not have any other alternatives to protect themselves from the wave actions 
that are adversely impacting the coastline on an increasingly regular and intensive basis.


---
*Page 54*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
F.2. Technical Evaluation   
208. This proposal builds on an analysis of international best practices, extensive experience of the authors of this 
proposal in undertaking similar projects in the Pacific, lessons from on- going efforts in Tuvalu,  and several pre- feasibility 
assessments carried out in the country recently. A Feasibility Study  assessing the var ious options for consideration 
including a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) analysis is presented in Annex I I. An analysis of 
international best practices (ranging from ‘retreat’, ‘accommodate’, or ‘protect’ ) reveals that an effecti ve use of ‘protection’ 
with an appropriate mix of hard and soft solutions and becomes extremely important in Tuvalu where alternatives are 
highly limited.  
 209. Previous studies (JICA 2011; UNDP 2014; World Bank, 2015) have also identified several options suita ble to  
alleviate some of the erosion and inundation problems currently facing Tuvalu.  The assessment, supported by the LDCF -
financed UNDP project, was carried out in two islands of Nukufetau and Nanumea. The World Bank assessment was 
carried out for all is lands as part of  post-TC Pam recovery assistance. The third study conducted by JICA in 2011 explored 
in detail the application of gravel beach nourishment and reclamation along 2.6 km of the western (lagoon- facing) shore 
of Fongfale Island in the Funafuti atoll
46.  
 
210. Both the UNDP project and World Bank reports suggest that structural solutions utilizing geo- textile sand container  
revetments may be an appropriate adaptation measure for the outer islands . As described earlier, geo- textile revetments 
are considered suitable i n the context of outer islands because of several reasons: first, they offer some flexibility when 
there is a high degree of uncertainty about the level of threat  while providing a sufficient level of protection;  and relative 
ease of logistical management compared with other engineered solutions, which is critical in outer islands where landing 
facilities do not exist .  
 
211. Technical evaluation of the various measures for the different sites suggests a mix of hard and soft engineering 
solutions. In Funafuti, the proposed project  aims to rehabilitate 1 ,000 m of the eroded and degraded foreshore on the 
lagoon- side of Vaiaku waterfront of Fongafale Island. This area is important economically and socially as it fronts Tuvalu’s 
largest population center and is the center of commerce and trade for the nation. Based on the feasibility and scoping 
studies already completed, it is concluded that  rock armor revetments and seawalls made from precast concrete units 
(Seabee) would provide the most cost -effective solution for the condition in Funafuti.  
 
212. For Nanumea, the geo- textile container revetment is an attractive and viable option for the following reasons. 
Presently, only a very narrow beach exists between the village and the reef flat. This restricts the potential effectiveness 
of ecosystem -based adaptation opt ions such as sand redistribution and beach nourishment, dune and beach ridge 
restoration. Alternatively , the reconstruction, removal or relocation of vulnerable structures were considered considering 
that the vulnerable shoreline is facing the outer ocean,  i.e. high level of exposure, but rejected immediately due to the lack 
of space available to the community for relocation. Thus, it is proposed that a sand- filled geo -textile revetment be 
constructed along the length of the vulnerable shoreline of the vill age. Such structures have been shown to be highly 
durable and long lasting and able to withstand the impact of large cyclone driven waves and tides.  
 
213. In Nanumaga, a geo- textile revetment  fronting the village is also a possible solution for protection from future storm  
surge events. However, before the detailed design of this  option is finalized , several issues need to be addressed. First  is 
the possibility that under storm conditions, a highly reflective seawall located at the upper beach would enhance eros ion 
and loss of sand, rendering the beach less resilient to future storm surges. Second is the issue of access from the village 
to the sea. A geo- textile revetment constructed between the village and the beach would impede pedestrian access forcing 
people to climb over and down the structure to get to the other side. Not only would this be troublesome, but it could lead 
to premature and unnecessary damage to the structure itself. Alternatively, if a gap were left in the wall for pedestrian access, it would render the rest of the barrier ineffective as flooding storm surges would enter the village through the gap. Implementation of this solution would therefore require prior public consultations to understand the mobility patterns and 
needs of the affected population in terms of using the beach and their day -to-day interaction with the coastline. This could 
lead to consensus on alternative routes for accessing the coast including walkways constructed over the revetment . 
 
                                                             
46 The scope of the investment was scaled back to 180m subsequently.


---
*Page 55*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
214. Other complimentary options for Nanumaga include reestablishing the dune and beach ridge to an appropriate  
elevation and controlling foot traffic through the establishment of elevated wooden walkways to reduce the degradation of 
the dune and enhance the natural coastal protection function of this important geographic feature. A possible long- term 
option could also be the relocation of the boat access channel to divert foot traffic around any proposed sea wall.  
 
215. For all three of the sites targeted in this funding proposal, island- level surveys of the oceanographic  and coastal 
environment as well as public consultations would be required to finalized the detailed design of the structure . 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations  
216. This project  has completed the UNDP social and environmental screening procedure (see SESP attached as  Annex 
VI(a) ). This screening was undertaken by a highly experience d coastal and marine ESIA specialist to ensure this project 
complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards. UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards were reviewed 
by the GCF accreditation panel and deemed sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit low and medium risk projects. Based on the specialist’s extensive experience of undertaking ESIA  on some of the largest port and coastal developments 
internationally (including the largest export port in the world, mega port and coastal development projects in World Heritage 
Areas, projects requiring dredging of up to 60 million m
3) as well as small to medium scale coastal developments and 
coastal protection infrastructure in the Pacific of a very similar nature (e.g. coastal protection infrastructure in Kiribati , 
Samoa and Tonga), the overall social and environmental risk category for this project  is Moderate . It is highly unlikely that 
the project  will have any medium to long term and/or irreversible impacts, and potentially moderate risks associated with 
the proposed construction of coastal protection structures and dredging of materials can be sufficiently managed. Specific 
project  risks are listed in Section G below, together with appropriate mitigation measures.  There are three key factors that 
determine that this project  is classified as a Category B (or Moderate Risk) project : 
 
a. The proposed project  will no t be undertaken in pristine or protected areas where the construction of a built structure 
could potentially cause irreversible changes to the biological, ecological and physical  environment. The project  will be 
undertaken in areas that have been impacted by both anthropogenic and natural processes (e.g. Cyclone Pam in 
March 2015) in the past  and that have ever changing environmental conditions through hydrodynamic and coastal 
processes  as an example.  
b. The coastal protection measures that are considered in the project  (i.e. igneous rock armour revetment, geo -textile 
container revetment, and pre-cast concrete revetment  (Seabee) ) will be parallel to the existing beach profile and coast 
line. These structures, in comparison with those that extend out to sea (e.g. through the construction of a groyne, 
revetment or breakwater as constructed to protect port infrastructure as an exampl e), are expected to have much less 
significant impact on coastal hydrodynamic processes as they will follow the existing coastal profile. Similar projects 
of this nature in the Pacific Islands have been considered as Category B projects and have been approved by 
international organisations following the preparation of an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) rather than a full 
ESIA (e.g. CIF -Funded ADB project  in Tonga for coastal protection works  as discussed above that the specialist was 
involved in and  wrote the IEE ). The beach profiling proposed as part of the project  (see E.3 above) will also be 
undertaken pre and post construction to provide a definitive baseline that will be used in the engineering design to avoid adverse environmental and social im pacts. This is a consistent approach used throughout the Pacific.  
c. Dredging will be extremely limited (approximately 30,000m
3) in contrast to large dredging projects that are considered 
to be of greater risk based on international practices ( for example, th e specialist  has recently completed a Public 
Environment Report –  a lower level assessment than an ESIA for a 3 million m3 capital dredging campaign within the 
Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area). Further, the amount of sediment being dredge is signifi cantly less than normal 
maintenance dredging undertaken at many ports throughout the Pacific which do not require an environmental impact 
assessment but are undertaken consistent with an ESMP.  Importantly, the type of dredge proposed (backhoe) to 
undertake dredging will have significantly less impact on the marine environment as there is no overflow that can 
impact water quality.   
 
217. The investment is expected to deliver the following economic, environmental and social benefits across the project  
area:  
a. Reduced loss of assets including houses and property, which will raise environmental and social wellbeing and 
economic productivity;  
b. Reduced sea flood damages through improved coastal protection;  
c. The development of new habitat for marine fauna;


---
*Page 56*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
d. Increasing capacity through education programs on climate change  
 
Coastal Protection Infrastructure  
218. Notwithstanding that the proposed  coastal protection infrastructure is small scale in nature, there are a range of  low 
to moderate environmental and less so, social impacts associated with the construction of the coastal protection 
infrastructure. The impacts include:  
a. Sedimentation of the marine environment through the movement of sediment to set the base for the construction of 
the infrastructure;  
b. The low level impacts on marine and terrestrial systems as a result of potential fine scale hydrodynamic changes in 
coastal processes;  
c. Limited c hanges in the habitats  where dredging and/or sediment/gravel collection takes place (previous research 
indicates mar ine fauna in these areas quickly re- establish, often above the ambient environment (for example, Moreton 
Bay Sand Extraction studies) ); 
d. Limited potential for the entrainment and impingement/entrapment of higher order marine organisms during 
construction  of coastal infrastructure (it is anticipated that there will be an impact on sessile marine invertebrates during 
the construction of the coastal protection inf rastructure; however  it is well established that these animals are highly 
resilient to change from living in a dynamic environment and quickly re- establish following any impact) ; 
e. Terrestrial and marine noise during the dumping of rock; and 
f. The anticipated waste associated with construction of the project  will be limited to damaged sand- filled geo -textile 
containers bags, although it is anticipated that this waste will be extremely limited.  
 
219. Prior to the commencement of the construction, a number of environmental studies should be undertaken including:  
a. Chemical, ecological and physical assessments (and associated modelling) that consider the adjacent marine 
ecosystems including but not limited to, marine water quality within the areas of influence, disturbance to habitats through the placement of infrastruc ture, noise, and vibration impacts,  impact on benthic biota , and potential 
contamination  from disturbed acid sulfate soils . All these studies should consider spatial and temporal characteristics  
(there is significant information already available within the JICA report) ; 
b. Hydrodynamic modelling to ensure the coastal protection infrastructure do not result in changes to sediment 
deposition;  
c. An assessment of proposed locations where dredging and/or sediment collection will take place; including an 
assessment of existing water quality; marine habitats and species utilization and any important use of this area by 
species or humans (e.g. fishing grounds) and what impacts might occur and how quickly the locations will recover, 
particularly re benthic fauna, any se agrass, water quality and other relevant issues  (see note above) ; 
d. An assessment of the location of any important fishing grounds to the local community that may be impacted by the 
construction of coastal protection infrastructure. This information will be gained from consultation with the local 
community ; and 
e. A terrestrial and marine noise assessment to ensure the construction of coastal protection infrastructure does not have 
an impact on human communities and marine fauna, respectively.  
 
220. Stakeholder consultation should be conducted to ensure appropriate land title is not impacted and that information 
is gained to feed into the environmental studies.  
 
Social assessment  
221. There are limited social impacts associated with the coastal protection infrastructure. Importantly, no people will  be 
displaced or relocated. Careful planning and stakeholder consultation will be undertaken prior to determining the specific 
locations of the coastal protection infrastructure which will ensure communities are not negatively impacted. Further, 
stakeholder consultations  will be undertaken when assessing the sites that might be utilized for the supply of sediment. 
There may potentially be an impact on fishers currently utilizing areas in proximity to the coastal protection infrastructure 
and or dredging locations. This risk could potentially materialize in two ways: First is through the impediment of pedestrian 
access to the coast caused by a coastal protection structure; second is through the disruption of fishing  grounds during 
the sourcing of sand materials or construction of a coastal protection structure. To ensure there is limited impact on people, community consultation will be undertaken to ensure the infrastructure and dredging are not located in important fisheries 
areas. Where available, local people will be employed to undertake construction and maintenance of the coastal protection 
infrastructure, thereby providing a social benefit to the community.


---
*Page 57*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
 
Gender considerations  
222. Acknowledging that men and women derive benefits differently from access to ocean (i.e. collection of shellfish,  
crustacean, shrimps in the nearshore area is typically a responsibility of women and children while men tend to engage 
more in pelagic or coastal fishing) and are impacted differently at the time of extreme events, the project  has been designed 
with a special to gender considerations. Women and women’s association have been separately engaged durin g 
consultations; Tuvalu’s relevant policies and strategies on gender have been reviewed; information and lessons from past 
studies and assessments have been incorporated into the design of the GCF project ; and gender considerations have 
been integrated int o the project  indicators, targets and activities. At the end of the project implementation, the project will 
specifically look into gender -differentiated impact of the project by engaging a technical specialist. Results from this 
assessment will be widely disseminated at a regional or national workshop, contributing to heightened awareness and 
understanding about the impact of coastal protection on gender equality or empowerment.  
 
223. Apart from the gender impact of coastal protection, the project  will also contribute to women’s empowerment  through 
two additional  avenues: enhanced participation and increased responsibilities. One of the fundamental principles of ISP 
support is participatory development planning, budgeting, execution and monitoring. Unlike the  conventional communal 
decision making process in Tuvalu, where the island assembly is open only to men over the age of 50, the ISP formulation 
process opens the door to all in the society, including women and youth. The project  will build on the community  
mobilization platform being used in the baseline UNDP projects and provide an opportunity for women to raise and reflect 
their concerns, in relation to climate change and coastal vulnerability, into their own island development plan.  
 
224. Moreover, the project ’s gender -responsive strategy will go beyond promoting women’s token participation. As an  
integral part of the ISP process, women’s group members will be given specific responsibilities to monitor the execution of 
ISP priorities and island budget through the participatory video tool.  
 
225. General awareness raising about climate change and coastal processes will be mainly delivered through 
engagement of school teachers. This is likely to have a positive gender spillover effect as 83 percent of teacher positions 
in the country is held by women, and the additional knowledge, information, and skills that teachers will learn through this 
GCF  project  will contribute to empowering female teachers.   
 
226. In addition, the project  will create a condition where some of the additional responsibilities that women will take on 
will be financially rewarded. More specifically, women members of society, in addition to youth groups, will receive skill 
trainings on beach profile survey, bas ic monitoring and maintenance of the coastal protection structures, and execution of 
simple ‘soft’ coastal protection measures, and these responsibilities will be financially rewarded, initially through the project  
budget during the implementation, but through the island- level development grants after the project  closure. It is expected 
that 36 people will be newly recruited and trained for beach profiling and at least half of them will be women. There is one 
Land C lerk in each island (total of nine) who will also be trained on beach profiling. Four out of nine of them are currently 
women. The scholarship programme will target 24 students to obtain higher degrees in disciplines that are specifically 
relevant for coas tal protection, and the minimum 50 percent target will be adhered to. Through these efforts, the  project  
will ensure signif icant gender benefits  (See  Section E.3.1) . During consultations, those that were directly linked to 
expanded economic opportunities ( such as the recruitment of women for beach profiling and monitoring and maintenance 
of the coastal infrastructure) were particularly welcomed by women. The Gender Assessment and Action Plan for this 
project  is presented in Annex XIII.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement  
227. The financial management and procurement of this project  will be subject to  UNDP financial rules and regulations  
available here: https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial -Rules -and-Regulations_E.pdf . Further guidance is 
outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures 
available at https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/introduction.aspx . UNDP has comprehensive procurement 
policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the 
procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. See here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx .


---
*Page 58*
---

 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY  
 GREEN  CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 66 
 
 
 F 
228. The project  will be implemented following the Direct Implementation Modality (D IM) following UNDP POPP  available 
here:  https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/direct -implementation- dim-modality.aspx . For project activities carried 
out by the government as a Responsible Par ty, fund transfer to the government shall follow DIM guideline . UNDP will 
ascertain the national capacities of the implementing partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the 
Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers -  HACT ). 
All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines 
and policies.   
 229. During implementation,  UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmat ion to be 
agreed with the GCF. This may include, but not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks,  facilitation  and participation  in 
project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project  level on t he resources 
received from UNDP.
 
 
230. The project  will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together  
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA currently being negotiated with the GCF. According to the current audit 
policies,  UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the project  cycle as per 
UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the 
funds were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a 
financial audit or an internal control audit.   
 
231. UNDP provides a variety of assurance activities which will comprise of (but not be limited to): (1) Periodic on- site 
reviews (spot checks)  of the financial records of the project . These may be performed by qualified UNDP staff or third 
party service providers; (2) Programmatic monitoring  of activities, which provides evidence regarding the state of project  
implementation and use of the GCF resources; and (3) Scheduled and special audits  (financial or internal control)  of the 
financial records.  UNDP prepares and reports financial statements in full accordance with the International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS).   Full compliance with IPSAS was achieved effective January 2012.   IPSAS was mandated 
by General Assembly Resolution 60/283 and i s considered best practice in accounting for public sector and not -for-profit 
organizations . 
 
232. A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document  signature) is 
provided in Annex XIII.


---
*Page 59*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
                                                             
47 For example, refer to Ahern, C.R., Ahern, M.R . and Powell, B. (1998) Guidelines for Sampling and Analysis of Lowland Acid Sulfate Soils (ASS) in 
Queensland QASSIT, Department of Natural Resources, Resource Sciences Centre, Indooroopilly; Ahern, C.R., McElnea, A.E. and Sullivan, L. A. (2004) 
Acid Sulfate Soils Laboratory Methods Guidelines . In Queensland Acid Sulfate Soils Manual. Department of Natural Resources, Mines and Energy, 
Indooroopilly, Queensland, Australia; and Dear, S.E., Moore, N.G., Dobos, S.K., Watling, K.M. and Ahern, C.R. (2002). Soil Management Guidelines. In 
Queensland Acid Sulfate Soil Technical Manual . Department of Natural Resources and Mines, Indooroopilly, Queensland, Australia.  G.1. Risk Assessment Summary  
Environmental Risks  
233. As identified above, the project  has a number of low to moderate environmental and social risks associated primarily 
with the  coastal protection infrastructure which will be temporally restricted except for any potential changes in fine scale 
hydrodynamic processes . There are also potential risks on marine ecosystems and fishing grounds associated with 
dredging areas although these are significantly reduced by using a backhoe dredge. The earth works will move sediment 
that, if not properly contained, may enter the marine environment.  
 
234. To ensure  that the sediment is not mobilized through water movement, it will be necessary to prepare an erosion 
control sediment plan and install silt curtains to restrict sediment movement. The plan should contain aspects including 
but not limited to the installation of sediment curtains to reduce sediment movement and the covering of sediment where 
practicable.  
 
235. The risks associated with a cid sulfate soils are considered minimum as there is no known mangrove habitats along 
the proposed coastlines. Prior to any excavation, however, sediments will be tested for their presence of acid sulfate soils 
and/or potential acid sulfate soils.  If the analysis proves positive, the sediment can be treated by a range of techniques 
including but not limited to liming the sediment.  Reference should be made to appropriate standards and guidelines47.  
Every effort should be made to ensur e there is no direct or residual impact following treatment.  
 
236. By undertaking the relevant studies and community consultation, these risks will be reduced significantly. Given  
the size of the coastal protection infrastructure, it is highly unlikely that, in comparison to much larger projects 
internationally, that they will have irreversible and/or long term significant impacts. The relevant mitigation measures are 
identified in Section F.3 of the proposal.  
 
237. Overall, it is expected that the project  will have some environmental impacts although these can be mitigated  
effectively through appropriate management measures. The project  will have significant environmental benefits in the 
short to long term through the improvement of water quality, provision of new habitat, coastal protection, and most importantly, through providing communities with areas to live that will not be inundated during king tides and during 
cyclone events  
 
Social risks  
238. There are limited social risks associated with the project . Importantly, no people will be displaced or relocated.  
There will potentially be an impact on fishers if the location of dredging or coastal protection is an important fishing ground . 
Coastal protection measures may also alter the way local communiti es interact with the coast. Participatory local 
consultations will be carried out during the implementation so that views and concerns can be reflected in the adjustment 
of the design and construction of the coastal protection measures. Importantly, the coastal protection infrastructure will 
act as a buffer during storm, events and therefore reduce the potential loss of lives and assets.  
  
Other risks  
239. Several other categories of risks have also been identified during the project  design. Under the technical and 
operational risks, there are two main risk factors that could affect the achievement of the expected results and outcomes 
of the project . Currently, there are two passenger boats that make scheduled trips to outer islands,  in addition to one 
research boat ow ned by the Fisheries Department  and one patrol boat in the country. These boats are always on high 
demand and the Tuvaluan seas often make these boats unnavigable. Another operational risk is the high staff turnover and t he difficulty in identifying suitable candidates for project  positions. Political risks are another risk category. In Tuvalu, 
changes of government, often through the parliamentary vote of no confidence, are frequent. While the change of 
government does not necessarily mean changes in policy directions, it poses a risk of delays in project  decision making 
process.


---
*Page 60*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent t he 
project/programme objectives from being achieved.  Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability  of risk 
occurring  
Exclusive reliance on government scheduled boat and 
chartered boat to outer islands limit the delivery of 
Outcomes in a timely manner.  Technical and 
operational  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The logistical issues will be addressed through two risk mitigation measures. First, for the transport of  construction 
materials and machinery, one of the selection criteria for the vendor/construction company is  the transportation capability 
so that the project  will not rely on the existing boats in the country . Second, for transporting project personnel for carrying 
out activities  in outer islands , the partnership with the UNDP -supported LDCF and GEF project will provide a full access 
to a boat dedicated for these projects. This will permit the project  to relia bly adhere to the original island visit schedule.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Complex land tenure in project  locations can cause 
delays and limit the successful construction of coastal 
protection interventions.  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project  will be along  the coastline which is owned partly by the crown (seabed) and the rest by private citzens  (the 
Foreshore And Land Reclamation Act ). It is expected that landowners will allow the contruction of c oastal infrastructure.  
However, given the high number of private lands owners involved who all need to endorse the project , and this process 
could create delays in  implementation. The project  aims to work through k apuales  to ensure that communities are part of 
the decision making process thus increasing ownership. The process of obtaining a community endorsement will start 
during the environmental and social impact assessment. Awareness campaigns on coastal protection will improve the 
understanding of the proposed interventions ma king sure they are supported and endorsed by the community.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Extreme climate events such as cyclones will affect the 
progress of project  and moreover, the design of the 
coastal protection infrastructure may not withstand 
climate change impacts including both sea level rise 
and increased intensity of cyclones .  Social and 
environmental  High (>20% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Notwithstanding that the annual probability of severe cyclones affecting the country is relatively low, coastal  protection 
infrastructure will be designed to ensure longevity based on methodologies that considers worst case scenarios.  
 
A state of emergency was declared in March 2015 due to Cyclone Pam and in 2010 due to a severe drought, and as a result, many government agencies were engaged in early response and recovery activities which caused delays in the 
implementation of the first LDCF project. In order to mitigate this risk, the constructions of the coastal protection 
interventions will be undertaken from April to November when the risk of cyclones is significantly lower. Also the duration 
of the project  has been set to minimize the impact of delays .  
Selected Risk Factor 4


---
*Page 61*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
High staff turnover and limited local human resource 
base could compromise the project  management unit 
and delay implementation  Technical and 
operational  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Project Management Unit will have  some necessary “redundancies” in the functions of project  personnel so that  staff 
turnover  would have minimum impact in terms of continuity of the project  implementation. This is based on lessons from 
earliner  projects. Moreover, there is an ongoing discussion between the Government and UNDP to create several 
positions that straddle multiple UNDP -supported projects . This will facilitate better coordination across these projects and 
a more flexible arrangement whereby a shortage of staff in one project can be supplemented, at least in the interim.  
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Description  Risk c ategory  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Political Risks: Changing leadership at national  and 
local level resulting in project  delays or refocus and/or 
suspension  Other  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The probability of a leadership change resulting in refocus of the project  is highly unlikely given that coastal  protection is 
unequivocally a national priority . However, delays in project decision making is a likely consequnece. The project  will 
work clos ely with the  national advisory comm ittee on climate change (NACCC) and  island Kaupules  to ensure that these 
key stakeholders are updated with progress and would be able to keep national and local leaders updated.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Spillage of construction materials. The transport and 
supply of material, barges, dredges, excavator, truck 
and any other machinery may have impacts that may 
arise from accidental spillage of construction materials 
(e.g. cement); oils and other chemical spills.  Further, 
there may be the release of actual construction 
material .  Social and environmental  Low (<5% of 
project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Through compliance with the Environmental and Social Management Plan, these risk s will be significantly  reduced.  
Selected Risk Factor 7  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Changes in hydrodynamic processes and deleterious 
sediment movement as a result of the construction of 
the coastal protection infrastructure  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Prior to final design and site selection of the coastal protection infrastructure, a number of environmental and  social 
studies should b e undertaken including:  
a. Chemical, ecological and physical assessments (and associated modelling) that consider the adjacent marine ecosystems including but not limited to, marine water quality within the areas of influence, potential contamination from marine sediments that may currently be contaminated, disturbance to habitats through the placement of 
infrastructure, noise, and vibration impacts, and impact on benthic biota. All these studies should consider spatial  and 
temporal characteristics;  and


---
*Page 62*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
b. Hydrodynamic modelling to ensure the coastal protection infrastructure does not result in the change to coastal 
processes within natural variables respectively. The study should evaluate various coastal infrastructure types and 
design.  
 
The information from the studies will be used to inform the environmental and social management plan for the project . 
The plan should ensure it includes water quality monitoring in the short to long term.   
Selected Risk Factor 9  
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Changes in coastal erosion and/or deposition as a 
result of the removal of sediment/gravel for the use in 
the coastal protection infrastructure  Social and 
environmental  Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value)  Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Prior to the selection of sites where material might be obtained for use in the coastal protection infrastructure, 
environmental and social studies will be undertaken including c hemical, ecological and physical assessments (and 
associated modelling) that consider factors such as  existing sediment erosion and deposition, potential contamination, 
disturbance to terrestrial and littoral zone habitats through the removal of sediment, noise, and vibrati on impacts and 
impact on biota.  
Selected Risk Factor 1 0 
Description  Risk category  Level of impact  Probability of risk 
occurring  
Terrestrial and marine noise including through the use 
of construction equipment and rock dumping will occur 
as a result of the project . This can impact on local 
communities and marine and terrestrial fauna using the 
adjacent area.  Social and environmental  Medium (5.1- 20% 
of project value)  Medium  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
An assessment of the terrestrial habitat where the coastal protection infrastructure is to be located should  consider any 
sensitive receptors including communities. Further, noise shields should be constructed to reduce the potential for noise 
to reach these communities. With respect to the marine environment, the studies that will be undertaken will provide input 
into the final location of coastal protection infrastructure to ensur e underwater noise does not impact marine organisms 
and sensitive receptors.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon  
Potential risks in price determination  
The coastal protection work proposed will likely involve minimum of two contractors: first to carry  out island- level 
asse ssments in all islands ; second to construct the coastal protection structures as per the detail drawings produced as 
a result of the assessment proces s. Due to this two- step process and limited experience of coastal protection in Tuval u 
at the scale proposed in the project , there is a certain level of uncertainty in the pricing of the final work contracted. 
Although the project budget has been developed with the best available estimates  using the industry standard and through 
consultations with experts who have worked in the region, the overall project  budget must be carefully monitored.  
 
Potential risks of community engagement  
Coastal protection is undoubtedly an urgent  priority shar ed by all levels of society. At  the same time, there is a sense of  
“consultation fatigue” within Tuvaluan communities. This is because of some of past development assistance that had a 
series of consultations without concrete benefits on the ground. This could potentially create impatient demands to see the construction as soon as the project  implementation starts. To manage expectations of the community, during the 
initial island visits, implementation schedule, expectations, and community engagement requirements will be clearly 
spelled out.


---
*Page 63*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework .   
Please specify the l ogic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework  under 
the Results Management Framework . 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts  at the Fund level48 
Paradigm shift o bjectives  
Increased climate-
resilient sustainable 
development  The proposed project  will directly contribute to safeguarding human development progress in 
target  islands of Tuvalu through coastal protection and thus contribute to climate- resilient 
sustainable development. The project  approach that combines concrete investments, long- term 
human resource development, knowledge management, and reallocation of available domestic 
development budgets towards climate change adaptation will facilitate a paradigm shift that affect 
geographical and inter -temporal d ecisions that Tuvaluan will make on resilience building.  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term  
(if applicable)  Final  
Fund -level i mpacts  
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change  3.2 Number of new 
infrastructure 
constructed to withstand 
condition from climate 
variability and change  Annual progress report; mid- term 
review; terminal 
evaluation No single 
engineered 
coastal 
protection 
solution exists in 
the country  N/A 3 coastal 
protection 
measures 
have been 
put in place 
in 3 islands  Environmental 
and social impact assessment is 
completed and approved without 
delay ; There is a 
land- use 
agreement with 
the la ndowners  
  
                                                             
48 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measur ement Frameworks available at the following link 
(Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/docum ents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf


---
*Page 64*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
                                                             
49 Figures released by Tuvalu High Commission in Suva, 21st July 2015.  
 H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level  
Expected Result  Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  Mid-term (if 
applicable)   Final  
Project/programme  
outcomes  Outcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts  
 A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems for climate -
responsive planning and 
development  5.1 Institutional systems 
that improve incentive 
for climate resilience 
and their effective 
action  Climate change 
related budget 
and 
expenditure 
report from 
island counc ils; 
Annual 
progress report  Only one round 
of ISPs has 
been produced 
and they 
neither are 
climate 
sensitive nor 
govern budget 
use At least two 
cycles of ISP 
production  ISP 
production, 
execution of 
priority 
actions, and 
community 
review have 
become an 
annual event  Domestic 
unconditional 
grants (FTF/SDE) 
which currently 
finance island-
level activities 
remain at similar 
volume  
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks  7.2 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from climate risk 
reduction measures  Implementation 
report by 
construction 
vendor; Annual 
progress report; 
mid-term 
review; terminal 
evaluation Currently, no 
Tuvaluans 
benefit from 
hard-
engineered 
coastal 
protection 
measures  Coastal 
protection 
design and 
implementation 
started to have 
at least 3,100 
individuals 
(50% women) 
who are in  
inundation 
areas protected 
by coastal 
protection  At least 
3,100 
individuals 
(50% 
women) who 
are in 
inundation 
areas 
protected by 
a coastal 
defense  There is a land-
use agreement 
with the 
landowners;  
Environmental 
and social impact 
assessment 
confirms that the 
proposed 
measures have 
minimum risks  
Project/programme 
outputs  Outputs that contribute to outcomes  
1.  Strengthening of 
institutions, human 
resources, awareness 
and knowledge for 
resilient coastal 
management  
 Number of technical 
officers trained on:  
- Monitoring / data 
synthesis on dynamic coastal processes  
- Designing of coastal 
protection (both hard 
and soft) measures  
- Environmental social 
impact assessment  
- Project management, 
V&A assessment, CBA  Annual 
progress report; 
questionnaires; 
mid-term 
review; terminal 
evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annual 
progress report; questionnaires; 
mid-term 
review; terminal evaluation Currently, there 
is no 
institutional 
arrangement 
where technical 
officers can 
gain technical 
skills  
 
 N/A 
 
 
 At least 12 
technical 
government 
staff (50% 
women) 
exposed to 
hands -on 
trainings on 
the three 
areas  
 
 
 
 Skill building 
trainings do not 
result in 
accelerated 
turnover of staff  
 
The host 
departments allow 
their staff to be 
away for skill 
building for 
sustained period 
of time  
 
The scholarship 
arrangement in 
which students 
are required to 
come back to the 
country after 
completing 
studies is  properly 
enforced  Number of students 
that are supported at 
higher -level studies 
(tertiary level or higher) on disciplines related to 
coastal protection work  Tuvalu 
sponsored 
students in 
tertiary 
education 
totaled to 
16349. DFAT(24 
awards in At least 24 
students (50% 
women) are 
supported for at 
higher level 
studies AND 
obtain a CCA -At least 24 
students 
(50% 
women) are 
supported for 
at higher 
level studies 
AND obtain a 
CCA -related


---
*Page 65*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
                                                             
50 http://fiji.embassy.gov.au/files/suva/120912%20- %20AusAID%20Tuvalu%20awards%20- %20FINAL.DOC   
51 Aid budgeted for scholarships and others http://www.aid.govt.nz/where -we-work/pacific/tuvalu   201250) and 
NZAID (NZD 
11million51) 
awarded a total 
of 20- 30 
scholarships 
each per year   related position 
in the country  position in 
the country   
2.   Vulnerability of key 
coastal infrastructure 
including homes, schools, 
hospitals and other assets 
is reduced against wave 
induced damages in 
Funafuti, Nanumea and 
Nanumaga  
 Island -level coastal 
assessment report 
produced  
 
 
 Implementation 
report by 
assessment/ 
construction 
vendor; Annual progress report; 
mid-term 
review; terminal 
evaluation 
 
 
Implementation 
report by 
assessment/ 
construction vendor; Annual 
progress report; 
mid-term 
review; terminal 
evaluation 
 
 
Implementation report by 
assessment/ 
construction 
vendor; Annual 
progress report; 
mid-term 
review; terminal 
evaluation No island -level 
reports 
containing 
assessment 
results such as 
local 
hydrodynamic 
processes are 
currently 
available 
 All 9 islands of 
Tuvalu has a 
coastal 
assessment 
report  
 
 
 
 N/A 
 
 
 
 There is a land -
use agreement 
with the 
landowners;  
Environmental 
and social impact 
assessment 
confirms minimum 
risks 
 
The length of 
vulnerable coastlines protected  In the proposed 
locations, there 
is no structural 
measures to 
mitigate the risk 
of wave over -
topping or 
coastal 
inundation 
events  
 Construction of 
coastal 
protection 
commenced 2,210m  of 
vulnerable 
coastlines 
are protected 
by a coastal 
defense 
measure  
Knowledge about 
gender -differentiated 
impact of coastal 
protection enhanced  Awareness 
about gender -
differentiated 
impact of 
coastal 
protection is 
low Island -level 
social impact 
assessment 
includes a 
section on 
gender  The final 
technical 
assessment 
report 
includes 
gender -
differentiated 
impact and 
the results 
are shared at 
a 
regional/nati
onal forum  The technical 
assessment takes 
place sufficiently 
before the closure 
of the project so 
that a 
regional/national 
forum can be 
organized after 
the assessment  
3.  A sustainable financing 
mechanism established 
for long- term adaptation 
efforts  
 Adaptation actions 
financed and 
implemented from 
island level plans (no. 
and type)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Audited Island 
accounts  
Compiled 
report produced 
by the ISP 
officer on the 
consolidated 
island- level 
budgets and 
use 
 
 
 
 
 To date, no 
adaptation 
action has been 
implemented 
based on Island 
Strategic Plans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All islands have 
an ISP with 
specific 
budgets for 
development 
priorities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At least 16 
adaptation 
priority 
actions (two 
in each 
island), 
outlined in 
ISPs, are 
financed by 
either 
domestic or 
external 
resources 
and 
executed  
 There is high level 
commitment and 
buy-in from 
officials in the 
central 
government and 
kaupule to revise 
ISPs and use 
domestic funds for 
adaptation 
purposes;  
Available 
domestic funds to 
outer islands  
remain viable 
sources; the role 
of women’s group 
as a checks -and-Women's distinct role 
in the context of island Focus group 
discussions; Women are 
only “consulted” The use of 
scorecards and Women’s 
group


---
*Page 66*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
decision making 
established  key informant 
interviews  during the 
island decision 
making 
process, but no 
distinct roles 
are established  participatory 
video has 
started  
 recognized 
by both men 
and women 
as an 
important 
interest 
group in the 
evaluation of 
kaupules   balances function 
is not diluted in 
the small island 
setting  
 
Activities  Description  Inputs  Description  
1.1.  Technical capacity, 
knowledge and 
awareness of the 
Government and 
community strengthened 
for coastal monitoring, 
protection and 
maintenance of coastal protection infrastructure  Strengthened and improved local capacity 
and inter -sectoral partnership/coordination 
in identifying, collecting and analyzing data in various aspects of coastal vulnerabili ty. 1.1.1. T raining of coastal 
monitoring workers in outer islands 
on the use of survey equipment; 
agreement of contracts including 
the frequency of data collection 
and transfer.  
1.1.2. Training of DoLS staff on the 
synthesis and digitization of survey 
data collected from outer islands.  
1.1.3. Training of DoE staff on 
environmental and social impact 
assessment  
1.1.4. Training of PWD staff 
members on the structural 
main tenance of the GCF 
investments  
1.1.5. Training of PWD staff, 
NGOs, and CSOs on the 
appli cation of EBA coastal 
protection  
1.1.6. Comprehensive training 
program designed targeting CCPU 
staff  
1.1.7. Two regional conferences 
and/or workshop on coastal 
protection organized      Improved monitoring at island level 
of coastal change; synthesis and 
analysis of beach profile data; 
improved ESIA capacity; improved 
knowledge and skills for EBA 
coastal protection; improved skills 
for maintenance of coastal 
protection infrastructure; improved 
coordination and CCA program 
management capacity for CCPU 
staff 
It is estimated that a total of 18 
trainings will be organized in the 
lifetime of the project targeting 
PWD, DoLS, DoE and CCPU. The 
total number of individuals to be 
trained is 12.   
1.2. Long- term national 
human resource capacity and awareness enhanced 
for sustainable coastal 
protection  Build and improve  technical capacity of 
Tuvaluans  to lead and take ownership in 
further development, implementation, and sustaining coastal protection measures by 
the project , as well in the future.  1.2.1. A scholarship program is 
designed with the MoE;   criteria for 
selecting eligible candidates 
agreed by the second Project 
Board meeting  
1.2.2.   Scholarship agreement 
made with at least 18 students  
1.2.3.  At least 6 new graduates 
are identified and recruited to 
assist the government in 
implementing the project and in 
carrying out coastal vulnerability 
and environmental and social 
impact assessment  
1.2.4.  Contractual agreement 
signed with the selected 6 
students  who are in a master’s 
program  relevant for coastal 
protection  
1.2.5.  Training of trainer events 
organized specifically targeting 
school teachers  
1.2.6.  Primary school curriculum 
modified and approved  Scholarship program for building 
future experts for coastal 
protection targeting hi gh school 
and university students; 
professional exposure for 
students; revision of primary 
school curriculum.


---
*Page 67*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
2.1.  Coastal protection 
design, site-specific 
assessments  and 
Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments 
undertaken in all islands 
in a partic ipatory manner  Site-specific assessments in all islands of 
Tuvalu to inform coastal protection options  2.1.1. Organization of community 
consultations to inform the design 
and ESIA.  
2.1.2.  Collection of wave, current 
and sediment data, public 
consultations and ESIA  
2.1.3. A national consultation and 
validation of the findings of the 
assessment.  
2.1.4. Establishment of a 
permanent survey benchmark 
engaging youth organizations to 
carry out surveys  ESIA, site assessments, detail 
drawings, BoQs, and public 
consultations for effective, 
sustainable, gender -responsive 
coastal protection 
2.2.  Coastal protection 
measures implemented  Coastal protection measures installed and 
monitored in identified sites.  2.2.1.  Construction of coastal 
protection infrastructure in 
Funafuti, Nanumea and 
Nanumaga covering 2,210m of 
vulnerable coastlines  
2.2.2. Organization of community 
consultations for handover of the 
assets  
2.2.3. Engaging youth based 
organizations to play a role in 
monitoring on a quarterly basis 
during and after project 
implementation  Procurement for construction 
companies; oversight for timely 
completion of the construction 
work  
3.1.  All I slands Strategic 
Plans and annual budgets 
integrate island- specific 
climate risks through 
existing gender sensitive, 
participatory processes  Community members, including men, 
women, children, and the elderly, 
empowered to participate in climate 
resilient planning process of the ISPs, 
taking into consideration climate change 
impacts and integrated coastal, land, and 
marine resource management principles.  
 3.1.1 . National ToT workshop 
organized for incorporating climate 
change risks, including coastal 
management, into ISPs targeting 
kaupule representatives, minority 
groups, DRD staff, NGO staff and 
women’s group s.  
3.1.2. Facilitation of outer island 
workshops to integrate climate 
risks  into the existing ISPs and to 
produce/enhance annual budgets  
3.1.3. Compilation, analysis and 
reporting of all outer island annual 
budgets  
3.1.4. Release of performance-
based top- up grants   
3.1.5.  Operational and financial 
arrangement finalized for 
community -based disaster early 
response/recovery support  Technical assistance throughout the 
iterative process of planning, 
budgeting, execution and monitoring 
for the lifecycle of the project.  
 
Two national workshops are 
expected in the course of the project; 
from year 2, an island level workshop 
will be organ ized once a year in each 
island to review the new ISP at the 
beginning of the budget cycle.


---
*Page 68*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
 3.2.   Capacity of 
Kaupules, Falekaupules 
and community members 
strengthened for 
monitoring coastal 
adaptation investments  Community capacities to monitor, evaluate 
and communicate results and impacts of coastal protection adaptation investments 
enhanced  3.2.1. Outer island level 
awareness raising events 
organized targeting different 
interest groups about monitoring 
and maint enance needs of the 
coastal investments (in the island 
of Funafuti, Nanumea and 
Nanumaga) and the needs for 
EBA for all the islands (Following 
Activity 1.1)  
3.2.2. A national Training of 
Trainers events organized inviting 
representatives from these interest 
groups for participatory video.  
3.2.3. Technical assistance on the 
use of  community scorecard to 
assess performance of outer 
island administrations  
3.2.4. National level consultations 
organized to review the process of 
annual budgeting, monitoring and 
evaluation for coastal protection  Strengthening the perception of 
internal accountability through the 
continuous use of community 
scorecard  
 
From year 4, isl and-level workshop 
to review the execution of ISPs will 
be organized every other year in 
each island; participatory video 
demonstration and review will be 
organized 5 times in year 4- 8.  
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  
240. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP  and the UNDP  
Evaluation Policy . The primary responsibility for day -to-day project  monitoring and implementation rests with the Project 
Manager. The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The 
Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during 
implementation, including the implementation of the Monitorin g & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate support 
and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project  staff maintain a high level 
of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and report ing project results.   
 
241. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision  
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project -level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP . Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be provided by 
the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project  target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal 
Point will be involved as much as possible in project -level M&E.   
 
242. A project  inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to: a) re- orient project  stakeholders to the project  strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project  implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project  team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework , re-assess baselines as 
needed,  and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review 
financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan 
and schedule Project Board meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board.    
 
243. A project  implementation report will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager, the 
UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to the annual PIR. The Project Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project  results framework are monitored annually well in 
advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR. The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Boar d and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate 
the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PI R, along with the terminal evaluation report and 
corresponding management response, will serve as the final project  report package.


---
*Page 69*
---

 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING  
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 66 
 
 
 H 
  
244. An independent mid- term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the 
project ’s duration. The terms of r eference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates 
and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP 
Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR report will be available in English. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months 
prior t o operational closure of the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow 
the standard templates and guidance available on the 
UNDP Evaluation Resource Center . The final TE report will be 
cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project 
Board. The TE report will be available in English. The UNDP Country Office will include the planne d project  terminal 
evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and 
the management response to the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) ( www.erc.undp.org ). The MTR and 
TE will be carried out  by an independent evaluator.  The eval uation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then 
quality assessed and rated by the UNDP Independent Evaluation Office. 
 
245. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project  for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex -post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the UNDP proj ect document.    
 
246. Implementation of Output 2 will follow a phased implementation approach. Island -level assessments across all 
islands will be carried out by a single contractor to ensure consistency in the assessment. The assessments will start 
from the three targeted islands . Timely contractual arrangement and oversight of the assessment process will be an 
important indicator to monitor the performance of the project  in the early stage  of project  implementation. Since the 
assessments and construction will be fully outsourced to an international contractors, the overall monitoring of the project  
will be on the basis of periodic progress report produced by the contractors.  
  
247. Monitoring of project activities for both Output 1 and 3 will require more careful coordination and planning. 
Monitoring of progress of capacity building targeting government officers wil l be done primarily through reports produced 
by, or in partnership with,  respective host departments (DoLS, PWD,  DoE and CCPU) . Similarly, the progress of 
scholarship programme will be reported by the Ministry of Education. For monitoring of progress on awareness raising, at the start of the project  implementation, a simple questionnaire will be administered to different target groups 
(parliamentarians, government officers, community, and school children). This is not only to understand different learning 
needs, but to also obtain baseline information against which the progress will be monitored over time.  
 
248. Progress monitoring on ISP process will use several tools and means of verification. For monitoring of operational 
progr ess on capacity building and awareness raising, progress reports produced by the ISP officer will be used. For 
monitoring of outcome- level progress, information drawn from the actual ISPs, island- level budgets, island audit report, 
community scorecards, and participatory video report will be synthesized and analysed.   
 
249. UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the Reporting Period, including semi -annual reporting, in 
accordance with the AMA and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). UNDP has country presence and capacity to perform 
such functions.  In the event of any additional post -implementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will 
discuss and agree these with the GCF Secretariat in in the final year of the project and will prepare a post -implementation 
monitoring plan and budget for approval by the GCF Board as necessary.


---
*Page 70*
---

ANNEX ES 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 66 
 
 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.  
 
 I. Supporting Documents  for Funding Proposal  
☒          NDA No -objection Letter   Annex  I 
☒          Feasibility S tudy  Annex  II 
 ☐ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements Annex III   Not Applicable 
for this project  
☒          Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co- financing commitment  Annex IV  
☒          Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) Annex V (a)  
☒          Confirmation as per AMA    Annex V (b) 
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  or Environmental and Social Management Plan   
 Social and Environmental Screening Template Annex VI  (a) 
             Environmental and Social Management Plan  Annex VI (b) 
☒ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations  Annex VII  
☒ Evaluation R eport  of the baseline project  Annex VIII 
☒ Map indicating the location of the project/programme  Annex IX  
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation   Annex X  
☒          Project/Programme confirmation Annex XI   
 
Additional information  
☒          Economic Analysis Annex XII (a), Annex XII (b)  
☒          Additional Background Details Annex XIII  
☒          Responses  to GCF comments on Proposal  Annex XIV  
☒          Letter of Endorsement from UNDP Senior Management  Annex XV


---
*Page 71*
---

 
GFC/B.13/16/ Add. 07 
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority


---
*Page 72*
---

 
GFC/B.13/16/ Add. 07 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Basic project/programme information  
Project/programme title  Tuvalu coastal adaptation project  
Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Environmental and social report disclosure information  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  2016 -05-24 
Language(s) of disclosure  Tuvaluan, English  
Link to disclosure  http://www.pacific.undp.org/content/pacific/en/home/library/env
ironment_energy/tuvalu -environmental -social -management -
plan.html   
Other link(s)  http://