=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20151009192207+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
/ModDate: D:20151015165621+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.10
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

∗ The agenda item number will be determined when the final sequence of items in the provisional agenda is 
confirmed by the Co -Chairs.  Consideration of funding 
proposals  – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP00 4 GCF/B.11/04/A dd.04 
15 October 2015  Meeting of the Board  
2 – 5 November 2015  
Livingstone, Republic of Zambia  
Provisional Agenda Item 14∗ 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following two parts:  
(a) A funding proposal entitled “Climate Resilient Infrastructure Mainstreaming in 
Bangladesh” submitted by KfW  Development Bank; and  
(b) A no -objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority or focal point, respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.04  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity   
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal poin t


---
*Page 4*
---

Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
Section C DETA ILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPTION
Section D RATI ONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
Section E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AG AINST INVESTMENT CRITERI A
Section F APPRAISAL SUMM ARY
Section G RISK A SSESSMENT AND MA NAGEMENT
Section H RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING
Section I ANNEXES
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template
Sections A,B, D, E andHof the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary  information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents 
such as project appra isal document.
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
Please submit the completed form to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMA RY
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1OF 52A
A.1. Brief Project /Programme Information
A.1.1. Project / programme title Climate Resilient Infrastructure Mainstreaming (CRIM)
A.1.2. Project or programme Project
A.1.3. Country Bangladesh
A.1.4. National designated a uthority  (ies) Economic Relations Div ision, Ministr y of Finance
A.1.5. Accredited e ntity KfW
A.1.5.a.Access modalit y ☐  Direct ☒  International
A.1.6. Executing entity / be neficiaryExecuting Entit y:Local Governme nt Engineering Department
Beneficiar y:Population of Bhola, Barguna and Satkhira
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD)☐  Micro ( ≤10)
X  Medium (50<x ≤250) ☐  Small (10< x≤50) 
☐  Large (>250)
A.1.8. Mitigation / a daptation f ocus ☐  Mitigation ☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross -cutting
A.1.9. Date of submission3 August 2015 (revisions from 31 August 2015 ,10 
September 2015 and 25 September )
A.1.10.
Project 
contact 
detailsContact person, position Johannes Scholl, Proj ect Manager
Organization KfW
Email address Johannes.scholl@kfw.de
Telephone number +49-69-7431 -8935
Mailing address Palmengartenstr. 5 -9, 60325 Frankfurt, Germany
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply) 
Reduced emissions from:
☐Energy access and power generation
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐Low emission transport
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)  
☐Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☐Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)
Increased resilience of:
☒Most vulnerable people and communities
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)
☐Health and well -being, and food and water security
(E.g. climate -resilient crops , efficient irrigation systems, etc.)
☒ Infrastructure and built environment
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)
Ecosystem and ecosystem services
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)☐


---
*Page 6*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMA RY
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2OF 52A
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)
The Climate Resilient Infrastructure Mainstreaming (CRIM) project integrates climate change adaptation systematically 
into decision -making for infrastructure planning, supervision and maintenance of the Local Go vernment Engineering 
Department (LGED), responsible for local infrastructure throughout Bangladesh. A dedicated Climate Resilient Local 
Infrastructure Centre  (CReLIC ) –a Centre of Excellence –iscreated within LGED. Compl ementar y to the C ReLIC ’s
institutional set up, the project finances pilot local infrastructure, designed to optimize climate change resilience in some 
of the country ’s most vulnerable districts. 
As a result, the project increases directly the adaptive capacit y of more than 134,000 people to c limate change. 
Indirectly, 10 .4 million people (6 .8percent of the total population of the country) will benefit from climate resilient 
infrastructure planning and implementation in the long term . 
With an annual investment budget of more than one billion US$, LGED is responsible for more than ten percent of all 
annual public investments (mainly roads, public buildings and drainages) in Bangladesh . The CReLIC will be 
established as a permanent unit within LGED and serve as a think tank and knowledge hub to mainstream climate 
resilience into all LGED activities. The Centre will trigger a step -wise institutional learning process all over the LGED 
infrastructure portfolio and pilot innovations directly in LGED operations through investments in rural and urban pilot
infrastructures in three of the country’s most vulnerable and poor coastal districts: Bhola, Barguna and Satkhira . The 
project builds 45 new multipurpose cyclone shelters, rehabilitates 20 existing shelters to a climate -proof standard, 
provides 80 km of critical road connectivity and provides climate resilient urban infrastructure in the city of Satkhira. The
new bui lt shelters follow an innovative state of the art multi -purpose design and will be used throughout the year as 
primar y schools. 
The project has important direct co -benefits, such as the creation of more than 1,700 full -time jobs, education support to 
more than 18,000 children and the reduction of local transport costs by  an estimated average of more than 20 percent. 
The gender -friendly design of infrastructure , particularly  multipurpose cyclone shelters, contributes to gender equality in 
development. The institutional reform within LGED will trigger a paradigm shift by transforming the business as usual 
development to a climate resilient and sustainable local infrastructure development all over Bangladesh. 
The project has an  overall volume of 80 million US$. A grant of 40 million US$ is requested from the GCF. Through 
KfW, the German Government provides parallel co -financing of 15 million US$ and the Government o f Bangladesh a 
counterpart contribution of 25 million US$. Additional co -financing is expected to be leveraged.
A.3.Project/Programme Milestone
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable)Not applicable
Expected financial close (if applicable) Not applicable
Estimated implementation start and end dateStart: 01/04/2016
End: 31/03/2022
Project/programme lifespan 6years


---
*Page 7*
---

FINA NCING / COST INFORM ATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 3OF 52B
B.1. Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Progra mme
All financing will be provided as grant from three different sources: Green Climate Fund (GCF), KfW on behalf of the 
German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and the Government of Bangladesh (GoB). 
Component s3 and 4.3  will not receive GCF financing , but will be covered exclusively by KfW/BMZ funds and a 
respective GoB con tribution . Funds provided by KfW /BMZ will be channelled through parallel co -financing under the 
same Project Management at KfW  and LGED .The rati onale for Grant financing is provided in Section F.1 .
* 1 US$ = 76.5 BDT ( Bangladeshi Taka, average exchange rate Apr -Jul 2015)Component Sub-component (if applicable) AmountCurrency  of 
disbursementAmountLocal 
currency
Component 1
Institutional 
DevelopmentSub-component 1.1
Knowledge management6.0 million USD ($) 459.0 million BDT
Sub-component 1.2
Guidelines, standards and 
procedures3.0 million USD ($) 229.5 million BDT
Sub-component 1.3
Communication, consultation and 
training3.0 million USD ($) 229.5 million BDT
Sub-component 1.4
Initiate development of a 
permanent institutional structure1.0 million USD ($) 76.5 million BDT
Component 2
Pilot Climate Resilient 
Rural InfrastructureSub-component 2.1
Priority Multipurpose Cyclone 
Shelters26.5 million USD ($) 2,027.3 million BDT
Sub-component 2.2
Critical rural road connectivity10.5 million USD ($) 803.2 million BDT
Component 3
Pilot Climate Resilient 
Urban InfrastructureSub-component 3.1
Climate Resilient Urban 
Infrastructure in Satkhira18.0 million USD 1,377.0 million BDT
Component 4
Project ManagementSub-component 4 .1
Project Management at LGED4.5 million USD ($) 344.3 million BDT
Sub-component 4 .2
Institutional Development (ID) 
support (C1); Design, 
Management and Supervision 
(DMS) support (C2)5.5 million USD ($) 420.8 million BDT
Sub-component 4.3
Design, Management and 
Supervision (DMS) support (C3)2.0 million USD ($) 153.0 million BDT
Total 80.0 million USD ($) 6120 .0 million BDT


---
*Page 8*
---

FINA NCING / COST INFORM ATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 4OF 52B
B.2. Project Financing Information
Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing
(a) Total 
project 
financing(a) = (b) + (c) 80.0million USD 
($)
(b) 
Requested 
GCF amount(i) Senior Loans
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans
(iii) Equity
(iv) Guarantees
(v) Reimbursable 
grants *
(vi) Grants *…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
40.0Options
Options
Options
Options
Options
million USD 
($)
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to
provide, part icularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should corresp ond to the level of the 
project/programme ’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E .
Total r equested
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)40.0million USD 
($)
(c) Co -
financingFinancial 
InstrumentAmount CurrencyName of 
InstitutionTenor Pricing Seniority
Grant
Grant15.0
25.0million USD 
($)
million USD 
($)BMZ/KfW
GoB(  )  years
(  )  years(   ) % 
(   ) % 
(   ) % IRROptions
Options
Lead financing institution: KfW (as both, GCF and BMZ grants will be channelled through KfW ).It is 
expected that approximately halfof the GoB con tribution (i.e. 12 -13 million USD) will be sufficient to 
cover all applicable taxes. Please see Annex 7 , III for more details.
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in sectio n Iissued by the co -financing institution.
B.3. Fee Arrange ment (if applicable)
Left intentionally blank due to general fee and AMA negotiations between KfW  and GCF still ongoing. No fees will be 
included in the 40 million US$ grant requested from GCF, but will be on top.
B.4. Financial Market Overview (if applicable)
Not applicable , as the proj ectis not market based .It covers the installation of administrative and management structures 
at government level and the construction of non -income generating public infrastructure for vulnerable groups .


---
*Page 9*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 5OF 52C
C.1.Strateg ic Context
Theproject comprises the systematic institutionalization of c limate change adaptation by a major public infrastructure
provid er in Bangladesh ,the Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) . Such a systematic and institutional 
approach is unprecedented in the country. LGED is an important executing agency of the strategic national climate 
change adaptation framework (see Section E.5.1) and is one of the few national institut ions that due to its experience 
and setup may qualify for Direct Access to the Green Climate Fund in the coming years . This proj ect w ill be executed 
by one of the best suited institutions for piloting this case of institutional change andit will provide p ositive spill -over 
effects by bringing a national Bangladeshi institution cl oser to direct access to the GCF. The proj ect enjoys high -level 
buy-in from the Government of Bangladesh (GoB), reflected by a significant financial contribution to the proj ect and an 
explicit long term commitment to institutional change at LGED.
The start of operations of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) has thus triggered an important positive  dynamic in 
Bangladesh and created a unique window of opportunity  for paradigm shift on an institutional level (see Section D.1) .
C.2.Project/ Programme Objectiveagainst Baseline
Bangladesh is considered one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate risks (see E.4). According to  
median predictions of General Circulation Models (GCM), Bangladesh will be 1.5°C warmer and 4 percent wetter by 
2050, however with stronger seasonal variations. Natural disasters , like cyclones and floods, cost Bangladesh an 
average of 1 percent of GDP each year (W orld Bank 2010). Public infrastructure coverage to protect lives and assets 
from these disasters has si gnificantly expanded since the 1960s, as the Bangladeshi government has invested more 
than 10 billion US$ in structural assets (like polders and cyclone shelters) and non -structural assets (like early warning 
systems). Nevertheless, large areas are still unattended, even in some of the most vulnerable coastal districts and 
people there remain highly vulnerable to extreme weather events like cyclones. The districts of Bhola, Barguna a nd 
Satkhira are the three districts with the highest remaining gap of cyclone shelter coverage (total gap: 157 highest 
priority cyclone shelters for more than 220,000 people). In the baseline scenario, most o f thisinfrastructure coverage 
gap is likely to remain, if no action is taken . The W orld Bank’s most recent Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Project 
(MDSP) was not able to  cover the infrastructure gap and it is deemed unlikely that other donors step in on a significant 
scale. Despite the many innovations in shelter construction developed in development projects over the past years , a 
series of issues remain. Particularly construction quality and maintenance have proven to be a core challenge . 
Intensified si te supervision during construction is needed, both  by LGED and Consultants. Due to  the remoteness of the 
construction sites, also local people have to be empowered to carry out simple supervision tasks for their future school 
and shelter. N on-engineering social and financial solutions to the maintenance challenge must be explored.
Moreover, existing infrastructure inBangladesh remains vulnerable to the impacts of climate change : Prolonged heat 
waves and intense precipitation put road pavements under stress and overload ur ban drainage systems ; more severe 
tidal surges and floods may erode road bases and bridge supports; higher wind speeds of storms and cyclones impact 
on building structures –just to mention a few of them. T hus, the fulfilment of the infrastructures’ social and economic 
purposes for the most vulnerable people, communities and regions cannot be guaranteed, such as providing effective 
shelter during extreme weather events or allowing all -year traffic on roads . Many roads, bridges and other physical 
structures were constructed at times when there was not yet full awareness for the effects of climate change. Even if 
thisinfrastructure is repaired, rehabilitated or upgraded today, climate change is usually not taken into acco unt 
systematically , although there is a  rich body of experiences to be learnt from, both in Bangladesh (see C.5) and 
internationally (like infrastructure codes developed by  Engineers Canada or a pilot project for climate change adaptation 
of the German road infrastructure by the German Federal Roads Agency ). In a baseline scenario, standard repairs, 
rehabilitation and upgrading work s in Bangladesh will thus not contribute to preparing existing infrastructure  forthe 
additional, incremental challenges of climate change.
On an institutional level , the large national agencies responsible for infrastructure planning, construction and 
maintenance do not follow a systematic approach of climate proofing. Additional, climate change -related risks (e.g. 
higher flood peak levels, higher peak temperatures) are not systematically taken into account . With more than 1 billion 
US$ per year, the Local Government Engineering Department (LGED), the  executing agency of this project, is


---
*Page 10*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 6OF 52C
responsible for more than 10% of all annual public investments in Bangladesh. In a baseline scenario, these 
infrastructure investments are not systematically made climate proof.
The project outcomes will respond to these three baseline trends. Key outcome of the proj ect w ill be the systematic 
integration of climate change adaptation into decision -making regarding infrastructure planning, supervision and 
maintenance at LGED in Bangladesh (Outcome 1 ), through the establishment of a Climate Resilient Local 
Infrastructure Centre  (CReLIC ), a Centre of Excellence and an institutional think tank that is fully  integrated into LGED 
structures and backed -up by pilot investment schemes. Through investment in pilot climate resilient infrastructure, the 
project will directly enhance adaptive capacities of more than 134,000 people ( Outcome 2 ). This will particularly reduce 
the coverage gap described in the baseline.
The project will have an immediate positive impact on the increased resilience of livelihoods of the most vulnerable 
people and on the resilience of respective infrastructure to climate threats (Impact). The CReLIC will provide the 
conditions to  deliver this increase d resilience to climate change on a broad structural scale. At the end of the proj ect, 
CReLIC will cover 10 percent of the annual LGED investments and, thus, 10.4million people (see Section E.1). In the 
long term, climate change adaptation shall be mainstreamed to 100 percent of LGED invest ments and would then 
benefit indirectly a total of 104.9 million people.
C.3. Project / Programme Description
The project will consist of four closely interlinked components (see B.1): (1) Institutional Development, (2) Pilot Climate 
Resilient Rural Infrastructure, (3) Pilot Climate Resilient Urban Infrastructure and (4) Project Management. The close 
linkage between institutional development ( component 1) and pilot infrastructure ( components 2 and 3) in one project 
ensures that a) mainstreaming is facilitated in a  waythat is operationally realistic and practicable and that b) a 
comprehensive institutional and sustainable institutional impact is reached by covering both main operational pillars of 
LGED: rural and urban infrastructure. 
Component 1: Institutional Dev elopment
This component establishes the Climate Resilient Local Infrastructure Centre  (CReLIC ), a Centre of Excellence, an 
institu tional think tank and knowledge hub at LGED for adapting local public infrastructure to  climate change. The 
Centre will be dedicated to gathering, analyzing and developing re levant local and national best practices, taking into 
account international standards, and translating them (among others) into construction standards, standard design, 
building material standards, training curricula and geo information for infrastructure planning, supervision and 
maintenance. During the proj ect, the CReLIC will put a special focus on pilot infrastructure  financed through 
components 2 and 3 , but i ts ambition is to become an integral part of LGED operations in all sectors on all levels.
Setting up and operati ng CReLIC will involve almost all LGED units. LGED is committed to setting up CReLIC
permanently and the Government has assured that long -term operational costs will be covered by the national budget 
(see annex, co -financing letter) . As the institutionalization of CReLIC is a far-reaching institutional decision, thedetail s 
of its permanent setup shall only be decided on a fter the first three years of project implementation, when reliable first 
lessons learnt are available. The decis ion shall be backed up by an accompanying institu tional assessment and several 
rounds of internal high -level consultation meetings.
Theactivities described below will be executed jointly  by the Programme Management Office  (PMO) and the 
responsible LGED units. All works will be supported by an Institutional Development Consultant. A more detailed 
explanation of each Activity  and sub -activity is provided in section F.1 .
Sub-component 1.1: Knowledge management
Core output o f this sub -component is the continuous internal provision of up-to-date climate relevant data and 
information through user-friendly ICT -applications and the systematic application of climate impact assess ment for 
LGED standard infrastructure types. Large parts of this sub -compon ent may require outsourcing to national and 
international research and monitoring institutions. This sub -component brings together meteorological and climate 
macro -data with engineering know -how, specific institutional experience of LGED and field level data to provide an 
integrated knowledge base for the  development of guidelines, standards and procedures and even specific project


---
*Page 11*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 7OF 52C
proposals under sub -component 1.2.
Activity 1.1 : Establish comprehensive knowledge management system
-Sub-Activity 1.1. 1: Establish framework for relevant external data acquisition in r egular intervals on climate 
impact variables for LGED infrastructure, i n an appropriate digital format with external data providers.
-Sub-Activity 1.1.2 : Systematically and continuously capture relevant lessons learnt from LGED’s ongoing 
projects, particularly through regular user/stakeholder surveys of pilot and other infrastructure.
-Sub-Activity 1.1.3 : Systematically and continuously screen national and international resear ch proj ects, 
publications and best practices for relevant results and feed into internal knowledge management.
-Sub-Activity 1.1.4 : Set up adequate formats and applications of provision and exchange of climate -relevant 
data, information and knowledge inside LGED, such as upgrading and exten sion of LGED databases, both 
spatial and non -spatial to provide climate -relevant information in a user -friend ly way.
-Sub-Activity 1.1. 5: Conduct comprehensive climate impact assessments to identify and verify relevant climate 
impact variables and risks for all LGED infrastructure types / use of LGED infrastructure and identify mitigation 
options through LGED planning, designs, regulations and procedures.
-Sub-Activity 1.1. 6: Promote action researches in collaboration wit h national and/or international research 
institutes where data, information or knowledge gaps are identified.
Sub-component 1.2: Guidelines, standards and procedures
This sub-component will develop and upgrade relevant internal LGED guidelines, standards and procedures building on 
the knowledge base developed under sub -component 1.1 and roll out climate impact assessments in a standardized 
way to specific project preparations. In a first step, a focus shall be on roads and multipurpose cyclone shelters, as they 
are among the most important LGED standard infrastructure types (see Table 1).
Activity 1.2 : Develop and adapt guidelines, standards and procedures
-Sub-Activity 1.2.1 : Develop and/or upgrade internal guidelines and procedures for infrastructure planning, s ite 
supervision, procurement, maintenance and others, if applicable, to miti gate climate change impacts and risks.
-Sub-Activity 1.2.2 : Develop and/or upgrade standard designs and building materials for standard LGED 
infrastructure to  mitigate cl imate change impacts and risks.
-Sub-Activity 1.2.3 : Effectively integrate climate impact assessments in the preparation of Technical Assistance 
Project Proposals (TPP) and Development Proj ect Proposals (DPP) for preparation of proj ects funded by the 
National Budget and/or donors.
Sub-component 1.3: Communication, consultation and training
This sub -component ensures that stakeholder consultation becomes a permanent exercise (instead of a one -time 
exercise) andthat lessons learnt from CReLIC are disseminated internally and externally.
Activity 1.3 : Provide communication, consultation and training
-Sub-Activity 1.3.1 : Establish and convene the Consultative Advisory Group (CAG , see C.7 ) in annual events . 
This includes the technical and logistical preparation of events, preparation of reports on findings and follow -up 
on them.
-Sub-Activity 1.3.2 : Set incentives for LGED employees to proactively apply C ReLIC products and to participate 
in the internal generation of knowledge and innovation for adaptation to climate change (e.g. through the 
establishment of LGED Annual Adaptation Award) .
-Sub-Activity 1.3. 3: Elaborate and disseminate publications of lessons learnt and best practices generated 
through CReLIC .
-Sub-Activity 1.3.4 : Prepare annual training plan and c onduct trainings for LGED staff to  disseminate CReLIC
results internally ,develop capacities of CReLIC staff and to provide training on operations and maintenance of 
pilot infrastructure at community level .


---
*Page 12*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 8OF 52C
Sub-component 1.4: Initiate development of p ermanent institutional structure
Activity 1.4 : Initiate development of a permanent institutional structure
-Sub-Activity 1.4.1 : Provide initial recommendations for permanent institutional setup one year after start of the 
project, based on a thorough and comprehensive institutional assessment and internal stakeholder survey.
-Sub-Activity 1.4.2 : Revise recommendations for permanent institu tional setup three years after start o f the 
project, based on a comprehensive review of lessons learnt from project implementation.
-Sub-Activity 1.4.3 : Take  necessary high-level GoB approval sonpermanent insti tutional setup three years after 
start of the project.
-Sub-Activity 1.4.4 : Provide flexible institutional support in the last year of the project after closing of all other 
project activities to ensure smooth transition to permanent institu tional structure.
Component 2: Pilot Climate Resilient Rural Infrastructure
Due to climate change, severe cyclones are expected to occur more frequently in the coastal region, exacerbated by a 
potential sea level rise of over 27 cm by 2050 ( World Bank 2010). Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters and roads that lead to 
these shelters are safe  havens for the vulnerable coastal population in case of disaster. They  are proposed as pilot 
rural infrastructure for mainstreaming through CReLIC . Of all standard LGED infrastructure s, these two are also the 
most important ones in terms of quantity and budget. LGED is responsible for maintaining and upgrading therural road 
network (including bridges and culverts) –thelifeline of the rural poor. Theconstruction of cyclone shelters has become 
an additional major LGED activity in the past years. They can be effective means for saving human lives during 
cyclones a nd other extreme weather events, as demonstrated during cyclone Sidr in 2007 (see IPCC 2014) .
Table 1: Important LGED infrastructure types 
No Infrastructure Ty pes Quantity
(2012-2013)Expenditure
(2012 -2013), in US$
1 Roads (rural and urban) 7,355 km 372.9 million
2 Bridges and Culverts (rural and urban) 27,841 m 128.1 million
3 Cyclone Shelters (rural) 227 N o 28.2 million
4 Other buildings (rural and urban) 222 No 13.5 million
5 Water resources development schemes (rural) 95,000 ha 11.9 million
6 Road maintenance (rural) 1,737 km 8.2 million
7 Water & Sanitation schemes (urban) 15,950 No 7.6 million
8 Drainage (urban) 226 km 7.5 million
9 Slum Improvement (urban) 11,024 No 2.7 million
*1US$ = 76.5 BDT ; Source: LGED Annual Report 2012 -2013, non-exhaustive list
The pilot coastal districts where pilot infrastructure will be built are the districts of Bhola, Barguna and Satkhira. 
Together, the three pilot districts provide an adequate sample for the different topographical and geographical 
cond itions on the Bangladeshi coast. Specific selection of construction sites will be conducted at the start of the project 
out of the total of 81 eligible locations for new shelters and a total of 29 eligible shelters for rehabilitation (see annex) . 
The 81 eligible sites were identified using the following criteria:
a)Identified by the Needs Assessment under the  Disaster Shelter System Phase I (DSSP -1) in 2011;
b)Ranked as high priority (based on vulnerability to cyclones and floods, status of existing infrastru cture and 
existing area/population coverage) in the Needs Assessment for the Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Project 
(MDSP) in 2014;
c)Located in one of the pilot districts Bhola, Barguna or Satkhira;
d)Not covered by any other investment project;
Out of this sa mple, 45 shelters will be selected for new construction and 20 shelters for rehabilitation under the project 
based on a detailed field survey. Selected roads shall be prioritized based on critical access to shelters they provide


---
*Page 13*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |  PAGE 9OF 52C
and on additional co -benefi ts.
Construction of pilot infrastructure shall be realized in two phases (construction cycles ) to enable intensified monitoring 
and field testing of CReLIC in two feedback loops . 
Sub-component 2.1: Priority Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters
Activity 2.1 .1: Build 45new multipurpose cyclone shelters with close monitoring and knowledge generation through 
CReLIC . 
Activity 2. 1.2: Rehabilitate 20 existing multipurpose cyclone shelters with close monitoring and knowledge generation 
through C ReLIC .
Sub-component 2.2: Critical Rural Road Connectivity
Activity 2. 2: Improve 80km of critical road connectivity , with priority on providing access roads to th e multipurpose 
cyclone shelters with close monitoring and knowledge generation through C ReLIC .
Component 3: Pilot Climate Resilient Urban Infrastructure
This Component will be financed by a bilateral parallel co-financing (see B.1) and a respective GoB contribution . As 
shown in table 1, many LGED infrastructure ty pes are urban. They are developed and implemented jointly between 
LGED and the city administrations and are thus subject to different internal procedures in LGED than rural 
infrastructures . 
This proj ect component will be essential to allow C ReLIC to fulfill its objective for LGED’s urban portfolio. The 
infrastructure components (both, component 2 and 3) are integral parts of the overall project, and are required to 
achieve the institutional mainstreaming objective of the overall proj ect. Rural and urban infrastructures are the two main 
pillars of LGED activities. An effective insti tutional approach requires the inclusion of both pillars to  be relevant. Urban 
infrastructure requires other modes of consultation, cooperation and sharing of tasks and r esponsibilities with local 
government bodies than rural infrastructure  in component 2. Both components will have a decisive influence on the 
overall long-term setup o f CReLIC and its outputs. On the other hand, the GCF -funded component 1 will be essential 
for ensuring a comprehensive climate proofing approach to the urban infrastructure implemented in Satkhira under 
component 3 .
All pilot investments under component 3 will be realized in the city of Satkhira. The town was selected as one priorit y 
city betw een the Governments of Germany and Bangladesh in 2014 , based on a country wide climate vulnerabilit y 
assessment for urban centers between 100,000 and 2 million inhabitants . Pilot urban infrastructure in Satkhira is 
currently being selected and prepared in an inclusive local stakeholder consultation process in line with this funding 
proposal , based on vulnerabilit y and risk analyses of S atkhira Municipality, in close coordination between LGED and 
thecity administration. Among the eligible infrastructure measures are city drainage, flood protection, water supply, 
sanitation and transport. Priority will be given to those infrastructures that enhance adaptive capacities of vulnerable 
people, such as those that live in the slums of the city.
Activity 3.1 : Build high -priority urban infrastructure with close monitoring and knowledge gener ation through C ReLIC .
Component 4: Project Management
Tasks of the Project Management are described under C.7. In addition to ensuring an effective and efficient 
implementation of all components the project, the project management is in charge of support ing LGED management in 
carrying over the project structu re into  a permanent LGED stru cture  at the end of the proj ect drawing on results from 
component 1.


---
*Page 14*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10OF 52C
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor
The accredited entity, KfW,is Germany’s public Promotional Bank and with a balance sheet of EUR 489 billion and a 
funding volume of over EUR 74 billion (2014), one of the largest development banks in the world . On behalf of the 
Federal German Government, particularly the Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ), KfW 
administers Germany’s offi cial Financial Cooperation in more than 100 developing and transition countries in Africa, 
Asia, South and Central America, th e Middle East , South East Europe and the Caucasus. KfW has been engaged in 
Bangladesh with development projects since 1972, shortly after the independence of the country , and has invested 
over EUR 3.2 billion in the country, mainly in infrastructure. 
TheExecuting Agency, the Local Gov ernment Engineering Department (LGED) is the technical arm of the Ministry 
of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives of the Government of Bangladesh. It is mandated with 
planning and implementation of local level rural and urban physical infrastructures. As such, it is the major public 
agency responsible for the provision of local public infrastructure in rural areas and small to medium -sized to wns in 
Bangladesh. The physical infrastructures include roads, bridges/culverts, markets, disaster shelters, solid waste 
disposal and smal l scale water resources. For sustainability of these development interventions LGED strives to ensur e
people ’s participation, local level planning, social mobilization, poverty alleviation activities and gender interventions.
With an annual allocation of m ore than 1 billion US$ (FY 2012 -2013) , LGED is responsible for more than 10percent of 
allannual public investment sin Bangladesh. Consider ing only rural development, the LGED ratio is even higher with 
roughly two thirds of all investments in Bangladesh in rural development. Its largely decentralized manpower of over 
10,000 employees ensures effective presence on local level all over the country. LGED has a long standing working 
relationship with all major donor s, including the International Development Association (IDA), Asian Development Bank 
(ADB), Japan (JICA) and Germany  (KfW and GIZ).
KfW and LGED have been cooperating since 1988 ,with a total of 12development projects (bilateral German 
funding ov er EUR 122.7 million, all grant) and maintai n a successful and professional relationship of mutual trust . 
This proj ect proposal represents a new level of inter-institutional cooperation between KfW and LGED .
C.5.Market Overview (ifapplicable)
The proposed Climate Resilient Local In frastructure Centre ( CReLIC ) provides the missing link for effective 
mainstreaming in the infrastructure portfolio of LGED. It fills the gap between the increasingly diverse and competent 
landscape of think tanks and scientific institutions that provide policy advice and scientific data  in Bangladesh on one 
side, and project -specific innovations and best practices generated within LGED on the other sid e.
TheCenter for Env ironmental and Geographic Information Serv ices (CEGIS) and the Institute of Water 
Modelling (IWM) –both institutions of the Government of Bangladesh –provide scientific data and tools for assessing 
climate -related risks and impacts. They are involved in a series of other relevant adaptation projects, such as the 
Bangladesh Delta Plan (BDP) , supported by t he Government of the Netherlands. The BDP aims at providi ng an 
integrated and holistic vision of the Delta Development for the coming decades and represents another significant step 
forward towards the effective mainstreaming of climate change into national policy planning. Among think tanks, the 
Bangladesh Cent re for Advanced Studies (BCAS) or the Centre for Global Change (CGC) havea long track record 
of offering independent climate policy advice. Many Bangladeshi Universities offer relevant expertise that may need to 
be tapped during the proj ect, such as BRAC University with its Centre for Climate Change and Env ironmental 
Research (C3ER) , Independent University with its International Centre for Climate Change and Development 
(ICCCA D)and the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET) with its Institute of Water and 
Flood Management (IW FM)and its general expertise on infrastructure designs and materials. All these national 
players shall be invited to be part of the Consultative A dvisory Group (CAG, see C.7) and, i f necessary, poten tially 
further inter-institutional cooperation arrangements.
On the project side, some of the most important LGED infrastructure investment projects directed towards adaptation to 
climate change in the past decade, like the Emergency 2007 Cy clone Recover y and Rest oration Project (ECRRP , 
supported by W orld Bank), the Coastal Climate  Resilient Infrastructure Improvement Project (CCRIP , supported by  
ADB), the City Regions Dev elopment Project (CRDP , supported by ADB) or the Sustainable Rural Infrastructure


---
*Page 15*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11OF 52C
Improv ement Project (SRIIP , supported by ADB )were all supported bilaterally by a grant co -financing from the 
Federal Republic of Germany through KfW .Innovations and best practic es from these and other LGED -executed 
projects will form the starting point of C ReLIC operations. For the pilot shelter infrastructure, close coordination with the 
most recent W orld Bank -supported Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Proj ect (MDSP) will play a prominent role.
C.6.Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)
Approval procedure in Bangladesh : The Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh (G oB) has nominated 
theLocal Government Engineering Department (LGED) for executing and implementing the project and has already 
firmly committed co -financing to this project ( see annex, co -financing letter) . Upon approval of this funding proposal by 
the GCF Board, LGED sub mits a Development Proj ect Proposal (DPP) in the approved format to the responsible 
Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (LGRDC). The DPP contains all relevant terms 
and conditions of this funding proposal and additional agreements reached and signed with KfW.After due scrutiny 
and, if nece ssary, subsequent revisions by the Ministry , the DPP is submitted to the Planning Commission of the 
Ministry of Planning duly signed by the Secretary of the Local Government Division (LGD)of the Ministry of LGRDC. 
The Planning Commission will again review and evaluate the proposal. The proposal will t hen be submitted for approval 
tothe Execu tive Committee of the National Economic Council (ECNEC), the highest authority headed by the Prime 
Minister. After approval , the DPP will be notified and processed back to LGED for further necessary action. The modus 
operandi of the project with administrative and financial requirements is clearly spelled out in the proposal. The project 
will be executed by LGED following administrative and financial rules and regulatio ns of the GoB and requirements by 
KfW.
Approval procedure in KfW : This funding proposal is equivalent to KfW’s internal appraisal report and is already 
endorse dby KfW  management. Relevant terms and conditions of this funding proposal will be translated into 
contractual terms as described under C.7. 
Taxes, duties and lev ies: Contractors shall be responsible for all taxes, duties, fees, and other such levies imposed 
inside and outside Bangladesh. Based on past experience, respective costs accou nt for up to 19% of investment costs. 
The GoB cash con tribution will be sufficient to cover these costs.
Insurance: For civil works (pilot infrastructure), the Contractor shall provide insurance cover from the S tart Date to the 
end of the Defects Liability Period, in the amounts and deductibles specified in the Particular Conditions of Contract 
(PCC) for the following events:
(a)Loss of or damage to the works, plants and materials;
(b)Loss of or damage to equipment;
(c)Loss of or damage to property (except the works, plant, materials and equipment) in connection with the 
contract; and
(d)Personal injury or death.
All KfW fiduciar y, environmental and social standards, as well as KfW  procurement guidelines apply to this proj ect.In 
the 27 years of joint cooperation, LGED has so far proven that it is capable of effectively  complying with these 
standards.


---
*Page 16*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12OF 52C
C.7.Institutional / Implementation Arrangement s
Project Management Office
The project will be implemented by the Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) through a Project 
Management Office (PMO) at LGED Headquarters in Dhaka, Bangladesh. An experienced and senior Civil Engineer of 
LGED will be appointed on deputation as the Proj ect D irector (PD). Required officers/staff will be deputed internally 
from LGED and in cases where required staff profiles are not available in LGED and/or where interinstitutional 
cooperation needs to be enhanced, secondments of external staff shall apply. The role and responsibility of the PMO is, 
among others:
-Liaise with the responsible line ministry, Local Government Division, and KfW , regarding implementation of the 
project;
-Prepare and implement interinstitutional agreements, particularly for scientific and academic partnerships, for 
the setup of the CReLIC ;
-Allocate tasks to proj ect officials and staff and supervise their works;
-Review bidding documents to ensure conformity with the National Procurement Guidelines ( PPR -2008 ), 
KfW and GCF regulations; link interim payments to contractors to milestone achievements in consultation 
with the project consultants. Review submitted bids (if necessary) and arrange for approval of the 
component au thorit y for awarding contracts;
-Provide nece ssary technical guidance to the field level Executive Engineers regarding implementation of 
the project activities and integration of newly developed CReLIC standards ;
-Supervise construction w orks and advis e the Executive Engineer regarding adherence to Technical 
Specification and qualit y control;
-Supervise work of the Project Consultants, review man months used against output produced;
-Take necessary measures for A nnual Development Plan(ADP) financial allocation stothe proj ect;
-Make payments to consult ants and contractors as certified by the Project C onsultants;
-Maintain financial record sof the proj ectand ensure keeping of separate accounts for GCF funds and 
bilateral German funds, respectively ;
-Prepare statement of expenditures as necessary  and arrange reimbursement of fund from donors;
-Preserve all expenditure records for audit by KfW  and GCF (if fielded).
The decision on how the CReLIC is going to  be transfer redinto a permanent institutional setup shall be taken three 
years after the beginning of project implementation (see C.3). 
Project Implementation at l ocal lev el (for pilot infra structure)
Implementation of pilot infrastructure components at local level will be done by the competent LGED district 
offices, represented by their respective District Level Executive Engineer who is responsible for all LGED 
operations in the respective district. The role and responsibility of the District Level Executive Engineer is:
-Implement pilot infrastructure at field level;
-Integrate newly developed CReLIC standards into infrastructure planning and design;
-Call tenders for the project works, evaluate the bids and prepare evaluation reports for review and 
approval of the component authorit yand No Objection by KfW ;
-Assign works to the officials and staff under his jurisdiction to supervise construction works and assure 
quality;
-Supervise construction works together with Consult ants, provide technical guidance to junior technical 
staff in connection with the implementation of the proj ect w orks;
-Prepare physical and financial progress reports and send them to the Project Director for reporting to the 
government and KfW ;
-Certify achievement of milestones progress of different schemes in confo rmity with the technical 
specification and assist the Project Director to prepare the reimbursement claims for claiming 
reimbursement from KfW  and GCF;
-Maintain all payment records and face audit;


---
*Page 17*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13OF 52C
-Provide support to LGED staff, consultants and/or partners in charge of acco mpanying pilot infrastructure 
for feed -back and knowledge management under CReLIC .
-For the urban pilot infrastructure, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established at Sa tkhira 
Pourashava (Municipalit y).Detailed roles and responsibilities between LGED and the city administration 
shall be defined in the Project Agreement.
Project Coordination Committee (PCC)
The Proj ect Coordination Committee (PC C) is under the chairmanship of the Chief Eng ineer ( LGED ), and consists of 
the Additional Chief Engineer, Implementation (LGED), the Deputy  Chief of the responsible Line Ministry (LGD), the 
concerned Superintending Engineers (LGED ),representatives from other relevant GoB departments ( particularly the 
Department of Disaster Management -DDM) and the Project Director (as Sec retary of the Committee). Representatives 
from Civil Societ y Organizations (such as the Red Cross and Red Crescent Society) shall be invited as members of the 
PCC as well. The PC C will review all relevant implementation issues, provide support and guidance for the smooth 
implementation of the proj ect and ensure transition to  permanent organizational structures of CReLIC .LGED may invite 
members and observers as necessary. The committee will meet as necessary but at least quarterly  (four times a year) .
Project Steering Committee (PSC)
The Proj ect Steering Committee (PSC) is under the chairmanship of the Secretary (LGD), as the responsible line 
Ministry, and consists of the Additional Chief Engineer, Implementation (LGED ),the Deputy Chief (LGD)and the 
Project Director (as S ecretar y of the Committee). The core task of the PSC is to provide direct policy guidance to the 
projectthrough the line ministry in charge . The committee may  invite any other offi cial or expert as member if 
necessary. The committee will meet as necessary but at least twice a year. The role and responsibilit y of the PSC is:
-Provide policy guidance re garding implementation of the proj ect. 
-Review progress and solve problems if there is any during proj ect implementation that needs attention at 
ministerial level. 
-Resolve interagency issues regarding implementation of the project.
Consultativ e Advisor y Group (CAG)
Withthe start of the proj ect, LGED will convene a Consultative Advisory Group (CAG) and invite most renowned and 
reputed national and international experts on Climate Change Adaptation, as well as representatives of Development 
Partners ,relevant Non -Governmental Organizations and institutional proj ect partners to be part of the Group. Its core 
role is:
-Provide a platform for exchange of best practice s, technical and policy innovations and knowledge 
management;
-Provide overall technical g uidance to the project;
-Ensure interlinkage of project developments with international best practice and global policy developments;
-Serve as channel for ou treach and communication of proj ect results and impacts.
The group will be convened once a year internationally in a one -day expert forum, i f possible, back -to-back with 
UNFCCC Conference of th e Parties (COPs), SBSTA meetings, GCF Board meetings or other important international 
conferences, where relevant international experts and donor representatives c onvene. A second annual meeting may 
be held in Bangladesh, if necessary, to follow up on results from the international meeting.
KfW Project Management
Project Management and supervision of compliance with K fW Guidelines, rules and procedures will be done by a 
designated KfW Project Manager at the South Asia Department (LEb4) in KfW  Headquarters in Frankfurt (Germany) , 
with support from the KfW Country Office, the unit responsible for supervision of procurement and contract ing(LEb5) 
and the Transaction Department at KfW for supervision and transaction of disbursements (TMa1) and revisi on of audit 
reports (TMa4) . The Project Manager will be supported by a Senior Civil Engineer, in charge of reviewing any technical


---
*Page 18*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14OF 52C
aspects in the course of the projectand twoSector Specialist sin KfW Dhaka Office who will provide technical advice 
and support in monitoring the implementation of the project . The Project Manager will liaise intern ally with the KfW 
Competence Center for Environment and Climate (LGc3) to ensure intra -institu tional learning, knowledge management 
and coherence. For more details on supervision, see the respective sections F.4 (Financial Management and 
Procurement) and H.2 (Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation). All fiduciary standa rds agreed on between GCF and KfW  
apply.
Contract ual Arrangements
A Financing Agreement between KfW and the Government of Bangladesh, represented by the Ministry of Finance, 
Economic Relations Division (ERD) will be signed to regulate core roles and responsibilities of the parties. A second 
Financing Agreement will be signed between KfW  and ERD for the bilateral parallel co -financing. Both agreements will 
refer to e ach other to ensure consistency and refer to the same Proj ect Agreement (Separate Agreement) that will be 
signed between KfW  and LGED. The Project Agreement willspecify the detailed implement ation arrangements 
regarding the Project Logical Framework of the overall proj ect with outcomes, indicators and activities, project 
implementation structure, budgets, rights and obligations of KfW  and LGED regarding the project cycle, procurement 
procedure s, disbursement procedures and reporting requirements , among others . The same PMO will be used for 
managing both, GCF funding and the bilateral co -financing .


---
*Page 19*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRA MME DESCRIPT ION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15OF 52C
C.8.Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below is used, p lease refer to the act ivities as numbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed.
TASKQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20 Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24
1. CReLIC established 
and operationalX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
1.1 Establish 
knowledge 
managem ent systemX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
1.2 Develop and adapt 
Guidelines, Standards 
and ProceduresX X X X X X X X X X
1.3 Provide 
Communication, 
Consultation and 
TrainingX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
1.4 Initiate permanent
institutional structureX X X X X X X X X X
2. Pilot rural 
infrastructure built, 
rehabilitated or 
improvedX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
2.1.1Build 45 new 
cyclone sheltersX X X X X X X X X X X X X X
2.1.2 Rehabilitate 20 
existing cyclone 
sheltersX X X X X X X X X X
2.2Improve 80 km  of 
critical road 
connectivityX X X X X X X X X X
3. Pilot urban 
infrastructure built, 
rehabilitated or 
improvedX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
3.1 Build high priority 
urban infrastructureX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
4. Project 
ManagementX X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
* Independent impact evaluation two to three years after the closing of the project , according to procedure in section H.2 .


---
*Page 20*
---

RATI ONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEM ENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16OF 52D
D.1.Value Added for GCF Involvement
The GCF provides a stage , where project results become highly visible internationally. This international attention 
enables high -level commitment sby governments that arenecessary for the success of far -reaching paradigm shifts . 
As the GCF is expected to become the new internation al benchmark in the world of Climate Finance, a GCF -
supported mainstreaming project is more likely to exert the necessary convening power than a proj ect only supported 
by an individual donor or even a multitude of donors. We do expect that the GCF support will enable the leveraging of 
even more additional cofinancing for the proj ect than currently planned. The chance for national institutions to gain
direct access to the GCF will be significantly enhanced if they get the opportunity to prepare themselves by executing 
GCF funds through the international track and undergoing an institutional reform under the guidance and supervision 
of the GCF.
As the project components are closely interlinked and interdependent, this project would not take place without 
involvement o f the GCF . The intended structural change would not occur and the significant infrastructure coverage 
gap in the three coastal districts would remain.
This project is fundamentally different to any investment project implemented so far in Banglad esh, as it subordinates 
investment measures to institutional development and mainstreaming. The approach and the rationale for selecting 
measures, locations and sectors is (o ther than in standard investment proj ects) institutional, not geographical or 
sectoral. The approach itself therefore consti tutes as well a paradigm shift .
D.2. Exit Strategy
As the CReLIC is designed to become an integrated part of the LGED organizational structure, the GoB commits to 
ensuring the long -term financing of th e CReLIC by regular budget funds after the end of the proj ect. The Local 
Government Division (LGD) ,the line ministry of LGED ,hascommitted firmly to provide the operational fund sto run 
CReLIC after the  project ends (see GoB cofinancing commitment letter with the explic it long term committment ).This 
is an extraordinary demonstration of country ownership and the appropriate exit for KfW /GCF.
Being among the national agencies that receive most external funds in Bangladesh, LGED is increasingly required to 
integrate climate change in its projects. By opting now for an institutional mainstreaming , LGED prepares itself 
systematically for becoming a prime recipient of international climate finance in Bangladesh in the future .
Maintenance of pilot infrastructures fall under the different responsibilities of the relevant national or local government 
agencies. Shelters are usually used as primary schools and thus fall under the responsibilit y of the Ministry of Primar y 
and Mass Education after hand -over from LGED . Shelters under this proj ect are built with the consent of the Ministry 
of Primary and Mass Education. The lo cal Scho ol Management Committees (SMC), composed by different local 
stakeholders and headed by the principal of the school, take care of day -to-day management and maintenance. In 
several cases, cooperation with non -governmental organizations exist son local level .These synergies will be further 
explored under the proj ect where applicable. Maintenance of roads fall under the maintenance responsibility of LGED 
and responsible local authorities, like Union Parishads, Upazila Parishads or (in case of an urban context) the 
Pourashava administration. Regular block allocation provided by the Government to LGED for maintenance of 
infrastructure willbe used for maintaining facilities. Executive Engineers and Upazil a Engineers of LGED at District 
and Upazila level will implement the maintenance activities with their technical staff. No recurring expenditure for 
manpower and equipment on local level will be required.
Procedural and technical innovations in infrastructure maintenance developed by the CReLIC shall be rolled out 
successively to all LGED infrastructures .


---
*Page 21*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17OF 52E
In this section , the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance 
of the proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -spec ific sub -criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality  made in section B.2 .
E.1.Impact P otential
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas
E.1.1.Mitigation / adaptation impact potential
The project will have a significant climate change adaptation impact, both direct lyand locally through the pro vision of 
pilot infrastructure and indirect lyand structural lythrough the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into LGED 
operations by CReLIC , thus contributing to the Fund level impacts 
-Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions 
(Adaptation 1.0)
-Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change threats (Adaptation 3.0)
-Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision -making (Adaptation 5.0)
Through a systematic mainstreaming approach for climate change adaptation into infrastructure planning, 
implementation and maintenance, t he project avoids the lock -in of long -lived climate -vulnerable infrastructure to a 
significant degree. LGED’s main mandate is the provision of long -lived infrastructure in Bangladesh , like roads, 
drainages or cyclone shelters, which currently is mainly not built to be climate proof . With an annual investment 
expenditure of more than 1 billion US$ , LGED is responsible for more than 10 percent of all public investments in 
Bangladesh. The full-scale impact of climate proofing on the LGED portfolio will not be realized immediately  after the 
end of the pr oject , but will evolve gradually with the institutionalization and roll -out of CReLIC services after the end 
of the project.
E.1.2.Key impact potential indicator
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.
GCF 
core 
indicatorsExpected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO 2 eq) to be reduced or a voided (Mitigation 
only)Annualn.a.
Lifetimen.a.
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population (adaptation only)TotalDirect: 134,350people
Indirect: 10.4million people
Percentage 
(%)Direct: 0.1 per cent
Indirect: 6.8per cent
Other 
relevant 
indicatorsPercentage of LGED infrastructure more resilient to climate variability and change : 10% (refers to all 
annual LGED operations at the end of the project; long -term expectation is full mainstreaming that 
covers 100 percent of all LGED operations)


---
*Page 22*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18OF 52E
Direct Beneficiaries under component 2 are those that are provided all -year access to shelters , measured by the 
increased capacit y of new cy clone shelters and the reinstated design capacity of rehabilitated shelters . The benefits 
are based on the following assumption (in line with methodology for the MDSP project, 2014):
-The 45 new shelters will each have the design capacity of 1 ,430 individuals (Total: 64,350 beneficiaries).
-The 20 existing shelters once rehabilitated will each be reinstated to their design capacity of 1,000 
individuals (Total : 20,000 beneficiaries).
A little more than half of the beneficiary  population in the districts is female (see Table 2) . Direct Beneficiaries under 
component 3 will be determined by the selection of specific urban infrastructure in Satkhira Municipalit y in an 
inclusive stakeholder consultation process, based on vulnerability and risk analyses at the start of the proj ect.It is 
here assumed that roughly one third of all 153,969 inhabitants of Satkhira Municipalit y(the urban center of the 
district) will benefit directly (50,000 people) .
Table 2: Population in pilot district, disaggregated by gender
District Male Population Female population Total population
Barguna 437,413 (48,9%) 455,368 (51,1%) 892,781 (100%)
Bhola 884,069 (49,7%) 892,726 (50,3%) 1,776,795 (100%)
Satkhira 982,777 (49,4%) 1,003,182 (50,6%) 1,985,959 (100%)
TOTAL (three districts) 2,304,259 (49,4%) 2,351,276 (50,6%) 4,655,535 (100%)
Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Census 2011
Indirect Beneficiaries are those that are reached by the systematic insti tutional climate proofing of all LGED 
infrastructure through CReLIC . LGED’s mandate is local infrastructure in mostly rural and small to mid -size urban 
areas. The CReLIC isa permanent institutional change, so it is assumed here that all people in LGED -attended 
areas of the country will be indirect beneficiaries of the proj ectin the mid to  long term . The total rural population of 
Bangladesh is used as a conservative proxy (small and mid -sized urban areas are not included) . According to World 
Development Indicators from 2015 , 104.9 million people live in rural Bangladesh .As the impact indicator of the 
project is to  make 10 percent o f new and rehabilitated LGED infrastructure more resilient, and it is not yet known 
where exactly this future infrastructure  is going to be  located in Bangladesh, we propose to apply the share of 
CReLIC coverage regarding LGED infrastructure also to the potential overall target population (10 percent of the total 
rural population in the country). Indicators are compared to the total population of Bangladesh of 156.6 million .The 
direct beneficiaries of the project account for 2.8 percent of the total population of the pilot districts.
Indicator values for direct beneficiaries are comparable to  those in similar projects. However, as CReLIC is a new 
and innovative approach, there is no comparison for indicator value s of indirect beneficiaries.
Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision -making is reflected in the indicator 
“Percentage of LGED infrastructure more resilient to climate variability and change” that accounts for 10% at the end 
of the project and reflects the share of infrastructure value in the overall LGED portfolio that draws on CReLIC
services in planning, supervision and maintenance of infrastructure directly  after the end of the project (see also 
H.1.1) .It is expected that this value increases to 100% in the long term.


---
*Page 23*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19OF 52E
E.2.Paradigm Shift P otential
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off proj ect/programme investment
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)
The permanent establishment CReLIC is an institutional paradigm shift for LGED : From ad -hoc proj ect-based
approaches towards a systematic integration of climate change adaptation into infrastructure planning ,
implementation and maintenance . Thus, s caling up will ta ke place inside the institution. A paradigm shift for LGED 
means automatically a paradigm shift for Bangladesh: LGED is one of the largest government depart ments with an 
allocation of more than 10% of the national Annual Development Budget of the Government of Bangl adesh and 
inside this budget, responsible for two thirds of allocations for rural development, in parts of the country where many 
vulnerable and poor people live. Currently, there are more than 100 development projects in the LGED pipeline, 
jointly funded by the Government of Bangladesh and different donors. The project thus has an impact oninvestments 
worth more than 1billion US $of local infrastructure in Bangladesh per annum by making climate resilience of 
infrastructure investments a decisive factor of the decision making and planning process. Scaling up and replication 
beyond LGED is not an objective of this project, but may occur in o ther national institutions, if the project is 
successful. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning
There is already a considerable amount of knowledge on climate resilient infrastru ctureinside LGED. Many proj ects 
supported by donors, like the W orld Bank, ADB, Germany, the United Kingdom , Denmark, the United States of 
Amer icaor the Netherlands have already  generated a considerable amount of learning and will continue to do so. 
The establ ishment of CReLIC allows LGED to insti tutionalize this learning and make it accessible outside the 
individual limited proj ect boundaries . Even more, it provides a platform for the exchange of knowledge with others 
outside LGED, like the Red Crescent Society / Red Cross in the case of cyclone shelters. Coupling the CReLIC
establishment with on -the-ground investment measures, as proposed by this proj ect, will ensure from the outset that 
this new knowledge hub i s not a theoretical and abstra ct exercise, but oriented to wards operations . High -level public 
events (such as Consultative Advisory Group meetings) will help to gather and disseminate knowledge broadly and 
to keep CReLIC high on the political agenda.
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
As described under E.2.1, this project is oriented towards creating an enabling environment for individual LGED 
investments by LGED itself, not for other private or public actors. However, the annual high -level Consultative 
Advisory Group (CAG) meetings shall be convened and conducted in such a way that they provide effective 
pathways for knowledge transfer to  actors in charge of broader policies in Bangladesh, for example the Planning 
Commissio n orthe Local Government Department (LGD). They  will be part of the annual conventions and thereby 
guide LGED and C ReLIC in the development of their products.
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies
The permanent establishment of CReLIC itself represents a  new government policy: The systematic mainstreaming 
of climate change adaptation into all infrastructure planning, implementation and maintenance under the mandate of 
LGED, one of the largest government departments (se e E.2.1). CReLIC will develop and upgrade relevant LGED 
guidelines and standards for climate -proof infrastructure.


---
*Page 24*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20OF 52E
E.3.Sustainable Development P otential
Wider benefits and priorities
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact
Through the establishment of CReLIC , high -qualified jobs will be created permanently at LGED. It is currently 
estimated that 10 -20 high qualified permanent jobs a recreated directly  through CReLIC . This number will be verified 
as soon as the decision over the permanent insti tutional structure and scope is taken by LGED during project 
implementation. These j obs are equally open for men and women.
Through the construction of pilot infrastructure, a number of short -term and seasonal employ ment opportunities
will be created in the construction industry, probably mostly locally and low -skilled, with important impacts on poverty 
reduction. Based on KfW  and LGED experience from past projects , construction works under the project will create 
an estimated 930,000 working days of direct employment for road construction (6,200 working day s per km) and an 
estimated 1,170,000 working days of direct employment for shelter construction (26,000 workin g days per new 
shelter), totaling 2.1 million working days . This is equivalent for 1, 750 full -time unskilled jobs locally for the full 
duration of the proj ect (6 years , if full -time is considered as 200 days per year ).
The construction of roads will provide significant additional economic benefits to the rural population in terms of 
all-year round access and decreased risk of interruption of traffic, reduced travel time and reduced transport costs. 
The most recent Midter m Survey Report of the Sustainable Rural Infrastructure  Improvement Proj ect (SRIIP), co -
financed by ADB and KfW  on behalf of BMZ, shows up to 28 percent average travel time reduction on project roads 
and up to 21 percent transport cost reduction forgoods . This can have important impacts on the local economic 
development. According to the report, even school attendance could be improved and dropout rates reduced due to 
improved rural roads.
The Cyclone Shelters built under this proj ect w ill be used as pri mary schools in normal times and, thus, have 
important educational benefits . As 45 shelters will be built under the proj ect, the project will provide 45 additional 
primar y schools and improve conditions in 20 more schools .Thiswill help educate a n estimated 18,590 children in 
the three districts , where literacy rates are comparatively low and in Bhola (43.2 percent) and Satkhira (52.1 percent) 
even below national average (BBS 2011). According to government statistics (Department of Primary Education
2013 and 2014) public primary schools have an average of 286 students. Most teachers in primary schools are 
female (64%).
All the mentioned job, economic and educational benefits will provide an important contribution to povert y 
reduction , as the infrastructure is intentionally targeted at some of the poorest districts in Bangladesh, and in these 
districts, to some of the poorest, most vulnerable and most remote areas .
The project will as well have important gender benefits : Although reli able data is scarce on gender -specific 
vulnerabilities to natural disasters in coastal Bangladesh, available studies indicate that women suffer more f rom 
natural disasters than men. According to a UNEP survey, in the devastating 1991 cyclone, the death toll among 
women aged 20 -44 was 71 per 1,000, compared to 15 per 1,000 for men. Being usually responsible for the 
homestead, women tend to wait for their relatives at home to return, before they evacuate to a safe place. Pregnant 
women and lactating mothers find it often  difficult to move, particularly when the cyclone warning reaches them late. 
They are also often reluctant to leave, in cases where cyclon e shelters are not designed gender -friendly (e.g. 
separate toilets and rooms for women) and they have to share rooms with men they don’t know. The project will 
promote community -based disaster management groups that have an equal number of women representa tives and 
are responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the Multi purpose Cyclone Shelters. The design of the


---
*Page 25*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21OF 52E
Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters will be gender friendly (see F.2) and the project will ensure a significant participation 
of local women in plann ing out the design features, location etc in a participatory manner. In the above mentioned 
employment opportunities, women will be employed with equal pay for equal work. School enrolment ra tes in primary 
schools in the coastal region show 51 percent (gir ls) / 49 percent (boys) gender balance, which means that both 
sexes benefit on average largely equally from new Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters used as schools.
LGED operations will also have minor climate change mitigation benefits , particularly through the stabilization of 
road sides by the plantation of trees. In Bangladesh, alongside rural roads , trees are planted on average every two 
meters on both sides o f the road, except for those areas where bridges, culverts, houses, existi ng trees etc. impede 
the plantation. From past project experience, we estimate that alongside roughly 60 percent of the road length trees 
will be planted, i.e. on a total length of 48 km. This means the plantation of a n estimated total of 48,000 trees during 
the proj ect. The specific sp ecies depend on local conditions and availability.
E.4.Needs of the R ecipient
Vulnerabilit y and financing needs of the ben eficiary country and population
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)
Bangladesh is considered one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate risks (Verisk Maplecroft 2014). 
Located in one of the world’s largest tropical river deltas with largely low -lying topography, the country has always 
been exposed to  natural calamities, like floods, droughts and cyclones. Over the past ten years, natural disasters 
have caused imp ortant economic losses o f an estimated annual average of 1 percent o f GDP ( World Bank 2010) and 
a significant loss of life. A warmer and wetter climate is expected to exacerbate these adverse impacts. According to 
median predictions of General Circulation Models (GCM), Bangladesh will be 1.5°C warmer and 4 percent wetter by 
2050 (see W orld Bank 2010) , however with stronger seasonal variations. Precipitation is expected to increase by up 
to 20 percen t during the  monsoon months July to September that would le ad to up to 18 percent higher discharges in 
the rivers during these months and higher associated flood levels. Severe cyclones are  expected to  occur more 
frequently, exacerbated by a potential sea level rise of over 27 cm by 2050 ( World Bank 2010). In addi tion to that, the 
delta area is subj ect to land subsidence that aggravates the impacts of sea level rise. The coastal region where the 
pilot region of this project is located is considered by  the far the most vulnerable part of the country to climate 
chang e.
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs
Bangladesh is part of the group of Le ast Developed Countries (LDCs), but has experienced impressive development 
in the past years. Poverty rates have declined from 48.9 percent in 2000 to  31.5 percent in 2010 (using the n ational 
poverty line) and from 58.6  percent in 2000 to 43.3 percent in 2013 (using the W orld Bank 1.25 US$/day poverty 
line). Life expectancy has risen from 65 to 71 years. Three out of every four children complete primary scho ol. On 1st
July 2015, the W orld Bank announced that Bangladesh would graduate from “lower -income” country to “lower -
middle -income” country , as the G NI per capita of an estimated 1, 080 US$ in 2014 for the first time moved above the 
1,046 US$ W orld Bank threshold of lower -middle-income countries . Although these numbers are still preliminary and 
they do not change Bangladesh’s LDC-status, they show that the country is on a very promising development path .
This promising path is a t risk from the impacts of climate change. Investment needs are huge. In 2010, the World 
Bank estimated additional investment costs for adapting some selected infrastructure to additional risks from climate 
change to account for more than 4.7billion US$ (see Table 3). Real adaptation costs are likely to be considerably 
higher, as t his number does not include the baseline investment needs to adapt to existing risks, is only  fixed on few 
infrastructure types ,and takes only into consideration risks caused by  tropical c yclones and inland flooding (not 
counting e.g. sea level rise or drought). These investment need s shown in Table 3are incremental , so they are not 
necessarily reflected in existing development planning.
Needs are most dire particularly in the pilot regions of the proposed proj ect. W ith poverty rates between 32.1 percent


---
*Page 26*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22OF 52E
(Satkhira in Khulna Division) and 39.4 percent (Barguna and Bhola in Barisal Division), they are above the national 
average of 31.5  perce nt and b elong to the disadvantaged parts of the country, only topped by the Northern Division 
of Rangpur (see Table 4). 
Table 3: Incremental investment costs for selected infrastructure due to climate change in Bangladesh
Infrastructure Investment costs Annual recurrent costs
Roads 2,127 million US$ 42 million US$
Embankments and Polders 1,410 million US$ 28 million US$
Cyclone Shelters 1,219 million US$ 24 million US$
Source: World Bank 2010 : Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change -Bangladesh ; only tropical cyclones and inland flooding
Table 4: Distribution of Poverty in Bangladesh by Divisions
Division Poverty (percent 
of population)
Rangpur 42.3
Barisal 39.4
Khulna 32.1
Dhaka 30.5
Rajshahi 29.7
Sylhet 28.1
Chittagong 26.2
NATIONA L 31.5
Source: Sixth Five Y ear Plan; National Poverty Line
Table 5: Estimate for needs of new shelters in the 14 coastal districts of Bangladesh
DistrictNeed for Priority  1 
SheltersCovered by  
OthersUncovered
Bagerhat 50 31 19
Barguna 106 45 61
Barisal 112 93 19
Bhola 268 223 45
Chittagong 160 133 27
Cox's Bazar 102 85 17
Feni 30 25 5
Jhalkati 33 27 6
Khulna 47 37 10
Lakshmipur 54 46 8
Noakhali 66 56 10
Patuakhali 160 132 28
Pirojpur 115 95 20
Satkhira 94 43 51
TOTA L 1.397 1.071 326
Source: World Bank, PAD M DSP, Nov. 2014


---
*Page 27*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23OF 52E
The three pilot regions Barguna, Bhola and Satkhira were selected, among others, because the need for additional 
new high priorit y cyclone shelters is most severe there (see Table 5). This is where the direct impacts of pilot 
infrastructure will be most prominent. The urban pilot (component 3), Satkhira, was selected in a  joint process 
between Germany and Bangladesh, based on vulnerability criteria, and agreed on in the intergovernme ntal 
negotiations between the two countries in 2014. Satkhira is among Bangladesh’s most vulnerable urban centers 
above 100,000 inhabitants.
While LGED has proven to be an experienced and able implementer with high operational capacities, the technical 
capacities regarding climat e change adaptation are limited. There is a considerable need for institutional 
strengthening if climate change adaptation is to be mainstreamed into infrastructure planning, implementation and 
maintenance beyond individual project s.
E.5.Country  Ownership
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme
E.5.1. Existence of a na tional climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs
Due to i ts high natural vulnerabilities to climate related hazards, there is in general a high political awareness in 
Bangladesh for natural disaster risk management and, in the past decade, climate change adaptation . Bangladesh 
has become more resilient over the past twenty years by investing heavily in disast er risk reducing infrastructure and
early warning systems. Nevertheless, the  threat of climate change will challenge the country’s preparedness on a 
new level beyond historically observed trends. 
The Government’s political vision is specified in its political manifesto “Vision 2021 ”from 2008 that aims to transform 
Bangladesh from a low income economy to the first stages of a middle -income nation by the year 2021 , the 50th
anniversary of independence of the country . Vision 2021 was later translated into the Perspective Plan of 
Bangladesh 2010 -2021 that identifies nine strategic priorities, of which priority number seven “mitigating the impacts 
of climate change” is the fund amental strategic umbrella for national climate policy.
An important policy milestone was the adoption of the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy  and A ction Plan 
(BCCS AP)in 2009 to guide nationwide climate change adaptation and to put the nation’s improved capacity for 
disaster risk management on a path towards increased resilience to  climate change. It is the main national climate 
policy document. The BCCSAP sets out 44 programmes under six strategic pillars. This project directly contributes to 
13 programmes under four strategic BCCSAP pillars. The BCCSAP builds on the  National Adaptation Programme 
of Action (NAPA) , that was prepared by the Government in 2005 as response to a decision by the Seventh 
Conference of the Parties (COP -7) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 
The Five Year Plans are th ecore national planning documents that specify  actions to  be implemented by the 
different sectoral ministries in a five y ear timeframe in the form of Annual Development Programmes. The Five Year 
Plans also determine the allocation of financial resources to nationwide investments across all sectors. The annual 
budget allocated to LGED for infrastructure is also included in these plans. Theupcoming Seventh Five Year Plan 
(2016 /2017-2020 /2021 )is still under preparation, but the existing background studies on Climate Change and 
Disaster Management confirm the huge unmet demand for climate resilient infrastructure in the country, parti cularly 
cyclone shelters and urban drainage. Thus, it can be expected that there will be significant allocations of funds for 
infrastructure development under LGED mandate that CReLIC will be releva nt for.
Apart from the mentioned core strategies and policies, the project will contribute to the priority area “Safety from 
man-made and natural hazards” of the Coastal Dev elopment Strategy from 2006 and is covered by the Standing 
Orders on Disaster from 1997 and 2010, that determine the use of geographical information system (GIS)


---
*Page 28*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24OF 52E
technology for the planning of cyclone shelters and contain broad guidelines for construction, management, 
maintenance and use of Cyclone Shelters.
The high contribution of co -financing that the Government of Bangladesh has committed to this proj ect and the 
commitment topermanent institutional change un derline the extraordinar ynational ownership that the country has 
for this project.
E.5.2. Ca pacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver
As described under C.4, KfW is one of the world’ s largest development banks specialized, among others, in Climate 
and Environment alFinance which in 2014 accounted for more than 35% of KfW ’soverall funding commitments (26.6 
billion EUR). In Bangladesh, KfW and LGED have been cooperating since 1988, in 12 development projects (bilateral 
German funding over EUR 122.7 million, all grant) and maintain a successful and professional relationship o f mutual 
trust. Regarding the implementation of pilot infrastructure, KfW has financed the construction and rehabilitation of 
around 450 multipurpose cy clone shelters and more than 1, 800 km of rural roads in Bangladesh since 1991, the vast 
majority of them built by LGED. Kf W has also supported the construction of Cyclone Shelters in India and has 
conducted impact evaluations on the Bangladeshi cyclone shelter projects. KfW has a country office in the capital 
city, Dhaka, with international and local technic al sta ff.
KfW’s own “ Climate Change Centre ” is the so -called “Competence Centre Environment and Climate”, established in 
2009, a unit o f currently 19 specialists in charge of mainstreaming Climate Change into operations of Kf W 
Development Bank. This unit, among others, was responsible for coordinating KfW ’s accreditation to the GCF and for 
conducting the GCF readiness programme for developing countries. They have developed internal guidelines and 
standards for planning, implementation and monitor ing of climate change projects that are applied today all over the 
KfW funding portfolio. Its head of division, Dr. Jochen Harnisch was Coordinating Lead Author of the IPCC Fifth 
Assessment Report, W orking Group III. KfW will be able to provide first -hand experience to LGED on insti tutional 
mainstreaming of climate change, as it has gone through the same process over the past six years.
The Executing Agency, the Local Gov ernment Engineering Department (LGED) has the legal mandate to provide 
local level rural and urban physical infrastructures and a proven track record to deliver on these investments. As 
mentioned under C.4, i t is the major public agency  responsible for the provision of local public infrastructure in rural 
areas and small to medium -sized towns in Bangladesh. W ith an annual allocation of more than 1 billion US$ (FY 
2014 -2015, see  Table 6), LGED is responsible for more than 10% o f all public investment expenditures in 
Bangladesh. Its largely decentral ized manpower of over 10,000 employees ensures effective presence on local level 
all over the country. LGED has a long standing working relationship with all major donors, including the In ternational 
Development Association (IDA), Asian Development Bank (A DB), Japan (JICA) and Germany (KfW  and GIZ).
Table 6: LGED’ s annual allocation in the National Development Budget (Annual Development Programme , ADP )
Financial Y ear Total National ADP LGED’s allocation ADP LGED share of ADP
2011 -2012 5.37 billion US$ 568.7 million US$ 10.6 percent
2012 -2013 6.85 billion US$ 750.1 million US$ 11.0 percent
2013 -2014 7.84 billion US$ 798.3 million US$ 10.2 percent
2014 -2015 9.80 billion US$ 1,041.5million US$ 10.6 percent
Average (2011 -2015) 10.6 percent
Source: LGED ;Exchange rate: 1 US$ = 76.5 BDT
It is the nature of innovation and paradigm shift to embark on new unchartered territory. Setting up a Climate Center 
inside a major public infrastructure provider has never been done before in Bangladesh, so a lot about the proposed 
project w ill also be new to both, KfW  and LGED. This is the reason why a step -by-step and iterative approach is


---
*Page 29*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25OF 52E
proposed for the proj ect and a comprehensive institutional assessment and development process is going to flank 
the components of the project. This is also the reason why the Consultative Advisory Group (CAG) is proposed and 
shall perform a decisive, inter active role for the project.
E.5.3. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders
The project concept was developed jointly between LGED and KfW , on LGED side with close guidance and 
supervision of top  management. The Proj ect Management of the Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Proj ect (MDSP) was 
directly involved in the project preparation to maximize synergies and ensure complementarities.
The project concept note  was officially discussed at a meeting of the Ministry of Finance, the Planning Commission 
and the accredited implementing agencies in Bangladesh (ADB, UNDP and KfW ), convened by the NDA on 23 April 
2015. KfW submitted the proj ect c oncept note for this proposal to the GCF Secretariat on 17 May 2015. The GCF 
Secretariat sent i ts review toKfW on 22 June 2015 . Recommendations were discussed between KfW and GCF 
Secretariat on the same day in a teleconference . KfW made all efforts to takeGCF Secretariat comments up into the 
present funding proposal accordingly. An additional teleconference on the proj ect concept and GCF 
recommendations took place on 1 July 2015 between KfW , LGED, NDA and GCF Secretariat.
For the inclusion of bilateral p arallel co -financing from Germany under the umbrella of the CReLIC concept, several 
rounds of discussions were held with the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(BMZ) between 11 June 2015 and 28 July 2015. These discussions will continue, as the GCF -funded part and the 
bilaterally co -financed part will be set up under one proj ect.
NDA convened a stakeholder meeting on the proposal with relevant Sector Ministries (Ministry of Finance, Ministry  of
Planning, Ministry of Environment and Forests and Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and 
Cooperatives) a nd their respective departments on 14 July 2015 , where KfW  and LGED presented the proposal and 
gathered feedback . A large consultation mee ting was held on 29July 2015 with a broad range of stakeholders 
invited from local authorities (from the three pilot districts Bhola, Barguna and Satkhira), civil society, ac ademia and 
the donor community .
During all this time from the outset in March 2015 until the submission of the funding proposal s everal informal, 
bilateral talks have  been conducted by KfW  and LGED with different stakeholders, particularly donors active in 
Bangladesh (such as DfID and DANIDA), civil society  (e.g. the Red Cross / Red Crescent Society in Bangladesh) 
and renowned climate change experts from Bangladesh , some of which are affiliated to institutes mentioned under 
C.5 and have participated as authors in past IPCC Assessment Reports . The project proposal itself was born out of 
these informal bilateral discussions ,and KfW  and LGED would like to thank the involved experts deeply for th eir 
ideas and contributions.
As consultation, communication and outreach is an integral part of this project proposal, the described consultations 
are only the beginning of a continuous stakeholder consultation process that will culminate each year in the annual 
meetings of the Consultative Advisory Group (CAG). With the permanen t establishment of the CAG, the pro ject 
directly contributes to strengthening the insti tutional consultation process on climate change issues in Bangladesh.


---
*Page 30*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26OF 52E
E.6.Efficiency  and E ffectiveness
Economic and, if appropriat e, financial soundness of the project/programme
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency
As also mentioned under F.1, the economic cost -benefit relationship of this project cannot be quantified without 
facing the e thical dilemma of monetarizing the value of human life. This is why –in line with KfW rules and 
procedures and international best practice –a quantified cost -benefit analysis was considered not ap plicable for this 
project, as i t would lead a) to an arbitrary and b) ethical problematic recommendation for the investment decision to 
the GCF Board (as the investment decision would be based on the “price tag” atta ched to a human life).
Our assessment wh y we consider this proj ect still economically viable concerning its GCF -financed infrastructure 
components is based on the strong scientific evidence (see IPCC 2014: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerabilit y. Summaries, Frequently Asked Qu estions, and Cross -Chapter Boxes. A contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, p.150) and the  excellent 
track record in independent evaluations (see Annex 2/09 and a most recent evaluat ion on multipurpose cyclone 
shelters in India (not yet published)) concerning the extraordinary relevance and impact of multipurpose cy clone 
shelters in effectively saving human lives. For poor people living in the highly vulnerable rural coastal areas of 
Bangladesh, particularly on islands like the pilot district Bhola, there is simply no cost -effective alternative for 
protecting their lives in case of disaster. As described under E.3.1, the pilot infrastructures also render considerable 
co-benefits. They strengthen the decision for investment, once i t is taken.
The institutional development part of the project is considered viable in the long run, as the Government of 
Bangladesh (GoB) has already  formally committed to operate the permanent structure o f CReLIC within LGED in the  
long-run (see co -financing letter). The Government of Bangladesh has committed to contribute an extraordinar y 31.3 
percent of the overall budget to this project , which is also a sign of the necessary political backing for insti tutional 
sustainability . 
Grant financing is the economically and financially appropriate way of financing this project. This is an innovative 
pilot endeavor in a Least Developed Country (LDC) targeting some of the most vulnerable regions and populations in 
the whole country . The focus of the project is the development of institutional capacities with no immediate economic 
return. Pilot infrastructure components will include a higher level of additional monitoring and supervision through 
consultants and CReLIC for knowledge generation than standard infrastructure . Shelters and roads are built primarily 
for humanitarian purposes (saving human lives). Although the pilot infrastructures render considerable co -benefits 
(see E.3.1), their economic profitability cann ot be assessed without facing the ethical dilemma of monetarizing the 
value of human life (see above) . Projects of this type are traditionally financed through grants by KfW  on behalf of the 
German Federal Government in bilateral development cooperation. KfW’s own co -financing of USD 15 m illion from 
BMZis also provided as a grant to the Government of Bangladesh for this reason .
An assessment of the proj ect through the application of the incremental cost approach is methodologically not 
appropriate. The definition of incremental costs as used by the GEF (see  Global Environment Facility Evaluation 
Office (2007): Evaluation of Incremental Cost Assessment; UNFCCC (2006): UNFCCC Handbook) builds on the 
differentiation between local benefits of a proj ect a nd global environmental benefits. This logic is by nature not 
applicable to adaptation activities. Since CRIM aims at mainstreaming climate change adaptation into decision -
making regarding infrastructure planning, supervision and maintenance in Bangladesh, the project (with all its 
components) is by definition addressing only adaptation to climate change. The pilot investment components 2 and 3 
are an integral part o f the ultimate climate change adaptation mainstreaming under the project.
The cost estimate sof this proj ect may appear to  be high for this project at first glance, particularly compared to 
standard investment projects generally funded by  multilateral and bilateral development banks (including KfW )–to 
which the proposed proj ect is not comparable for its fundamentally different setup . However, higher costs are the 
necessary price for an intended a) higher quality of th e infrastructure, b) better sustainability, c) additional benefits


---
*Page 31*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27OF 52E
regarding inno vation and institutional leverage and d) targeting of some of the most vulnerable populations and 
regions of the country , with difficult access and therefore higher construction costs. A detailed justification of cost 
estimates is included in section F.1. In any case, Kf W procurement guidelines apply. This ensures that all contracts 
under all CRIM components are  awarded in competitive bidding procedures covered by the guidelines at market 
prices, independently of the cost estimates provided in this funding proposal. This ensures maximum cost efficiency. 
As all activities under the project are within a public mandate, there will be no crowding out of private investment. 
Although there is a  lot of public investment by other donors and by the Government o f Bangladesh (GoB) provided to 
climate resilient infrastructure, the needs of the country are so large, that a crowding out of public investment is not
expected.
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term investments (mitigation only)
The co-financing ratio of this project is 1:1, all grants. For each Dollar provided by the GCF, one additional Dollar will 
be provided by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh (GoB) or the Government of the Federal 
Republic of Germany. The GoB co -financing will be provided directly through LGED, both  in kind and in cash, the 
German bilateral co -financing will be provided in cash through KfW  toLGED as parallel co -financing .
Although it is not an explicit objective of the proposed proj ect, it is expected that additional co -financing can be 
leveraged for C ReLIC to expand its scope, for example pilot infrastructure in water resources development schemes.
E.6.3. Financial viabilit y
The main benefit o f cyclone shelters and the roads that provide access to them is saving human liv es. Economic 
Analyse s for the construction of cyclone shelters have been conducted in the  past , but they  always face a  
fundamental ethical dilemma : The valuation of human lives. A  typical proxy that is often used in similar economic 
analyses is the Value of Statistical Life (VoSL) .Economic analyses for cyclone shelters conducted with this proxy 
show internal rates o f return (IRR) between 13 percent and 75 percent. We would not expect a fundamentally 
different IRR for the  proposed proj ect, if an economic analysis was made with the s ame assumptions and using the 
same variables. However, the ethical dilemma remains. After carefully pondering pros and cons, w e decided to
refrain from conducting a specific e conomic analys is for the cyclone shelter infrastructure due to this ethical dilem ma.
The institutional development part of the project is considered viable in the long run, as the Government of 
Bangladesh (GoB) will provide the funds necessary  for operating the permanent structure of CReLIC within LGED.
E.6.4. Application of best practices
During project preparation, n o benchmark or best practice could be identified for introducing a climate change unit 
into a major infrastructure provider. If similar cases are identified during project implementation in other countries, for 
examp le through platforms like the Consultative Advisory Group (CAG), the project will exchange lessons learnt with 
them and, if appropriate, establish interinstitutional partnerships of learning and exchange. It is expected that the 
CReLIC itself will become a best practice and an international reference. Due to the innovative character of this 
project, a step -by-step and iterative approach is proposed for the project and a comprehensive institutional 
assessment and development process is going to flan k the components of the project .
As it is part of the objective of component 1, CReLIC itself will identif y and systematically apply best practices related 
to climate change adaptation in the LGED investment p ortfolio. Regarding pilot infrastructure, the most i mportant 
innovations regarding cyclone shelters were triggered in the past years by the Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery 
and Restoration Project (ECRRP), particularly regarding gender -friendly shelter designs (with separate wash -rooms 
and sometimes even sep arate floors for men and women), the inclusion of shelter for livestock and facilities like


---
*Page 32*
---

EXPECT ED PERFORM ANCE A GAINST  INVESTMENT  CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28OF 52E
water supply and storage systems. Pilot infrastructure under the project will build on these.
Quality control remain sa challenge particularly in remote areas. The new Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Project 
(MDSP) has proposed technological innovations like steel frames for a couple of pilot buildings to reduce the  need of 
close supervision . If positive lessons learnt fro m MDSP are already available at the beginning of the project they shall 
be taken into account. In addition to that, the project assigns increased funds for construction supervision to ensure 
appropriate qualit y control. Local communities and stakeholders m ay be involved in simple supervision tasks.
During stakeholder consultations for this project it became clear that innovation is needed particularly in social and 
institutional terms, for example at the link with early warning systems and regarding mainte nance. The early warning 
systems depend critically on community volunteers and their continued commitment . The proj ect w ill provide 
measures to increase social recognition of these volunteers and their capacity. The lack of maintenance has complex 
social, institutional and financial dimensions, and is often site -specific. The project will conduct a more 
comprehensive assessment in this area , including an assessment regarding the introduction of long -term financing 
mechanisms, like endowment or sinking funds for the pilot structures, although experiences with specific financial 
measures like community funds are so far mixed. P arts of CReLIC’s innovation development and local soft measures 
for component 2 will be focused on the issue of maintenance .
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators
GCF 
core 
indicatorsEstimated cost per t CO 2eq, defined as to tal investment cost / expected lif etime emission reductions 
(mitigation only)
Not applicable, as only  mitigation
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the  
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only)
Not applicable, as only  mitigation
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co -benefit 
generated as a result of the proj ect/programme)Number of temporary and permanent jobs created by 
the project
Reduction of travel time and transport costs on 
project -financed roads
Number of children enrolled in project -financed 
primary schools (multipur pose cyclone shelters)


---
*Page 33*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29OF 52F
F.1.Economic and Financial Analy sis
Economic and Financial Anal yis:
As mentioned under E.6.1, the economic profitability of this project cannot be quantified without facing the ethical 
dilemma of monetarizing the value of human life. This i s why –in line with KfW  rules and procedures and international 
best practice –a quantified cost -benefit analysis was considered not applicable for this project, as it would lead a) to 
an arbitrary and b) ethical problematic recommendation for theinvestment decision to the GCF Board (as the 
investment decision would be based on the “price tag” attached to a human life).
Our assessment why  we consider this project still economically viable concerning its GCF -financed infrastructure 
components is based on the strong scientific evidence (see IPCC 2014: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adap tation 
and Vulnerability. Summaries, Frequently Asked Questions, and Cross -Chapter Boxes. A contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the In tergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, p.150) and the excellent 
track record  in independe nt evaluations (see Annex 2/09 and a most recent evaluation on multipurpose cyclone 
shelters in India (not y et published) ) concerning the extraordinary relevance and impact of multipurpose cyclone 
shelters in effectively saving human lives .For poor people living in the highly vulnerable rural coastal areas o f 
Bangladesh, particularly on islands like the pilot district Bhola, there is simply no cost -effective alternative for 
protecting their lives in case of disaster. As described under E.3.1, t he pilot inf rastructures also render considerable 
co-benefits. They strengthen the decision for investment, once it is taken.
The institutional development part of the proj ect is considered viable in the long run, as the Government of 
Bangladesh (GoB) has already formally committed to ope rating the permanent structure of CReLIC within LGED in 
the long -run (see co -financing letter) .A further indicator of the economic and financial viability is the extraordinary 
commitment of the Governmen t of Bangladesh to contribu te31.3 percent of the o verall budget to this project.
Background on cost estimates
As described under E.6.1, the cost estimates of this proj ect may  appear to  be high for this project at first glance,
particularly compared to standard investment projects generally funded by  multilateral and bilateral development 
banks (including KfW ). However, higher costs are the necessary price for an intended a) higher quality of the 
infrastructure, b) better sustai nabilit y, c) additional benefits regarding innovation and institutional leverage and d) 
targeting of some of the most vulnerable populations and regions of the country, with difficult access and therefore 
higher construction costs. 
In any case, K fW procur ement guidelines apply. This ensures that all contracts under all CRIM components are 
awarded in competitive bidding procedures covered by the guidelines at market p rices, independently of the cost 
estimates provided in this funding proposal. This ensures maximum cost efficiency. 
Costs ofComponent 1:
A large part of the higher costs is due to the iterati ve institutional learning approach during the whole lifetime of 
the project opposed to a  one-off short -term consultancy approach that is usually conducted as TA component of large 
standard infrastructure projects. TA inputs are needed for a longer timeframe to b uild the intended institutio nal 
sustainabilit y. 
Cost estimates for component 1 carry a certain degree of uncertainty and may therefore appear to be high, 
particularly for sub-component 1.1 (“Establish knowledge management system”). This is due to tworeasons:
-Cost uncertainties are attributable to the innovative nature of the project.


---
*Page 34*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30OF 52F
-Cost comparisons to other projects are only of limited value, as there is no real benchmark .
There is very limited experience both nationally and internationally, concerning the cost of an institutional 
mainstreaming approach to infrastructure in an i terative process involving the direct piloting of innovations in a broad 
and varied infrastructure portfolio on the ground .This project type is the first of its kind in Bangladesh. It is the nature 
of real innovations that there are no real benchmarks. Due to these uncertainties, the project provides in component 
1.4 as the first deliverable of the component a  comprehensive institutional assessment (budgeted with 300,000 US$), 
among others, to sharpen the current indicative cost estimates (see Annex 7 /I, Indicative Detailed Cost Esti mate and 
see Annex 6, Timetable). We expect that after this assessment was conducted, a more specific and reliable cost 
estimate is generated.
The comparatively high expected GoB share of this component (37.5 percent of the component’s budget) is intended 
to buffer these uncertainties financially  for GCF funds (see Annex 7/III).
Costs of Sub -component 1.1 “Establish knowledge management system”
Sub-component 1.1.1 “Establish framework for external data acquisition” includes specialized organizational and IT 
consulting services, assessing the existing LGED non-IT and IT systems for planning, implementation and monitoring, 
exploring potential for interlinkages and gaps, and proposing options for optimizing the existing institutional and 
organizational setup. As this involves insti tutional high -level decisions within LGE D and external public and private 
data providers, this cannot be done sustainably only by a short term consultancy .We expect that a t least one long-
termorganizational development consultant with strong GIS knowledge will be needed to support the first ye ars of 
implementation and the negotiation of framework agreements with external partners , in addition to two national long -
term consultants and specialized short term inputs by IT consultants .We do expect that for some data (e .g. high 
resolution satellite images , water models ), LGED will have to pay for, and these costs need to  be covered by the 
project in the beginning. Th e overall estimate for this sub -component is 990,000 US$ (please see Annex 7, I for 
details).
Sub component 1.1.2 “Continuously capture lessons learnt” will consist primarily of an initial detailed baseline 
assessment of existing relevant lessons learnt regarding the use of existing LGED infrastructure and the realization of   
at least 30 long -term local-level user/stakeholder surveys of users of pilot infrastructures in component 2 and 3 over 
three to four years , during the irconstruction period and their first years of operations during the project period that will 
document also gender -related issues (e.g. such  as w omen’s experience in d isaster response and preparedness) . 
This sub -component is expected to consist largely of long-term national consultancy services plus several workshops 
and outreach on local level. The overall estimate is 440,000 US$ for this sub -component.
Sub component 1 .1.3“Continuously screen external research and best practice” is oriented towards sy stematically 
capturing lessons learnt from other countries and from scientific innovations in engineering and planning. A mid-to 
long-term Consult antwith strong linkage to international research isnecessary for the baseline input, but also for 
helping LGED to establish an institutional practice o f tapping this source of innovation by themselves. It will involve a 
large amount of continued internation al network building (e.g. through participation in 1 -2 conventions per year or 
external staff secondments , e.g. in the context of action researches proposed for sub -component 1 .1.6) and direct 
access to relevant scientific j ournals. The overall estimate is 330,000 US$ for this sub -component .
Sub-component 1.1.4 “Set up applications for knowledge provision” is the genuine “IT sub -component” of component 
1, as it covers the upgrade of existing IT systems and structures based on the recommendations of sub -component 
1.1.1. It is expected that this is done by a speci alized IT -firm and will include both necessary and additional software, 
hardware, upgrades and first years of maintenance and trouble -shooting. It has to be guided and supervised by a 
long-term international IT consultant. As the scope of this sub -componen t is going to depend decisively on sub -
component 1.1.1, it is difficult to provide a reliable cost estimate. Based on a rough initial assessment during project 
preparation, we expect 1,210,000 US$ to be sufficient for this sub -component.


---
*Page 35*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31OF 52F
Sub-component 1.1. 5“Conduct comprehensive climate impact assessments” will pull together information inputs from 
all previous sub -components to  conduct detailed assessments for at least 5 o f the most relevant LGED infrastructure 
types (such as cyclone shelters and urban in frastructure, that are  at the same time also among the most complex 
ones) and an estimated 15 additional ones for smaller infrastructure ty pes. The cost of conducting these assessments 
(almost entirely Consulting Costs) on the different infrastructure types is difficult to estimate , as they  depend on the 
complexit y of the infrastructure itself and the range of regional circumstances under which these assessments need 
to be field -tested (e.g. cyclone shelters only apply to a similar topographic and clima tic zone (the Coast) while roads 
cover the whole country) . As a rough reference, t he ADB Climate Change Fund budgeted an average cost of 250,000 
US$ to 400,000 US$ per Climate Risk and Vulner ability Assessment . We estimate a unit cost of 200,000 US$ for th e 
five in -depth assessments (as a lot of information will already be provided by the previous sub -components and the 
assessments are embedded in a broader learning framework ) and an aggregate 500,000 US$ for the remaining 15 
infrastructure types that shall be conducted in less detail. The overall cost of this compo
Sub-component 1.1.6 “Promote action researches for knowledge gaps” will target relevant knowledge gaps identified 
in the first four sub -components . It is hard to predict to what degree this will be necessary. W e estimate an average of 
three research projects in the context of partnership agreements with national or international research institutes over 
three and a half years (see Annex 6, Timetable) with an individual annual budget of roughly 100 ,000 US$ (see Annex 
7/I)that also includes the publication of results in national and/or international scientific journals.
Costs of Sub -component 1.2 “Develop and adapt guidelines, standards and procedures”
The development and adaptation of guidelines, standards (e.g. standard designs and standard materials) and 
procedures that translate the knowledge generated in Sub -component 1.1 into  institutional practice will include 
predominantly international long -term consulting services (at least two internation al full -time consultants for an  
estimated two and a half years (see Annex 6, Timetable) each, one senior organization development expert and one 
senior engineer ) and long -term national consulting services (a t least t hree national consultants with knowledge of 
Bangladeshi public regulatory systems and respective organizational development and engineering skills ). The 
material / design part will require several short -term inputs from architects, specialized engineers, urban planners and 
land use planners .
An additional budget is provided to “field -test” and e ffectively mainstream the guidelines/standard application in a total 
of 30 new and specific LGED investment and/or TA projects funded by other donors and/or the national budget, under 
preparation in the last years of the project. An estimated 30 “climate proof” Development Project Proposals (DPP) 
and Technical Project Proposals (TPP) will be provided . The DPPs/TPPs are the national equivalent to international 
appraisal reports/funding proposals, that nat ional Bangladeshi executing agencies have to submit to the Ministry of 
Planning to receive budgets (see also C.6 that describes the approval procedure for this project itself).
The total budget of this sub -component is an  estimate d 3,000,000 US$ (see Annex 7,I for details).
Cost of Sub -component 1.3 “Provide communication and training”
Most of the sub-component budget will be allocated to conduct internal trainings to  LGED operational sta ff in the pilot 
districts and at Headquarter level to disseminate CReLIC results and build capacities for use and application of the 
innovations. A detailed training plan will be developed at the end of the first year of the proj ect (see Annex 6) and will 
be continuously adapted and updated throughout the p roject as CReL IC delivers results. The training plan shall 
include trainings specifically for LGED staff of the CReLIC proj ect to build up their capacities as they will need to take  
over some activities from seconded staff and consultants after the project ends. As oper ations and maintenance has 
already been defined as one of the core bottleneck of pilot infrastructures during the project preparation phase, an


---
*Page 36*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32OF 52F
important part of the trainings shall target the stakeholders on local level in charge of maintaining pilot infr astructure 
constructed under components 2 and 3. The training plan shall include gender capacit y building interventions. We 
have budgeted a rough annual budget of almost 400,000 US$ for trainings that results in a total of an estimated 
1,590,000 US$ for trainings in total.
The Consultative Advisory Group (see C.7) is expected to be convened once a year (altogether six times) in a high -
level annual conference setting. Most of the associated costs are  for pro fessional event management at an 
international st andard and associated travel costs and logistics. The overall budget for the CAG is an estimated 
760,000 US$.
For communication and outreach a budget of 435,000 US$ is reserved for publication and dissemination of lessons 
learnt and best practices of CReLI C, mainly through digital means and a professional website in english and bangla 
language that is professionally positioned in search engines like Google, so that CReLIC can be found and tapped on 
the web by  potentially interested professionals worldwide, linked to the official LGED website.
In this sub -component, additional internal incentives in LGED shall be piloted to enhance intrinsic motivation by staff 
to participate in the development of innovations under CReLIC and to apply its products. One option is the 
establishment of an annual LGED Adaptation Award. It is difficult to estimate costs for this sub -component, but 
215,000 US$ are expected to be sufficient to  cover event management costs, convening of an indepen dent jury and 
prize of such an award over the life of the project, and potentially beyond.
Cost of Sub -component 1.4 “Initiate development of pe rmanent institutional structure”
This component consist of the above mentioned initial comprehensive institut ional assessment, its review after three 
years of project implementation and a one -year flexible contingency budget to smoothen the transition from the 
CReLIC project to the permanent institutional structure. It is particularly hard to tell at this stage w hich core 
bottlenecks will need this additional support after five  years of project implementation, but we expect that most of the 
budget will be needed for additional consultancy support during phase -out.An estimated total of 1 million US$ is 
budgeted for this component (see Annex 7/I for details).
Costs of Component 2:
The budget for component 2 , the rural pilot infrastructure is determined by the selection of three coastal districts to 
allow for sufficient geographical representativeness of pilot locations. W hile all three districts were qualified as highest 
priorit y districts (see F.2), B hola i s composed of a series of islands with difficult access, Barguna is to a large extent 
marshland on the mainland and Satkhira is a part of the delta region that is protected to a certain exten t by the 
mangrove forests of the Sundarbans. Together, the three districts provide an adequate sample for the different 
topographical and geographical conditions on the Bangladeshi coast. At the same time, they are sufficiently close to 
each other to enable cost -efficient monitoring. Satkhira was also picked to study th e rural -urban linkages between 
component 2 and component 3 of the proj ect. The quantity of pilot infrastructure under component 2 has to  be 
sufficient to allow for two phases of construction within the same project cycle. This is due to the stepwise approa ch 
of CReLIC establishment of component 1 and to ensure that an additional set o f lessons learnt can be included in the 
second construction cycle. Considering all these determinants, the total o f 65 shelters (45 new shelters and 20 for 
rehabilitation) was considered adequate for this purpose. Based on past proj ect experience, an average of 2.3 km of 
access road was estimated for each shelter (both new and rehabilitation). 
The estimate for the construction of a new multipurpose cyclone shelter is set at an average 500,000 US$. The cost 
of an individual unit depends on a series of different factors. Table 7 shows the unit costs of shelters tendered under


---
*Page 37*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33OF 52F
KfW financing in the past three years. Variation is considerable. Costs are usually determined decisively by local 
competition during tender, number of shelters tendered in one package (usually the bigger the package, the cheaper 
individual unit costs, however, with a couple of exceptions) and the site -specific costs (e.g. due to additional transport 
costs and lack of availability of skilled local labour). All the higher cost -packages in Table 7 include also addit ional 
costs for small “last mile” access tracks that are often needed on the compounds themselves to connect the shelters 
to the remaining road system , that are not included in estimates of other shelter p rojects.
Table 7: Individual shelter costs of tendered cyclone shelters under KfW financing in the past three years (only 
Patuakhali and Barguna districts)
Package 
IDAverage unit 
costs (US$)
1 467,446.37
2 599,078.92
3 548,830.08
4 379,896.29
5 655,377.96
6 503,770.69
7 578,811.22
8 661,069.07
9 457,338,46
10 386,977.04
11 266,459.21
12 365,437.57
13 392,772.07
14 406,160.37
Average 422,771.11
Source: KfW (please note that the average cost is different to the sum of all average unit costs divided by 14, as several units were ten dered jointly 
in packages)
We think, it is justified to  maintain the “last mile” access track as part of individual shelter packages, as they are often 
decisive for effective use and can most efficiently be dealt with by the contractor in charge of the main construction 
site. It is difficult to predict the individual necessary lengths of these tracks. This d ata will be available in the detailed 
design phase.
Additional costs (that are included in the estimates) are expected due to the choice of the pilot districts (see F.1).


---
*Page 38*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34OF 52F
CRIM si tes are onaverage expected to be more remote and difficult to construct with the same quality standards and 
to supervise than the avera ge shelters constructed by  other proj ects that cover the full length of the Bangladeshi 
coastline. The difficult but highly vulner able Bhola district is basically composed by islands. As one of the three CRIM 
pilot districts, Bhola is expected to account for 34 -45 percent of new shelters under CRIM. Bhola is arguably one of 
the most difficult districts to work, but needs are most dir e there and high impacts can be expected. This, however, 
has an impact on average cost estimates.
We also expect that innovations generated by CReLIC in design and material for the second batch tenders will impact 
on temporarily higher individual costs per unit for the second batch. As social outreach is often reported as key 
weakness of shelter construction, we have provided a separate small budget for strengthening stakeholder 
committees on site (please see Annex 7, for more deta ils).
Altogether we expect that the average comparably high unit cost estimate of 500,000 US$ is technically and 
financially justified on these grounds. We are convinced that this will be more than offset by high quality, sustainability 
and impact o f the infrastructure.
For shelter rehabilitation, it is extremely difficult to provide a reliable cost estimate prediction before detailed design. 
The variation is from a few hundred US$ (e.g. for painting and minor repairs) to more than 200,000 US$ per unit (e.g. 
for vertical extension o f an existing shelter and upgrading to a gender -friendly facility). Average costs in other shelter 
projects have been set at an estimated 80,000 US$. The same additional geographic challenges, additional “last mile” 
costs and uncertainties about cost impli cations of CReLIC innovations mentioned above for new shelters also apply 
to rehabilitation of shelters. As most eligible shelters under CReLIC are reportedly in a bad or very bad shape and 
were specifically picked for these reasons, we expect that an aver age 120,000 US$ per unit will be sufficient to reflect 
necessary average per unit costs and are j ustified economically and financially.
The road sub -component builds on the LGED standard rate of 130,000 US$ per kilometer of road. This standard rate 
is used in other infrastructure projects as well and is considered reasonable enough to cover specific CReLIC 
innovations expected for the second batch of infrastru cture tenders.
Contingencies for this component (5 percent for the rather complex shelters and 1 pe rcent for the less complex 
roads) are reasonable and common practice. They  should be sufficient to  cover price escalations or additional other 
types of unexpected cost increases.
Costs ofComponent 3:
The overall budget assigned for urban infrastructure in Satkhira is in line with budgets assigned to individual 
municipalities under other donor -funded LGED proj ects. Scoping visits to the municipality of Satkhira in 2014 and 
2015 have shown that the need for high priority climate resilient urban infrastructure is by far larger than available 
funds. As most of the LGED urban infrastructure is to a certain degree scalable (see section C.3, Table 1), there is no 
doubt that the assigned budget can be spent eff ectively and efficiently on high priority climate resilient urban 
infrastructure out of the LGED portfolio. The funds are covered by a commitment of the Federal Republic of Germany 
to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
The detailed infrastructure  package is currently being prepared with Satkhira Cit y Administration and LGED in line 
with this funding proposal to the GCF and will be specified in the respective Separate Agreement / Project Agreement 
with LGED/Satkhira City Administration. Final cost of measu res under Component 3 will also be determined through 
public procurement processes, ensuring best value for funds invested.


---
*Page 39*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35OF 52F
Costs ofComponent 4:
Direct Project Management Costs for CRIM are summarized under sub -component 4.1 and account for 4.5  million 
US$ (roughly 5.6 percent of overall costs) and are expected to be fully  borne by the Government of Bangladesh 
(GoB). 
The overall Project Management Costs for CRIM include Consulting Services for Design, Management and 
Supervision (DMS) and Institutional Su pport (ID). These consulting services account for 9.3 percent of the total 
budget. These cost positions are sometimes covered u nder infrastructure  components in standard infrastructure 
projects, like some W orld Bank projects. With institutional support (ID ) these consulting services also include 
additional institutional stren gthening and institutional capacity building measures for managing the complex 
component 1.
With an overall 15 percent of the overall budget, Proj ect Management costs are a t the higher end of proj ect 
management costs of standard infrastructure projects, but not exceptional. The higher overall management costs are 
due to the following reasons:
-CRIM will provide an increased budget for supervision of infrastructure components that raises c onsulting 
costs. This is in part necessary due to the  remoteness of most construction si tes. The additional budget is, 
however, also provided to improve quality control and, thus, sustainability. Quality control is considered one 
of the core bottlenecks in shelter construction;
-CRIM is considerably more complex than standard “plain vanilla” infrastructure projects and therefore not fully 
comparable to them. In standard infrastructure proj ects, there is no equivalent to  component 1 
(mainstreaming). W e expect a lot of institutional and inter -institutional consensus -building, event 
management, supervision and coordination of the many necessary TA inputs under component 1, a more 
complex accounting and procurement (due to many non -standardized contracts) and the necessity for a  
flexible and proactive project management.
The mentioned PMU costs cannot be reduced by sharing the PMU with another project. W e would even expect that 
PMU costs rise in case of sharing the PMU with another project that has different objec tives and fundamentally 
different PMU tasks (as all other standard investment projects that are currently under implementation by LG ED 
have). The overall contribution of the GoB to component 4 is expected to account for 53.1 percent (see Annex 7, III).
Overall assessment:
Altogether, the financial structure can be considered adequate and reasonable to achieve the desired impact .
F.2.Technical Evaluation
It is part o f the objective of C ReLIC to assess technological solutions, inclu ding designs and building materials o f all 
LGED standard infrastructure s.
LGED has established itself as the largest and most capable agency for the construction and rehabilitation of cyclone 
shelters and all kinds of rural roads in Bangladesh. For the pilot infrastructure , LGED standard designs and 
specifications shall be used, adapted to  specific local circumstances and updated by innovations developed by 
CReLIC . If deemed appropriate in the course of the detailed climate impact assessments under this proj ects, green 
infrastructure design standards that promote low -emission development, shall be considered. Expert consultations 
and product development for pilot inf rastructure shall be prioritized by the C ReLIC component 1 .Pilot infrastructure


---
*Page 40*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36OF 52F
shall receive a significantly more intensive monitoring by consultants, C ReLIC and potential scientific partners than 
normal infrastructure, to gather lessons learnt ,cross -check fin dings from expert consultations and feed it back into 
the institutional development process.
Road infrastructure is particularly affected by tidal surges in the region. Current embankment heights need to take 
into account future climate scenarios. Evidence from ongoing projects suggests that an average o f80 cm above 
Highest Flood Level (HFL) is sufficient (will be assessed during detailed design) . Slope protection and st abilization of 
road shoulders is particularly important to maintain the integrit y of the embankment during floods. Roller -compacted 
concrete pavement (RCC pavement) is considered the most resilient pavement for smaller local roads , particularly for 
the mos t vulnerable sections of the road .
As the ground in the coastal region is often marshy, with a very low load -bearing capacit y, a proper geotechnical 
assessment will be conducted to ensure construction o f sufficiently strong foundations. Due to the  remotene ss of the 
project area, it is difficult to provide construction materials (for example, freshwater for concrete works or aggregates 
for concrete  and pavement works) . The central and regional LGED material testing laboratories will play  an important 
role to assist verification of materials and construction qualit y on site. The shelter shall be constructed gender -
adequate, for example with separate toilets for men and women (in larger shelters even separate floors) and separate 
rooms for pregnant women. The shelters shall be provided with solar power to provide minimum power supply in case 
of disaster and facilities for rainwater harvesting (emergency water supply).
Thepilot coastal districts where pilot infrastructure will be built are the districts of Bhola, Barguna and Satkhira. 
Together, the three pilot districts provide an adequate sample for the different topographical and geographical 
conditions on the Bangladesh i coast. Specific selection of construction sites will be conducted a t the start o f the 
project out of the total of 81 eligible locations for new shelters and a total of 29 eligible shelters for rehabilitation (see 
annex). The 81 eligible sites were identi fied using the following criteria:
a)Identified by the Needs Assessment under the Disaster Shelter System Phase I (DSSP -1) in 2011;
b)Ranked as high prior ity (based on vulnerability to cyclones and floods, status of existing infrastructure and 
existing area/population coverage) in the Needs Assessment for the Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Proj ect 
(MDSP) in 2014;
c)Located in one of the pilot districts Bhola, Barguna or Satkhira;
d)Not covered by any other investment project;
Out of this sample, 45 shelters will be selected for new construction and 20 shelters for rehabilitation under the 
project based on a detailed field survey. Selected roads shall be prioritized based on critical access to  shelters they 
provide and on additi onal co -benefits. For each road and shelter package, LGED will p repare a s ub-project appraisal 
report to be submitted and approved by  KfW. The format will be specified in the Project Agreement.
Specific proj ect urban infrastructure in Satkhira Municipality will be identified in an inclusive stakeholder consultation 
process, based on vulnerabilit y and risk analyses at the start of the project.
F.3.Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations
1.Environmental and Social Risk Categor y (A/B/C)
For most proj ect components (see C.3) no significant or irreversible environmental or significant negative social 
impacts are expected. However, the construction of new Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters and access roads may 
lead to land acqui sition and in some cases to limited displacement. The construction of new cyclone shelters and 
access roads will also require a local environmental and social impact assessment, which will also be aligned 
with international standards, to identify and avoid adverse impacts. The project was screened and designated as 
environmental Category B which is appropriate and consistent with the previous experience in similar project s
and provisions of the sustainability guideline of Kf W Development Bank and internatio nal practice for the 
following reasons:
no important protected habitats will be impacted, no violation of international treaties and no consumption of


---
*Page 41*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37OF 52F
high resources are expected;
gener ally no land acquisition and resettlement are necessary as the proposed sites will be within existing 
educational facilities; and
all project related environmental and social impacts during construction and implementation of the sub -
project can usually be mitigated through state -of-the-art countermeasures or standard solution s and the 
potential consequences will be limited to the local area and are in most cases reversible.
2.Applicable Performance Standards (PS) for the Project.
Performance Standards of IFC Justification of PS Applicability  
PS 1: Assessment and Management 
of Environ mental and Social 
Risks and ImpactsXEnvironmental & social (E&S) impacts to  be assed for 
every sub -project. 
PS 2: Labor and W orking ConditionsXSafe and appropriate working conditions to be assured 
during construct ion and maintenance
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and 
Pollution PreventionXResource efficiency and  adequate standards for pollution 
prevention to be ensured for each sub -project
PS 4: Communit y Health, Safety, and 
SecurityXDuring construction community H&S may be an issue, i n 
particular onsite the education facilities.
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary 
Resettlement
(X)For most sub -projects not applicable as the proposed 
implementation will be in the existing educational facility  
boundaries. Howeve r there will be a resettlement 
framework in case land acquisition/ resettlement cannot 
be avoided.
PS 6: Biodiversit y Conservation and 
Sustainable Management of 
Living Natural Resourcesn/aNo protected or rich biodiversity area will be disturbed or 
locat ed within the Area of Influence of the Sub -project. 
This will be excluded.
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples n/a No indigenous peoples are living in the area of influence
PS 8: Cultural Heritage(x)Depends on location. Chance Finds Procedure to be 
applied.
It should be noted that two sample sites were picked for an exemplary Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment as the site  selection process is currently ongoing for the sub -component 2.1. (see C.3). For the two 
selected sites only PS1 –4 are applicable, bec ause no land acquisition or resettlement is required as the shelters 
will be located within the existing education facility boundaries and no cultural assets were identified.
3.Summar y of the env ironment and social impact assessment (ESIA)
An assessment was made for two schools as sample to understand the overall baseline condition and possible 
environmental and social impacts of the  proposed activities. As the other locations will be determined throughout 
project implementation the proj ect has -as lessons learnt from previous shelter programs in cooperation with the 
World Bank –set up an  Environment Management Framework (EMF), a Social Management Framework (SMF) 
and a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy  Framework to guide all upcoming construction activities for the


---
*Page 42*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38OF 52F
planned 45 new shelters and 20 shelter rehabilitations as well as road rehabilitation to ensure the compliance 
with KfW ’s sustainability guideline and therewith with IFC Performance Standards to assess the environmental 
andsocial risks and impacts of each sub -project in a consistent manner. For an early identification of E&S risks 
an Environmental Screening Format has been established, which has to be filled out for every  proposed site.
PS 1 –Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
Based on baseline studies, lessons learnt from previous similar proj ects and community and stakeholder 
consultations general environmental and social impacts were assessed and mitigation measures designed. 
These a re compiled in management plans that will become part of the implementation contract. In addition sub -
project specific measure will be added as appropriate. This allows knowledge sharing between the different sub -
projects because all will be assessed based on the same Environmental and Social framework. 
Generally expected Environmental risks/impacts and respective mitigation measures:
In the following typical impacts and risks are summarized with potential mitigation measures. The impact and 
risks are most ly on -site and construction related. The mitigation measures include dust and noise control, tree 
plantation, waste disposal, health and safety, water supply, and sanitation etc. In  summary:
Surface and ground water pollution may contaminate surface water and ground water table. Mitigation 
measure include safe disposal away from the site.
Air/Dust pollution may pose health hazard to school children, residents and pedestrians. Sprinkling water 
on dusty roads and covering stockpiles is necessary.
Soil erosion may cause land slide/ battered slope, rain -cut, absence of vegetation. This can be addressed 
by layer to layer compaction, soil stabilization measures, re -vegetation and restoration of disturbed soil and 
appropriate design of slopes to prevent slumping, s lippage and erosion.
Destruction of trees and vegetation may enhance deforestation and desertification. Possible responses can 
be tree plantations in proper places of school (cyclone shelter) premises and re -vegetation of barren 
surfaces.
Inadequate drinking water supply and lack of sanitation will increase incidence of diseases. Adequate 
supply of drinking water needs to be ensured and sanitation facilities for male and female workers need to 
be kept separately.
These specific risks and mitigation me asures shall be addressed under an environmental management system 
based on the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which will specify the probable risks and mitigation 
measures under the government and KfW ’s Sustainability Guideline.
Generally expected So cial risks/impacts:
The construction of cyclone shelters may create  some unavoidable adverse social impacts to affected 
households physically or economically, if there is need for land acquisition and relocation of people. In  case land 
acquisition is neces sary, thi s will be assessed and addressed according to Bangladeshi legal provisions and IFC 
Performance Standards where differences are identified. But in any case, first priority will be given to 
construction sites with no need for land acquisition (see P S 5 below).
Further community safety may be an issue during construction in particular on site of the education facilities. 
There it will be relevant to coordinate construction time outside of schooling hours (see also PS 4 below).
Lack of health and sa fety measures may cause health hazards and general safety of workers. Adequate safety 
gears for workers shall be provided and training for co ntractors and workers arranged (see PS 2 below).
LGED will set up a Grievance Redress Mechanism to allow the public and affected people to voice concerns 
regarding the subproj ects or any project related activiti es. The mechanism will be communicated through the 
consultation and trainings of the program. 
During the sub -project impl ementation comprehensive consultation processes are foreseen. This includes 
participation during screening and assessment to inform the ESIA, information disclosure, focus group 
discussion, etc. and ongoing participation.


---
*Page 43*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39OF 52F
Monitoring will be ensured through the EMP. Responsible will be the Project Management Office (PMO) that will 
prepare quarterly progress reports and submit them to KfW .The reports include the following (i ) proj ect progress 
regarding physical works and capacity building, (ii) delays and problems encountered and actions to  be take n to 
resolve them, (iii) compliance with grantcovenants, (iv) expected progress during the next 6  months, and (v) 
general informa tion on sector development and policy change. 
The PMO of LGED will be supported by an external consultant to ensure adequate capacity to address 
environmental and social issues.
PS 2 –Labor and working conditions
LGED will ensure that adequate labor an d working conditions are provided to all workers. These will be 
described in an Occupational Health and Safet y Plan (OHS Plan). The  OHS Plan shall ensure:
Implementation of this Occupational Health and Safety Plan.
Provision of first aid facilities and reg ular check of worker health and vaccination
Training provisions for workers and supervisors on first aid, health and sa fety measure procedures.
Maintaining proper medical aids and medicines establishing temporary stock during construction.
Training of construction workers in general health and safety matters and on specific hazards of their work 
especially fire safety, traffic safety, personal protective equipment, emergency preparedness and response;
Provision for workers with appropriate personal prot ection equipment (PPE), such as sa fety boots, helmets, 
gloves, protective clothing, goggles and ear protection.
Provision of safe drinking water to all workers, as confirmed by independent water quality testing and 
submission or lab results to the engineer ; and
Traffic safe ty instruction for workers and contractors to inform their drivers of the location of noise and 
safety  sensitive area. In these areas, speed limits will be restricted  and use of vehicle horns and engine 
breaking will not be permitted at a ll times, unless in emergency situations.
Further LGED will be responsible to enforce the implementation for the ILO core convention (in particular on 
child and forced labor). LGED and the contracted engineer will ensure that any person wishing to file a 
complaint or table a concern can reach them without fear of retribution.
LGED will instruct the contacted engineer to undertake a random check of the H&S documents on a monthly 
basis, document this and take immediate on -the-spot action if non -compliance is identified.
To convey these OHS requirements to  the contractor, Special Environmental Clauses (SECs) for the Tender 
Documents are provided in the environmental and social documentation of the sub -project that will be 
incorporated in the contracts.
PS 3 –Resource Efficiency  and Pollu tion Prevention
Resource efficiency due to resource constraints is central in the sub -projects. Therefore, solar panel will be 
installed on the shelter roof tops to  generate clean energy for the users. One of th e most important needs during 
and after cyclones is the availability of drinking water. This is of at most importance as surface water is often 
saline and in a few cases with traces of arsenic in hand pumps. To deter this, tube -wells on raised platform 
pumping safe water will be installed in the shelters. There will be provisions of rain water harvesting facilities in 
the shelters.
In summary the project will support:
renewable energy (solar lighting) for lighting purposes,
rainwater harvesting storage tanks for water supply purpose,
drinking  water and sanitation facilities in the shelters,
maintenance of the planned tree plantation through the school management and the community
floors to be  furnished with situ mosaic to reduce damage and for easy maintenance;
aluminu m sliding windows were provided as per U.S. Architectural Aluminum Manufacturer’s Association


---
*Page 44*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40OF 52F
standard specification
ramp for disabled 
The environmental aspects of design criteria will also include maintaining the aesthetic view of the premises, 
save the agriculture land, play grounds, avoid felling of any tree or minimum number of trees, maintaining proper 
design with landscape etc.
PS 4 –Community  Health, Safety  and Security
The main risk for the community will occur during construction. And the safety issues due to construction were 
also raised during public consultation events. The concerns were safety of school kids on site. Therefore, class 
activities and safety to students of the multipurpose shelters during construction work will be ensured adopti ng 
the following options:
Duration of construction work will be extended to avoiding construction work during class hours.
Construction works will be extended during nights and holidays.
When construction cant be avoided during calls hours in one floor, this floor will not be used for class 
activities during construction. 
These points will be included in each Environmental Management Plan.
Throughout the  consultation and information process with the  communitie s, construction activi ties will be 
communicated to raise awareness within the community.
As outlined above clean water provision will be ensured during emergency  situations in the shelters. Further, 
gender related consideration for women include a separate pregnancy room and separate hygiene facilities.
PS 5 –Land Acquisition and Involuntar y Resettlement
Generally it must be highlighted that resettlement and land acquisition will totally be avoided if possible. Lands in 
the premises of the educational ins titutions are mostly owned by the government and where unavailable, (i) other 
public lands will be used as much as feasible; only in critical cases (without alternative) (ii) private lands can be 
obtained for sites through (iia) voluntary  donation, (iib) d irect purchase (willing seller and buyer basis), (iiic) 
exchange or contribution against compensation by sponsoring institutions. W ith this approach, involuntary 
resettlement for implementation of the sub -projects is highly unlikely. However, since disaste r shelters are basic 
infrastructure in the disaster prone coastal areas, unavailability of land in the selected sponsoring educational 
and social institutions or through voluntary donation should not be an excuse to drop a vulnerable area without a 
shelter . A feasible option in compliance with W orld Bank OP 4.12 respectively IFC PS5, will be resorted to as 
last option.
In case where land acquisition or land take is not avoidable the proj ect specific Land Acquisition and 
Resettlement Policy Framework will ap ply. This foresees in the first place the above mentioned hierarchy to 
avoid any land acquisition or resettlement. If not avoidable the resettlement policy guidelines apply to bridge gap 
between national provisions and the international standards: (i) elig ibility for compensation will be determined 
this includes also people without legal land title, (ii) compensation is calculated based on market price, (iv) this 
will include also the loss of income (economic displacement) to ensure livelihood restoration; (iii) if required 
relocation assistance will be provided; (v) if required assistance will be provided to complete land title 
documentation; (vi) Monitoring will be performed.
Provisions for a sub -project would be compiled in a sub -project specific resettle ment action plan that will be sent 
to the Bank for approval.
4.Consideration of gender aspect in the Project
The overall objective of the of gender consideration in the proposed of the Climate Resilient Shelter and Public 
Infrastructure  Project is to ensure that by  adopting a gender -sensitive approach, the project will efficiently 
contribute to gender equality  and will achieve greater and more sustainable climate change results, outcomes 
and impacts.


---
*Page 45*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41OF 52F
The gender consideration in this project has se t out six fundamental principles: 
(1)  Commitment to  gender equalit y and equity; 
(2)  Inclusiveness in terms of access and applicability to all the activities; 
(3)  Accountability for gender and climate change results and impacts;  
(4)  National policies and priorities, and inclusive stakeholder participation; 
(5)  Competencies thro ughout the institutional framework; and  
(6)  Equitable resource allocation so that women and men benefit equitably from the adaptation measures.  
During the implementation of the proposed project, LGED will oversee its contractor whether or not the proposed 
gender considerations have been fulfilled throughout preparation, implementation, and operation of the project  
periods. The proposed environmental and social management plans clearly mentioned the actions to satisfy the 
requisite.
F.4.Financial Management and Procurement
This section reflects KfW  standard procedure. Th e procedure may be subject to revisions to reflect the outcome of the 
ongoing negotiations of the Accreditation Master agreement (AMA) and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between 
KfW and GCF.
Procurement
Procurement will be done according toKfW procurement guidelines (Guidelines for the Assignment of Consultants 
and Guidelines for Procurement of Goods, Works and associated Services) , approved by GCF through the 
accreditation process . 
LGED and KfW Standard GoB procurement procedures shall beapplied wherever they are in accordance with KfW 
guidelines to avoid duplication and ensure efficiency . International Competitive Bidding (ICB) shall be applied for 
large contracts . For smaller contracts, national competitive bidding (NCB) will be allowed. Specific thresholds will be 
in line with thresholds commonly used in projects between KfW and LGED and will be defined in the Separate 
Agreement. The new ICT-based e-GP system (e-Government Procurement system) shall be used, if compatible with 
KfW guidelines (assessment is currently ongoing). LGED has a proven track record of effectively conducting 
procurement under KfW procurement guidelines. Details will be regulated in the Financial and Separate Agreement, 
and will include rights and obligations regarding the supervision of the procurement process (e.g. requirement of KfW 
No Objection to Terms of Reference (particularly for Consulting Services), works packages, tender documents, tender  
evaluation reports and contracts) in line with GCF -accredited KfW standard procedure , and a preliminar y 
procurement timetable.
Financial Management and disbursement methods
LGED has well documented financial regulations and procedures and internal control measures in financial 
management and procurement and has the experience of implementing a number of KfW-, World Bank-, ADB-and 
other donor financed projects. LGED will recruit a Senior Financial Management Specialist for the project, who will 
ensure efficient financial performance. The LGED has Unified Financial Management Software (UFMS) for 
accounting financial transactions in the PMO and is currently in the process of applying it in the district offices . All 
funds will be legally handled by LGED, and disbursed according to the disbursement methods described below.
Disbursement methods will follow standard disbursement methods in other projects of KfW  and LGED. GCF f unds will 
be disbursed through a Special Account (“KfW Dispofonds” -method) to be established by the PMOof the project at a


---
*Page 46*
---

APPRA ISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42OF 52F
commercial bank with sufficient experience in handling these types of accounts . The approved Government 
procedures governing the establishment of Special Accounts shall be followed. PMOwill manage the Special 
Account. A Statement of Expenditure (SoE) has to be presented to KfW before replenishment of the Special Account, 
usually every four months , together with a disbursement forecast for the next four months . All statements and 
forecasts have to be countersigned by the Design, Management and Supervision Consultant, according to KfW rules 
and procedures.
Direct disbursement method (direct payment to contractors’ accounts by KfW on request by PMO) shall be allowed 
for large contracts and international consulting contracts , particularly for those in foreign currency, to avoid exchange 
loss. Details will be regulated in the Separate Agreement , to be signed between KfW  and LGED .
Financial Audits
External audit swill be done by the national Foreign Aided Proj ect Audit Directorate (FAPAD) under the Office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of Bangladesh (CAGBD) following International Standards on Auditing (ISA) and 
practices o f the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI)/SAI of Bangladesh and also 
procedures prescribed by the GoB and the respective Development Partner (in this case KfW ) following their specific 
Terms of Reference. Periodicity of the standard financial audits is one per year. KfW reserves i ts right to conduct 
and/or request additional audits. Details will be regulated in the Financial and Separate Agreement. As a German 
Bank, KfW  is subject to  German Anti -Money Laundering and Counter -Terrorism Financing laws and policies.


---
*Page 47*
---

RISK A SSESSMENT A ND M ANAGEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 43OF 52G
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent t he 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures.
Selected Risk Factor 1 Stakeholder Risk
Description Risk c ategory Level of r iskProbability of risk 
occurring
Project stakeholders, both on national and on local 
level are expected to be supportive of proposed 
project measures, bu t the risk of reduced political and 
social support cannot be fully discarded.OtherHigh (>20% of 
project value)Low
Mitigation Measure(s)
KfW and LGED will maintain a continued dialogue with all relevant stakeholders, including Government agencies, 
donors, relevant Non -Governmental Organizations and local communities, both  through the established project -
specific forums (see C.7) and through th e regular interinstitutional dialogue.
Selected Risk Factor 2 Gover nance Risk
Description Risk c ategory Level of r iskProbabilit y of risk 
occurring
Governance risks exist for the proj ect, in contract 
management and procurement.OtherLow (<5% of 
project value)High
Mitigation Measure(s)
KfW procurement guidelines are  specifically designed for procurement in countries and/or projects with respective 
governance risks and already reflect special procurement oversight measures. Construction quality will be 
supervised and monitored by an independent supervision consultant. Proactive monitoring by KfW  staff, both in 
Dhaka and Frankfurt, and frequent field visits, usually accompanied by an experienced KfW Senior Civil Engineer, G.1.Risk Assessment Summary
Theoverall implementation risk of the project is rated as medium with medium possibilities to influence the 
determinants of specific risks (see G.2). 
There is a general political risk ( stakehol der risk ) that the extraordinar y support that the Government of Bangladesh 
(GoB) provides to the project and the local support by local stakeholders to pilot infrastructure decreases. There is a
governance risk , particularly related to contract management and procurement particularly for infrastructure 
investments. A capacity  risk exists, particularly regarding the steering of the insti tutional development process. 
Although both LGED and KfW  have a  long experien ce in dealing with pilot infrastructure, there is always the risk that 
an unforeseen social and env ironmental risk occurs as soon as the project moves into the phase of specific site 
selections and detailed design. Due to the remoteness of some constructio n sites there is also a monitoring risk of 
construction quality. And, as usually in the case of infrastructure finance, there is the sustainability  risk that 
maintenance of pilot infrastructure is not going to be adequately done, although responsibilities are theoretically well 
defined, as well as a risk of delay  and cost override .
The proj ect proposes a series of mitigation measures. These will be able to mitigate risks to a certain degree, but will 
not be able to eliminate them completely .


---
*Page 48*
---

RISK A SSESSMENT A ND M ANAGEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 44OF 52G
will contribute to supervision quality. To the extent possible, contract shall be packaged in larger lots to attract more 
bidders. International Competitive Bidding (ICB) shall be the rule, with National Competitive Bidding (NCB) being 
allowed under commonly applicable th resholds. Procedural innovations regarding governance improvements that 
are currently under development in LGED (such as the W orld-Bank supported e -procurement) shall be applied for 
the project with priority , provided that they are in compliance with KfW  rules and procedures.
Selected Risk Factor 3 Capacity  Risk
Description Risk c ategory Level of r iskProbabilit y of risk 
occurring
While LGED has a comparatively high capacity in 
managing infrastructure projects they are less 
experienced in conducting an institutional development 
project. Technical capacities for supervision, 
procurement, financial management are generally 
good at LGED. There are d eficiencies in Climate 
Change Adaptation.Technical and 
operationalMedium (5.1 -
20% of project 
value)Medi um
Mitigation Measure(s)
Project Management will be conducted by a specific Project Management Unit that will receive technical assistance 
and adequate budget to implement the project. The PM Owill provide senior staff for financial management. W here 
LGED does not have the necessary expertise, sta ff shall be recruited or be made temporari ly available through staff 
secondment from other public agencies. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Unforeseen Social and Env ironmental Risk
Description Risk c ategory Level of r iskProbabilit y of risk 
occurring
During construction of pilot infrastructure , unforeseen 
social and environmental risks may be discovered.Social and 
environmentalLow (<5% of 
project value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Site-specific social and environmental risks will be assessed during the phase of specific si te selection and 
preparation of detailed design. Land acquisition is not anticipated under the project . Risks shall be managed 
according to F.3.
Selected Risk Factor 5 Monitoring Risk
Description Risk c ategory Level of r iskProbabilit y of risk 
occurring
The selected pilot regions are very remote and difficult 
to access. This can cause difficulties in monitoring 
construction quality.Technical and 
operationalLow (<5% of 
project value)High
Mitigation Measure(s)
The proj ect will provide sufficient consultant capacit y to supervise construction in addition to LGED staff. The linkage 
with CReLIC will guarantee that frequent visits of external observers occur on construction si tes. As supervision is 
part of the CReLIC scope of work, any innovation in supervision of works developed by CReLIC shall be applied in 
the project.


---
*Page 49*
---

RISK A SSESSMENT A ND M ANAGEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 45OF 52G
Selected Risk Factor 6 Sustainability  Risk
Description Risk c ategory Level of r iskProbabilit y of risk 
occurring
Adequate m aintenance of infrastructure may not be 
provided after the end of the project. Technical and 
operationalLow (<5% of 
project value)High
Mitigation Measure(s)
Responsibilities for infrastructure maintenance are clear (see D.2) and will be monitored during the proj ect (as 
completion of some pilot infrastructure is expected to b e long before the end of the  project). Shelters are used as 
primary schools, which considerably mitigates the sustainability risk, but –as past project experience shows –
cannot fully avoid it. The shelters are built with the consent of the Ministry of Primar y and Mass Education , and a 
respective covenant shall be included in the Project Agreement between KfW  and LGED . One focus of CReLIC is 
the development of innovations for improving maintenance that shall be rolled out to LGED operations .
Selected Risk Factor 7 Risk of delay  and cost override
Description Risk category Level of riskProbabilit y of risk 
occurring
As in all development projects, there is a risk o f delay, 
particularly due to delays in procurement ,and cost 
overrides due to exchange rate fluctua tions or price 
increasesFinancialLow (<5% of 
project value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Sufficient contingencies have been included in budget estimates, based on past experience. Both, KfW  and LGED 
will provide a close financial monitoring and ensure quick reaction times in project management to avoid delays. As 
stipulated in all Financial Ag reements of KfW  with the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, the Government of 
Bangladesh ensures the overall financing of the proj ect.
Selected Risk Factor 8 Knowledge Risk
Description Risk category Level of riskProbabilit y of risk 
occurring
There is a risk of information gaps regarding expected 
future climate change impacts .OtherLow (<5% of 
project value)Low
Mitigation Measure(s)
The setting up of CReLIC will empower LGED to react flexibly to new scientific findings on climate change. The 
close collaboration with scientific partners under CReLIC will ensure that LGED builds its mainstreaming on the best 
available scientific data . Pilot infrastructures can be qualified largely as low regret measures regarding climate 
change adaptation, and we do not expect the lock -in of inappropriate infrastructure.


---
*Page 50*
---

RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46OF 52H
H.1.Logic  Framework .
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under 
the Results Management Framework .
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level1
Paradigm shift o bjectiv es
Increased climate -resilient 
sustainable developmentClimate -related risks to sustainable development in Bangladesh are significantly reduced, 
as cri tical public infrastructure and its users become less exposed to climate hazards, are
less susceptible to  climate change -related impacts and are more resilient in the face of 
disaster.
Expected Result IndicatorMean s of 
Verification 
(MoV)BaselineTarget
Assumptions Mid-term 
(if 
applic able)Final
Fund -level i mpacts
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions1.1 Change in expected 
losses of lives and 
econom ic assets (US$) 
due to the impact of 
extreme climate -related 
disasters in the 
geographic area of the 
GCF intervention.2Capacity of 
built and 
rehabilitated 
Shelters with 
effective 
access for 
population
Statistical Data
Designs, Field 
Survey and 
Monitoring 
ReportsZero 
reduction 
per future 
super 
cyclone in 
area 
without 
access to 
shelterReduction 
of 
expected 
casualties 
by40,000
perfuture 
super 
cyclone , 
disaggrega
ted by 
genderReduction 
of 
expected 
casualties 
by84,350
per future 
super 
cyclone , 
disaggreg
ated by 
genderInfrastructure is 
accepted and used by 
target group in case of 
disaster to full capacity
Early warning systems 
work
People that use shelter 
in case of disaster 
have no alternative 
shelter to go to
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
intrastructure and the 
built environment to  
climate change3.1 Num ber and value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to climate 
variability and change, 
considering human 
benefits (reported where 
applicable)3LGED internal 
surveys0%of all 
new and 
rehabilitat
ed LGED 
infrastruct
ure per 
year (both 
number 
and value)5% of all 
new and 
rehabilitate
d LGED 
infrastructu
re per year
(both 
number 
and value)10% of all 
new and 
rehabilitat
ed LGED 
infrastruct
ure per 
year (both 
number 
and value)Climate change 
impacts develop 
according to forecasts
GoB remains 
committed to 
mainstreaming of 
climate change 
adaptation
Construction and 
mainte nance is done 
appropriately
																																								 																		
1Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement) : 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf
2Pilot infrastructure of this project is built to save  human lives, not to protect economic assets, therefore only 
the „humanitarian half“ of i mpact indicator 1.1 will be covered by a target.
3Indicator 3 .1 refers to the mainstreaming impact of the project on the overall LGED portfolio. Although 
targets are set in percentage s (as the specific future LGED infrastructure portfolio is not yet known), reporting 
will be on numbers and values, according to the GCF PMF. Physical assets made more resilient under the 
pilot components are already covered as outputs under 2.1, 2.2 and 2 .3, and are not mentioned again at 
impact level.


---
*Page 51*
---

RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47OF 52H
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level
Expected Result IndicatorMeans of 
Verification 
(MoV)BaselineTarget
AssumptionsMid-term
(if applicable)Final
Project/programme
outcomesOutcomes that contribute to Fund -level impacts
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory systems for 
climate -responsive 
planning and 
development5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implem entation 
5.2 An annual budget is 
provided by LGED after 
the end of the project to 
operate CReLICQualitative 
assessment
Organigram of 
LGED
Annual budget 
of LGED (in 
Annual Report)No
NoNo
NoYes
YesCReLIC products and 
services are used at 
different levels in LGED
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, businesses 
and public -sector 
services of Fund -
supported tools, 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond 
to clim ate change and 
variabilityMonitoring 
reports and 
field surveys
Monitoring 
reports and 
field surveys0people 
with all 
year 
round 
acces s to 
transport 
and 
shelter
0people 
with 
access to 
climate 
resilient 
urban 
infrastruct
ure40,000
people with 
all year 
round 
access to 
transport 
and shelter
0  people 
with access 
to climate 
resilient 
urban 
infrastructur
e84,350
people 
with all 
year 
round 
access 
to 
transport 
and 
shelter
50,000   
people 
with 
access 
to 
climate 
resilient 
urban 
infrastruc
tureInfrastructure is 
accepted and used by 
target group in case of 
disaster to full capacity
Early warning systems 
work
Project/programme 
outputsOutputs that contribute to outcomes
1. CReLIC established
and operational1.1 A comprehensive 
Knowledge Management 
System is established 
and field -tested
1.2 Guidelines, standards 
and procedures are 
developed, adapted and 
field-tested
1.3 Necessary 
communication, 
consultation and training 
is providedMonitoring 
reports
Monitoring 
reports
Monitoring 
reportsNo
No
NoNo
No
NoYes
Yes
Yes


---
*Page 52*
---

RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48OF 52H
																																								 																		
4No quantitative number of frameworks/guidelines/assessments/publications/trainings is specified at the 
moment of submission of the funding proposal to the GCF. Specific targets will be set not earlier than one 
year after the effective start of the project, after the initial comprehensive institutional assessment under sub -
component 1.4.1 has been conducted and validated.2.Pilot rural 
infrastructure  built, 
rehabilitated or improved 2.1 At least 45 new 
cyclone shelters are built
2.2 At least 20 existing 
cyclone shelters are 
rehabilitated
2.3 80 km of critical road 
connectivity is improvedMonitoring 
reports
Monitoring 
reports
Monitoring 
reports0
0
0 km0
0
0 km45
20
80 km
3. Pilot urban 
infrastructure  built, 
rehabilitated or improvedIndicator will be specified 
at beginning of project, 
bilateral co -financingTo be specified, 
bilateral co -
financingTo be 
specified, 
bilateral 
co-
financingTo be 
specified, 
bilateral co -
financingTo be 
specified, 
bilateral 
co-
financing
Activ ities4Description Inputs Description
1.1 Establish knowledge 
management system1.1.1 Establish framework for relevant 
external data acquisition in regular intervals 
on climate impact variables for LGED 
infrastructure, in an appropriate digital format 
with external data providers.Manpower, Technical 
Assistance, Relevant data 
from external service 
providers (e.g. scientific 
institutes)
1.1.2 Systematically and continuously 
capture relevant lessons learnt from LGED’s 
ongoing projects, particularly through regular 
user/stakeholder surveys of pilot and other 
infrastructure.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance, 
National Travel
1.1.3 Systematically and continuously screen 
national and international research projects, 
publications and best practices for relevant 
results and feed into internal knowledge 
management.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance, 
National and International
Travel , relevant 
information from external 
service providers (e.g. 
scientific institutes)
1.1.4Set up adequate formats and 
applications of provision and exchange of 
climate-relevant data, information and 
knowledge inside LGED, such as upgrading 
and ex tension of LGED databases, both 
spatial and non -spatial to provide climate -
relevant information in a user -friendly way. .Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance
1.1.5 Conduct comprehensive climate impact  
assessments to identify and verify relevant 
climate impact variables and risks for all 
LGED infrastructure types / use of LGED 
infrastructure and identify mitigation options 
through LGED planning, designs, regulations 
and procedures.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance, 
National and Internatio nal 
Travel
1.1.6Promote action researches in 
collaboration with national and/or 
international research institutes where data, 
information or knowledge gaps are identified.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance, 
National and International 
Travel, re levant 
information from external


---
*Page 53*
---

RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49OF 52H
service providers (e.g. 
scientific institutes)
1.2 Develop and adapt 
Guidelines, Standards and 
Procedures1.2.1 Develop and/or upgrade internal 
guidelines and procedures for infr astructure 
planning, site supervision, procurement, 
maintenance and others, if applicable, to 
mitigate climate change impacts and risks.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance
1.2.2 Develop and/or upgrade standard 
designs and building materials for standard 
LGED infrastructure to mitigate climate 
change impacts and risks.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance
1.2.3 Effectively integrate climate impact 
assessments in the preparation of Technical 
Assistance Project Proposals (TPP) and 
Development Project Proposals (DPP) for 
preparation of projects funded by the 
National Budget and/or donors.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance
1.3 Provide Communication, 
Consultatio n and Training1.3.1 Establish and convene the Consultative 
Advisory Group (CAG) in annual events. This 
includes the technical and logistical 
preparation of events, preparation of reports 
on findings and follow -up on them.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance, 
National and International 
Travel
1.3.2 Set incentives for employees to 
proactively apply C ReLIC products and to 
participate in the internal generation of 
knowledge and innovation for adaptation to 
climate change (e.g. through the 
establishment of LGED Annual Adaptation 
Award).Manpower, Technical 
Assistance, small budget 
for prize award
1.3.3 Elaborate and disseminate publications 
of lessons learnt, best practices generated 
through C ReLIC .Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance, 
National Travel
1.3.4Prepare annual training plan and 
conduct trainings for LGED staff to 
disseminate CReLIC results, develop 
capacities of CReLIC staff and to provide 
training on operations and maintenance of 
pilot infrastructure at community level.Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance, 
National and International 
Travel 
1.4 Initiate development of a 
permanent institutional 
structure1.4.1 Provide initial recommendations for 
permanent institutional setup one year after 
start of the project, based on a thorough and 
comprehensive institutional assessment and 
internal stakeholder survey.Equipment, Manpower, 
Technical Assistance
1.4.2 Revise recommendations for 
permanent institutional setup three years 
after start of the project, based on a 
comprehensive review of lessons learnt from 
project implementation.Manpower, Technical 
Assistance
1.4.3 Take necessary high -level GoB 
approvals on permanent institutional setup 
three years after start of the project.Manpower
1.4.4 Provide flexible institutional support in 
the last year of the project after closing of all Equipment, M anpower, 
Technical Assistance


---
*Page 54*
---

RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50OF 52H
other project activities to ensur e smooth 
transition to permanent institutional structure.
2.1.1Build 45 new cyclone 
shelters2.1.1.1Selection of site: The new disaster 
shelter/school buildings with access roads 
are to be constructed at the same premises 
of the existing schools/institutions; The 
construction does not require any land 
acquisition.School Management 
Committee (SMC), 
Upaz ila Education 
Committee, LGED 
Officials, Consultants
Local stakeholdersThe sites are selected from the 
priority list of shelters prepared 
under ECRRP
2.1.1.2 Mobilization: M aterials and 
equipment to the sites and establishment of 
labor camp.Materials, Equipments, 
Manpower, TransportsExcavation trucks, loaders etc.
2.1.1.3 Excavation: Excavation for 
foundation work; Dewatering Equipments, M anpower
2.1.1.4 Casting and Piling: Reinforcement, 
concrete casting of footing or pile cap for 
Piling work, reinforcement, concrete casting 
for superstructure including beam, columns 
and slab.Materials, Equipments, 
Manpower, TransportsRig machine, concrete mixture, 
steel fixers, cement, rods etc.
2.1.1.5 Finishing work includes partition wall, 
painting, electrical works etcMaterials, Equipments, 
Manpower, Transports
2.1.1.6 Site clearing and managing all 
construction wasteEquipments, M anpower, 
Transports
2.1.2 Rehabilitate 20 existing 
cyclone shel ters2.1.2.1Selection of site: The new disaster 
shelter/school buildings with access roads 
are to be constructed at the same premises 
of the existing schools/institutions; The 
construction does not require any land 
acquisition.School Management 
Committee (SMC), 
Upazila Education 
Committee, LGED 
Officials, Consultants
Local stakeholdersThe sites are selected from the 
priority list of shelters prepared 
under ECRRP
2.1.2.2 Mobilization: M aterials and 
equipment to the sites and establishment of 
labor camp.Materials, Equipments, 
Manpower, TransportsExcavation trucks, loaders etc.
2.1.2.3 Excavation: Excavation for 
foundation work; Dewatering Equipments, M anpower
2.1.2.4 Casting and Piling: Reinforcement, 
concrete casting of footing or pile cap for 
Piling work, reinforcement, concrete casting 
for superstructure including beam, columns 
and slab.Materials, Equipments, 
Manpower, TransportsRig machine, concrete mixture, 
steel fixers, cement, rods etc.
2.1.2.5 Finishing work includes partition wall, 
painting, electrical works etcMaterials, Equipments, 
Manpower, Transports
2.1.2.6 Site clearing and managing all 
construction wasteEquipments, M anpower, 
Transports
2.2Improve 80km of critical 
road connectivity2.2.1 Mobilization: Mobilization of materials 
and equipment to the sites and 
establishment of labor camp.Materials, Equipments, 
Manpower, Transports
2.2.2 Cleaning, excavation and rehabilitation 
worksMaterials, Equipm ents, 
Manpower, Transports
2.2.3 Finishing work includes leveling, 
maintaining proper slopes turfing etc.Materials, Equipments, 
Manpower, Transports


---
*Page 55*
---

RESULTS MONITORING A ND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51OF 52H
* All activities and inputs of component 3 will be specified at the beginning of the project (bilateral co -financing , no GCF funds ).2.2.4 Site clearing and managing all 
construction waste Manpower, Transports
H.2.Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation
This section reflects KfW standard procedure. The arrangements may be subject to revisions to reflect the outcome of 
the ongoing negotiations of the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between 
KfW and GCF.
KfW will report to the GCF according to the general terms agreed between KfW and GCF, at least once a year. KfW  will 
adher e to the highest quality reporting standards.
The PMO under LGED will prepare quarterly progress reports supported by international and national consultants with 
the purpose to provide KfW and relevant national authorities with timely and updated information on implementation of 
project components. A detailed format for reporting will be agreed on in the ProjectAgreement between KfW  and 
LGED . Quality of reports need sto comply with best practice reporting standards between LGED and KfW . The 
progress report swill cover, among others:
-Progress of CReLIC implementation in in sub -components against agreed milestones ;
-Physical progress of civil works construction against agreed milestones;
-Solutions -oriented discussion of issues and problems in the project;
-Work plans and cost estimates for the next two quarters;
-Detailed tables, overviews and maps in the Annex.
The proj ect w ill be supervised continuously by the local KfW Office in close coordination with GoB and at least three 
times through missions from KfW  Headquarters in the first two years, among oth ers, to conduct annual reviews. A mid -
term review shall be conducted at the end of the first three years of implementati on. The mid -term review shall include 
field visits, high level meetings with GoB agencies and a broader stakeholder meeting. The perm anent 
institutionalization of CReLIC will be a core subject of the mid -term review mission.
Within six months of the closing of the project, LGED will prepare a completion report that also includes evaluation of 
outcome and impact indicators. The final review will be conducted jointly by  GoB and KfW .Monitoring of the  impact of 
the project by KfW , particularly of compone nt 1, shall continue for an estimated threeyears after closing of the project.
Independent impact evaluation two to  three years after the closing of the project is done by KfW Evaluation 
Department. The project will be included in the sample from which proj ects for impact evaluation are drawn. If the 
project is selected for impact evaluation, the GCF Secretariat may be invited by  KfW  to join the evaluation mission at 
their own costs.


---
*Page 56*
---

ANNEXES
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52OF 52I
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal
☒ NDA No -objection Letter (Annex 1)
☒ Feasibility Study (Feasibilit y Package, Annex 2 )
☐ Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analy sis of cri tical elements (not applicable )
☒ Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment (Annex 3a) GoB and 3 b) KfW )
☐ Term Sheet (not applicable )
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan
(Annex 4 )
☐ Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (not applicable )
☐ Evaluation Report of the baseline project (not applicable )
☒ Map indicating the location of the proj ect/programme (Annex 5 )
☒ Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex 6 )
☐ Project/programme confirmation (see the template in Annex I to the Accreditation Master Agreement)
☒ Indicative Detailed Cost E stimates ( Annex 7)


---
*Page 57*
---

 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.04  
  
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority  
 
________