=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sunny Kim
/CreationDate: D:20151009191655+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.10
/Keywords: 
/ModDate: D:20151015165443+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.10
/Subject: 
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

∗ The agenda item number will be determined when the final sequence of items in the provisional agenda is 
confirmed by the Co -Chairs.  Consideration of funding 
proposals  – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP00 3 GCF/B.11/04/A dd.03 
15 October 2015  Meeting of the Board  
2 – 5 November 2015  
Livingstone, Republic of Zambia  
Provisional Agenda Item 14∗ 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following two parts:  
(a) A funding proposal entitled “Increasing the Resilience of Ecosystems and 
Communities through the Restoration of the Productive Bases of Salinized Lands 
in Senegal” submitted by Centre de Suivi Ecologique; and 
(b) A no -objection letter issued by the national desig nated authority or focal point. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority or focal point, respectively.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.03  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity   
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point


---
*Page 4*
---

Contents
Section A PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
Section B FINANCING / COST INFORMATION
Section C DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
Section D RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
Section E EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Section F APPRAISAL SUMMARY
Section G RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Section H RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
Section I ANNEX ES
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template
Sections A,B, D, E andHof the funding proposal requi re detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including th e Appraisal Summary in section F , accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate inform ation into this
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross -reference to other project documents
such as project appraisal document.
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50 .
Please submit the completed form to:
fundingproposal@gcfund.org
Please use the following name convention for the file name:
“[FP] -[Agency Short Name] -[Date] -[Serial Number]”


---
*Page 5*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1OF77A
1A.1. Brief Project/Progra mme Information
A.1.1. Project / programme titleIncreas ingtheresilience of ecosystem sandcommun ities through the
restoration of the productive bases ofsalinized lands
A.1.2. Project or programme Project
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region Senegal
A.1.4. National designated
authorityMadeleine Diouf
A.1.5. Accredited entity Centre de Suivi Ecologique (CSE)
A.1.5.a. Access modality ☒Direct ☐International
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiaryExecuting Entity :International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN),Institut
National de Pédologie (National Soil Science Institute ( INP),Réseau Africain
pour le Développpement Integré (RADI )
Beneficiary: Local c ommun ities in the districts of Fatick andFoundiougne,
District councils of Fatick andFoundiougne, Government ofSenegal
A.1.7. Project size category (Total
investment, million USD)xMicro ( ≤10)
☐Medium (50<x ≤250)☐Smal l (10<x ≤50)
☐Large (>250)
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus ☐Mitigation ☒Adaptation Cross -cutting
A.1.9. Date of submission 18 September 2015
A.1.10.
Project
contact
detailsContact person,
positionMr.Déthié Soumaré Ndiaye, Coordinator C limate Finance Unit
Organization CSE
Email address <dethie@cse.sn >or<dethiesoumare@gmail.com >
Telephone number +221 776583878
Mailing address PO Box 15532 Dakar -Fann, Dakar, Senegal
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)
Reduced emi ssions from:
☐Energy access and power generation
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)
☐Low emission transport
(E.g. on -grid, micro -grid or off -grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)
☐Buildings, cities and industries and appliance s
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy -efficient buildings, energy -efficient equipment for companies and supply
chain management, etc.)
☐Forestry and land use
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatmen t and
management, etc.)
Increased resilience of:
xMost vulnerable people and communities
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change –diversification of supply sources and


---
*Page 6*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2OF77A
2supply chain management, relocation of manufacturing f acilities and warehouses, etc.)
xHealth and well -being, and food and water security
(E.g. climate -resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)
xInfrastructure and built environment
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.)
Ecosystem and e cosystem services
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.)x
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words)
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primar y measurable
benefits (see investment criteria in section E ). The detailed description can be elaborated insection C .
For more than four decades, Senegal, as an underdeveloped Sahelian country has b een facing climate change, with
one of its most striking events being land salinization due to its magnitude and its ecological, social and economic
consequences. The main causes of land salinization related to climate factors include:
(a)Low rainfall du e to persistent drought causing reduced land drainage by fresh water ;
(b)Low infiltration of fresh water leading to salt water intrusion ;
(c)Rising sea level causing saltwater encroachment on land ;and
(d)The combined effect of reduced rainfall and i ncreasing temperatures accelerat ingevaporation which contributes to
therise of salt water by capillary action .
Land salinization and the contamination of water tables that result from it have significantly increased the vulnerability of
ecosystems and co mmunities, leading particularly to: reduced arable lands, lower soil fertility, decline in yields and
productions, food insecurity, unemployment, rural exodus, etc. The country has taken many initiatives at political,
institutional, legislative, social and economic levels leading to the development of policies, strategies andlaws as well
as the establishment of projects and programmes (baseline). However ,these actions remain limited considering the
extent of the phenomenon and the persistence of several c onstraints and barriers, including: ( a) a poorly defined
political and institutional framework (legislative, regulatory, organizational and financial) for addressing the issue of
climate change in planning and programming; ( b) appropriate technical and tec hnological tools arepoorly disseminated
and applied; and (c) a deterioration inthe living conditions of local communities and lowresilience capacities of
stakeholders.
The project is therefore a response ,in the short and long terms,to the impacts of c limate change specifically on the
issue of land salinization in the area of intervention which is a delta area and estuaries. To address the problem, the
project envisions through the provision of information and training ,and the raising of awareness, to: (a) improve
knowledge on the phenomenon; ( b) promote the adoption and dissemination of appropriate technologies; and (c)
encourage thebroad participation of beneficiaries (populations and local authorities). It aims to: ( a) improve knowledge
onsalinized lands ;(b) develop adequate responses through the adoption and dissemination of appropriate
technologies ;and ( c) improve the living conditions of the worst -hit local communities.
Hence the re is a need to develop a more integrated and participatory appro ach involving all stakeholders in an
enduring partnership approach. This approach focuses on the principle of additionally ,which implies that the project
builds on the gains of both national and local stakeholders to help toovercome the remaining barrier sin order to ensure
the sustainability of project activities. It is against this backdrop that a co -financing system will be developed to establish
a genuine co -management of the project activities.
The expected results include: ( a)strengthened individua l, institutional and systemic resilience capacities of the various
stakeholders (State, local communities, technical structures, non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ), the private
sector, local communities and their organizations, vulnerable groups women a nd youth, etc.); ( d) reduced salinity of


---
*Page 7*
---

PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3OF77A
3agricultural, pastoral and forest lands ,which form the productive basis of the local and national econom ies;and (c)
enhanced resilience of communities to the impacts of salinization o ntheir livelihoods. This thre e-pronged approach is
designed to add ress the institutional, biophysical andsocioeconomic drivers of vulnerability to climate change and the
subsequent adaptation needs, as identified by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ).1Institutional
and community support fordesalinization measures are essential forensuring that these enabling environments are in
place to support the long -term maintenance and operations of the desalinization measures. This integrated institutional,
biophysical andsocioeconomic approach to addressing the problem represents an innovative aspect of the proposal
and builds on lessons learned from the past.
A.3.Project Milestone
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if applicable) Not Applicable
Expecte d financial close (if applicable) Date: 01/06/2020
Estimated implementation start and end dateStart: 01/02/2016
End: 01/02/2020
Project lifespan4years 0months , plus 3 years post project
monitoring
1HuqS, Anokhin YA, CarminJ, Goudou D, Lansigan FP, Osman-ElashaBand Villamizar A.2014.Adaptation needs and options. In:CBField,VR
Barros, DJ Dokken, KJ Mach, MD Mastrandrea, TE Bilir, M Chatterjee, KL Ebi, YO Estrada, RC Genova, B Girma, ES Kissel, AN Lev y, S MacCracken,
PR Mastrandrea, and LL White (eds.) .Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Glob al and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY :
Cambridge University Press, pp. 833 –868.


---
*Page 8*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4OF77B
4B.1.Description of F inancial Elements of the Project / Programme
Please provide:
an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes) that includes a projection covering the period from financial
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assum ptions and rationale; and a
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme
a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives,
and leverage public and/or private finance
abreakdown of cost estimates analysed by sub -component in local and foreign currency and a currency
hedging mechanism:
For example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal exploration project, sub -components
would include civil engineerin g works, drilling services, drilling equipment and inspection test.
ComponentAmount Currency of
disbursementAmountLocal currency
Component 1 0.576100 million USD ($) 288.05 million XOF
Component 2 3.707900 million USD ($) 2008,376 million XOF
Com ponent 3 2.671000 million USD ($) 1663,676 million XOF
Execution cost 1.205260 million USD ($)
Total 8.160260 million USD ($) 3960,10 2million XOF
Indicative disbursement schedule
Year 1 Year 2 Year3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7
Component 1 196 685176 695 101 360 101 360 0 0 0
Component 2. 1 019 875 1 112 775 1 112 775 462 475 0 0 0
Component 3. 752 750 837 750 837 750 242 750 0 0 0
Implementation of the environmental and social
management plan 50 000 50 000 80 000 70 000 0 0 0
Monitoring of the environmental and social
management plan 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 0 0 0
Communication 31 000 21 000 26 000 26 000 0 0 0
Audits 20 000 20 000 20 000 20 000 0 0 0
Evaluations 010 000 010 000 0 0 0
Exit strategy 0 030 000 10 000 0 0 0
Project man agement 183 831 198 832 196 900 76 697 0 0 0
Post-project monitor ing and evaluation 0 0 0 017 000 17 000 16 000
Total 2 255 391 2 428 302 2 406 035 1 020 532 17 000 17 000 16 000
The provision of timely budget will be a factor and will enable the achi evement of project objectives.
We believe we can negotiate a quarterly investment rate of 1.5 per cent .
We believe that a flexibility rate of 20 per cent of the overall budget will be necessary during project implementation.


---
*Page 9*
---

FINANCING / COST INFORMATION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5OF77B
5B.2. Project Financing Inform ation
Financial Instrument Amount Currency Tenor Pricing
(a) Total project
financing(a) = (b) + (c)8.160260million USD ($)
(b) Requested GCF
amount(i) Senior Loans
(ii) Subordinated Loans
(iii) Equity
(iv) Guarantees
(v) Reimbursable grants
*
(vi) Grants *……………
……………
……………
……………
……………
7.614260Options
Options
Options
Options
Options
million USD ($)(  )  years
(  )  years(   ) %
(   ) %
(   ) % IRR
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that
GCF is expected to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor
and price between GCF financing and that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of
concessio nality should correspond to the level of the project/programme’s expected performance
against the investment criteria indicated in section E .
Total requested
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi)7 614260 million USD ($)
(c) Co -financingFinancial
InstrumentAmount CurrencyName of
InstitutionTenor Pricing Seniority
Grant
Grant
Optio
ns
Optio
ns…………
…
0.546……
…………
…………
…million USD
($)
million USD
($)
Options
Options……INP…………
………………
………………( 4 )
years
(4)
years(   ) %
(   ) %
(   ) %
IRRsenior
junior
Options
Options
Lead financing institution: GCF
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co -
financing institution.
B.3. Fee Arrangement
Fee arrangement for the proposed project/programme is to be aligned with the GCF Board’s decision on fees, which is expected
to be taken at the 11thmeeting of the Board
The accredited entity management fees are not included in the budget above
B.4. Financial Market Overvi ew (if applicable)
N/A


---
*Page 10*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6OF77
6C
C.1.Strateg icContext
Please describe relevant national, sub -national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies .
I  CONTEXT
1.1.  Th ephysical context :
Senegalis located between latitude 12°8 ’and16°41 ’north andlongitude 11°21 ’and17°32 ’west. It covers an area of
196,722 km2and is divided into 14 administrative region s.Itspopulation isestim ated at 12,873,601 with an annual
growth rate of 2.5per cent (ANSD: RGPHAE 2013 ).The Senegalese climat eis of tropical semi -arid type,with two
distinct season s:dry from O ctoberto May and rainy from June to S eptemb er. It ischaracte rized by high inter-annual
rainfall variabilit ydue to thedistribution and duration of the rainy season .Itis moreover submitted to astrong maritime
influence with over 700 km of coastline .Like other Sahelian countries, Senegal ismarkedby a strong degradation of
soilresources, v egetation and a biodiversity erosion across the country’s e cogeographi c areas ;rising temp eratures,
variation inseasonal cycles, andlow rainfall among other things that allimpact onproduction systems .However, the
salinization of waters and soils which form the country’s productive basis remains on eof the major concerns because of
its magnitude and impacts at the e cologi cal, social and e conomi c levels for local commun ities and the country as a
whole .The obs ervation series for1901 –1930, 1931 –1960, 196 1–1990 and 1971 –2007 suggest that,over the last
decades ,rainfall has experienced a significant drop with a shift of isohye tsfrom north to south and a very high spatio -
tempor alvariability .Isohy et 400mm that was over the Louga -Podor axis during 1931 –1960was on the Thies-Matam
axis between 1971 and 2007. The country comprises sixcharacteristic ecogeographic zones each with high
vulnerabilit y and manifestations of the impacts of climate c hange (figure 1) .
The Groundnut Basin zone andmore specifically th e districts of Fatick and Foundiougne , where this project will be
implemented, areparticul arlymarked by salinization ,which justifies project implementation in this area .
%[
BassinarachidierZonesylvo-pastorale(Ferlo)
SénégalOriental
CasamanceNiayesValléedu
fleuveSénégalMauritanie
Mali
GuinéeGuinée-BissauGambieDAKAROcéanAltlantiqueOcéanAltlantique


---
*Page 11*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7OF77
7C
Figure 1:Ecogeographi cal zone sofSenegal (CSE 2004 )
1.2. The politi cal and institution alcontext :
Due to the multidimension alandmultisector alnature of the fight against climate change ingeneraland the sustainable
management of salinized lands in particula r,which involves many State institutions, the proje ctisalign edwith several
national and sectoral polic ies and strategies :
Attheinternational level
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC) and the Kyoto P rotocol ratified by
Senegal in 1994 and 2001 , respectively .The National Climate Change Committee (COMNACC) was set up upon
ratification and Regional Climate Change Committees (COMRECC s)were established in2010 to support, advise and
follow up on the effective implementation of the goals of the Convention.
Atthenational level
ThePlan Sé négal Emergent ( Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE)isthe country’s economic and social planning
reference document in the medium and long term s, up to 2035. The proje ctis fully consistent with component 2
of the 2014 –2018 PSE titled ‘’Human c apital, socialprotection and sustainable development ’’which focuses on
the need to “’incorporate sustainable development princip lesin national polic iesand reverse the trend noted
against the loss of environ mental resourc es’’ by ‘’ ensuring a balance between the developmen tof productive
activit iesandenvironment al management’’ .
Adaptation to climate change is therefore a major challenge to PSE which reinforce sthestrategies of the
Environmental and Natural Resource Sector Policy Statement .Enduring solutions must be foun d to enable
populations and institution alstakeholder stodevelop aculture of climate change prevention and adaptation
charact erized by the occurrence of events such as flooding, recurren t droughts ,land salini zation, coastal
erosion and rising temp eratures.
TheEnvironment and Natural Resource Sector Policy Statement (LPSERN): itsstrategic objectives are : (a)
to improve the knowledge base on the environment and natural resources (ENR); ( b)to reverse the current
degradation trend of the ENR ;and(c)toincrease the participation ofpopulations, local communiti esand the
private sectorin the concert ed management of the ENR.The action of LPSERN hinges on various instruments
such as : (a)the National Action Plan to Combat Desertification; ( b)theStrategyand National Action Plan for
Biodiversity Conservation; ( c)the National Wetlands Management Policy,and (d)thestrategy for the
Implementation of the UNF CCC and its national action planforadaptation (N APA)among others .
TheNational Strategy for Susta inable Management of Run -off and Fight against Land Saliniz ation which
defines the direction in combating the phe nomenon .
Due to the impact ofchange s on the country’s various e conomi c and socia l sectors ,other polic iesandstrategies are
also involved suc h as:
The Agricultural Development Policy Paper mainly flagship program mesfocusing on food security–
improved export s such as :theProgramme toAccelerate the Pace of the Senegalese Agriculture, the National
Rice Self-sufficiency Programme ;and t heProgr ammefor the Economic Development of the Niayes ;
The Livestock Development PolicyStatement and the National Livestock Development Plan: one main
goal being the securi tization of livestock for increased productivit y;
TheFisheries Development Policy State ment ,theAction Plan for the De velopment of Fisheries and the
Operational Plan for the Develop ment ofAquaculture :lay emphasis on ‘’a sustainable management and
restoration of fisher yresources ’’;
The Agro-sylvo -pastoral Outline Law (Law N° 2004 -16of04June 2004) :seeks to promote better land


---
*Page 12*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8OF77
8C
development in thelong term through securing land forsmall -scale produc ersand the development of private
agribusiness ; and
Water policy:focuses on the production and distribution of deep and surface water resources to cater both for
clean water and production needs .
Legislation on the environment and natu ralresources :
Various texts andlawsorganize land management in Senegal,including :
Landlegislation (L awN° 64 -46of17June 1964) ;
Legislation on the en vironment and natural resources: includes various codes on forest land,the
environment andhunting as well a s wildlife, pastoral and water protection ,etc.; and
Phase 3ofdecentrali zation :envision sorganizing Senegal into “ viable, comp etitive territo ries capable of
promot ingsustainable development by2022 ’’. It beefs up the capacitie sof the commune through greater
regulatory , financi al and managerial autonomy so as todevelop itsterritor y.
1.3. Socioeconomi c context
Senegalis a Sahelian country predominantly agricultural ,highly dependent on an unpredictable climat e and
agroe cologi calconditions making it onetheleast developed countries .
According to the 2013 National Strategy for Eco nomic and Social Development review,theaverage growth rate of
Senegal’s GDP was estimated at 3.9per cent ,corresponding to only 1.3per cent above the demographi c growth rate
(2.6per cent ).Factorsbehind thiscounter-performance include the low performance of the primary sectordue to a strong
deterioration inliving conditions ( of the lands )and the low performance of the production support mechanisms. This
results in a deterioration in the populations’ living conditions witha57.1 per cent rural poverty increase ,against 26.1per
cent inits capital city, Dakar,and41.2per cent in other cities (see:context report on PSE ( May 2014) ).
PSE is the new e conomi c and social planning document defined by the Senegalese political authoritiesasa‘’reference
for the medium and long term economi c and social policy ’’based on the vision of an emerging Senegalby2035. In this
regard ,the PSE is thekeyproject entry point and source so as to check its contribution to food security.
These lasttwo documents strongly support activities to reduce rural –urban migration bypromoting and supporting,
among others, the development of agriculture activities in rural areas, with the ultimate goal ofSenegal becom ingself-
sufficient in cereals ,withtheparticular focus ofbecom ingself-sufficient in rice by 2017.
C.2.Project/Programme Objective against Baseline
Please describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline ,key barriers, challenges
and/orpolicies) and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline scenario.
The high level objective of the proposed project is to increase the long -term resilience of the local population to the
impacts of climate change. The project will focus on addressing the particularly acute problem of theincreased
salinization of agricultural lands in this region the population of which is highly dependent on agriculture for its
livelihood. Increased salinization, exacerbated by climate change, is threatening the development of the region and its
people.
There are three main baseline conditions which act as barriers to this object iveand which the project seeks to address.
These are organized using the aforementioned IPCC adaptation needs: biophysical , institutional and social barriers ,
and adaptation needs.


---
*Page 13*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9OF77
9C
i. Biophysical and environmental baseline conditions
The project operates in the ecogeographic zone of the Groundnut Basin ( Bassin arachidier ,figure 1 ) with a high
density of population comprising mainly agropastoral ists growing the country’s major food and ca sh crops such as millet
and groundnut thedevelopment of which is strongly disrupted by water and soil salinity. The focus is placed on the
agro-sylvo -pastoral production sites in order to enhance the resilience of ecosystems and ensure food security of
communities and fight household poverty.
Land salinization in the project area iscaused by natural (e.g. climate) and/or anthropogenic (e.g. human) activities :
Natural causes: ( a) seawater intrusions; ( b) capillary action from drought and a declining rain fall;and(c) wind
transport of salt loams ;
Anthropogenic causes: (a)bad farming practices such as the irrational use of chemical inputs ;(b)the poor
quality of development ;(c)overuse of groundwater fostering salt water intrusion; (d)the lack of adrainage
system ;and(e)the inappropriate use of brackish water for irrigation.
2.1. Site location ( figure 2) : The selected project sites are areas (in red) with high agricultural potentials in the districts
of Fatick (Diouroup and Loul Sessène) and Foundi ougne (Djilor, Toubacouta, Keur Samba Guèye and Diossong) .
Figure 2: Project area location


---
*Page 14*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10OF77
10C
Rationale :These sites are located in the Sine Saloum R egion , one of the region sof the country with the largest area s
of salinized land ( see 1991 data in t able 1).These salinized areas have extended further since then. A more recent
study conducted in this region ( in2004) ,evaluated the salinized lands unsuitable for agriculture at265,500 ha or 33.6
per cent of the total land area;they are located mainly in t he districts of Fatick and Foundiougne and are considered
limiting factors for agriculture and livestock activities .Primarily ,land use in this area is forcash crops such as
groundnut, vegetables, etc. Local farmers have little scope for income diversifi cation when crops fail. Due to theclimate
change described above and poor agricultural practices, the land area and degree of salinization is increasing.
As a result ,several attempts to recover salinized lands were made by various stakeholders (State st ructures, NGOs ,
local populations , etc. ) through programmes, projects or farmers’ own initiatives. These include theProject to Improve
Local Small -scale Irrigation (PAPIL ) that built anti -saltdikes and run -off impoundments with convincing yet limited
results.
Table 1: Size of land affected by salinization in Senegal
Zones Size (ha) Soil types
Petite côte (Small coast) < 100 Acid sulphate soils and salty soils
Sine Saloum
Region (230, 000
ha)River -continental
area140 000 Salty soils, acid sul phate s oils
Estuarine area 90 000 Acid sulphatesoils
River Gambia Basin 143 000 Acid sulphate soils and salty soils
Source :SADIO S. 1991, Pédogénèse et potentialités forestières des sols sulfatés acides et salés du Sine Saloum
(Sénégal). ORSTOM Etudes et thèses -1991 -270 p.
Climate variability and man -induced activities have caused increased salinization of land in Senegal, particularly within
the project intervention area due to its coastal location, intensive farming and high population density. Inthe country as
a whole , increas edsalinized lands have reduced arable lands by about 45 per cent along with a decline in yields and
production, and the pollution of freshwater aquifers causing food insecurity and lowering population incomes .This leads
toa growth deficit for a country such as Senegal where the economy is primarily led by agriculture.
Faced with a nationwide salinization issue, several measures have been taken by the State, many dating from before
the country’s independence in 1960 , by tech nical and financial partners, local communities and NGOs. These included
the construction of protection dikes against saltwater intrusion in the region of Fatick (the project area, in the centre of
Senegal) and Casamance (in the southwest of Senegal).
Howe ver, these large -scale infrastructur alinterventions have proven ineffective over time and their maintenance costs,
have been high, while their buy-in by local populations have been weak. More recent experience promotes the use of
small -scale community dec ided infrastructure. This assures buy -in from the local populations which aremore likely to
use and maintain interventions which it has taken a role in developing, deciding upon and benefitting from. This is the
approach that this project proposes.
Two m ajor types of activities are carried out to fight land salinization. They include mechanical and biological actions.
Mechanical actions are under way mainly in Casamance and Sine -Saloum with the construction of
anti-salt dikes and embankments particularly in the valleys, especially through the PAPIL and Projet
d'Appui au Développement Agricole et à l'Entreprenariat Rural (Project to Support Agricultural
Development and Rural Entrepreneurship) (PADAER )projects, to curb seawater intrusion. Other
additional t echnologies have also been developed such as ridge harvesting, rack valves to regulate
water flow with support from research ( Institut Sénégalais de Recherches Agricoles2(ISRA ),Institut de
Recherche pour le Développement3(IRD)orCentre de coopération i nternationale en recherche
2Senegalese Agricultural Resear ch Institute
3French Research for Development Institute


---
*Page 15*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11OF77
11C
agronomique pour le développement4(CIRAD )as well as traditional good practices by the Diola
populations which have a long tradition of rice field desalination ; and
Biological actions particularly relate to the use of halophilic tree species such as Tamarix sp,
Melaleuca for reforestation in particular of salt flats in the Sine -Saloum, allowing for the recover yof
some lands. In agriculture, it should be noted that following the immersion then drainage of soil ,
phosphogypsum is spread for irrigated crops with the support of SENCHIM (private company
specializ ingin agriculture equipment and fertilizer).
These efforts helped toprotect several thousands of hectares. However ,despite all these efforts at thenational and
local levels , the issue remains a reality and is more acute due to climate variability and change.
Technical and technological barriers include:
(a)Inadequate technical and technological knowledge (causes, level of salinity, extent of area affected by salinization);
(b)Thehigh costs of necessary investments (micro -dams, protection embankments, DRS/CES5(soil protection and
restoration) mechanisms;
(c)Thelimited technical and technological skills of most stakeholders;
(d)Scarce resources for supervision;
(e)Land status (tenure); and
(f)Low capacity of local producers to develop local solutions due to the magnitude and complexity of the phenomena of
salinization.
ii. Institutional base line: me asures to combat land salinization and their limitation sand gaps
Senegalhas developed several land management policie sand strate gies in key sectorsliketheenvironment and
natural resource management ,agriculture, l ivestock , etc. Some are presented below.
Several initiatives have already been taken toprotect agains t saltwater intrusion into lands mainly through the
construction of anti -salt dikesand development of valleys.These initiatives are pursued through various ongoing
proje ctssuch as :
ThePAPIL (2006 –2011, 2011 –2015) :financ ed by the African D evelopment Bank–up to 16.28 million
units of activity ;the Islamic Develop ment Bank –14.47 million United States dollars (USD) –is highly
active in the food security area with theconstruction ofwaterworks for water control and thefight
against land salinization ;
Le projet de Bassins de Rétention et de Valorisation de forages (theProject for Reten tion Basins
and Boreholes Development, BARVAFOR ), 2001 –2016 –USD 12 m illion financ edup to 95per cent
byBelgi um)is active in the Groundnut Basin for the constructio n of hydro agric ultural development s,
including anti -saltdikestoprotect and recover salinized lands ;
TheSenegal -Japan capacity -building project for the control of land degradation and promotion
of their development in degraded soils 2011 –2016 –USD 5 million from Japan in the districts of
Fatick, Foundiougne, Kaolack andNioro ;
TheProgramme toPromot e Renewable Energies of Rural Electrification and Sustainable Supply
inDomesti c Fuelswhich also operates in the area with the development and reforestati on of f orestsin
Djilor andVélor ; and
TheEcoVillages Programme also operates in the district of Foundiougne onaspects related to
reforestation ,wind energy and improved stoves .
4International Crop Research Institute for Semi –Arid Tropics
5Défense et Restauration des Sols / Conservation des Eaux et Sols


---
*Page 16*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12OF77
12C
These proje ctshave benefit edfrom thetechni cal and technologi cal support o f national research institutions specializ ing
in land management in generalandsalinized lands inparticul ar,such as :
INP, which develop s models for combating land salinization using local mate rialsintheconstruction of
dikes,andphosphogyps um and pea nutshells to facilit atesalt removal and improve the soil structure. I t
also supervis esfarmers in the areas of information dissemination and training on good preventive and
palliative practicesinthefight aga inst land saliniz ation ;
ISRA develop sresearch on the agro-sylvo -pastoral restoration and valori zation of lands degraded by
saliniz ation. In addition to the construction of anti -saltinfrastructures ,theintroduction of exotic salt -
tolerant species (Melaleuca, Tamarix aphylla , etc.) and the se lectio nof salt -tolerant cereal and fodder
varieties (rice, sorgh um)should be noted ;
CSE performs a regular monitoring of parame tersrelated to the e volution of natural resources in the
areas of forest ry,livestock and agriculture using modern techniques such a s satellite data ;
Direction de la Gestion et de la Planification des Ressources en Eau (Directorate on the
Management and Planning of Water Resources )monitors more than 147 power plants to map and
monitor the country’s water resources with the development of a Geographic Information System ; and
Agence nationale de la météorologie du Sénégal (National Meteorology Agency (ANACIM ))has a
network of observation stations across the country for agro-hydro -meteorologi cal data collection ,
processing and disseminat inginformation to various tempor alscales (daily,weekly , monthly or
decenn ial)for better me teorologi cal and climat e monitoring in the areas of forestry ,water , environment,
livestock , soils, etc.
Political, institutional and organiz ational barriers include:
(a)Lack of synergy in stakeholders’ interventions reducing the effectiveness of activities and efficiency of resources ;(b)
Limited involvement of local commun ities;
(c)Inadequate organiz ation and poor producers’ resources to maintain the anti -salt structures ;
(d)Inadequate or non -existent specific legislation on salinized lands which often have ambiguous status; and
(e)Lack of financial resources to address the phenomenon which requires heavy investment over a long period.
iii. Socioeconomi c baseline: the resilience and coping capacities of local populations to salinization and
climate change
The loss of land and productivity in this coastal area is contributing to theincreased vulnerability of the population by
reducing their primary incom e source, poor health due to lack of water quality and malnutrition. This increased rural
poverty is contributing to rural –urban migration, impacting the country as a whole. The project seeks to reduce this
poverty cycle by addressing salinization and, in addition, promoting income generation and diversification for
communities to protect them from increasingly harsh climate conditions. As climate change is expected to continue in
the future, populations in the area require support to reduce their exposure in this region highly dependent o n
agriculture.
Socioeconomic constraints relate to:
(a)Reduced arable lands with the abandonment of salinized lands resulting in arable land redistribution tothe detriment
of vulnerable groups ,that is, women and youth whose access to the main production factors or land has become more
difficult and uncertain;
(b)Decline in farm yields causing decreased production, a lower food balance and food insecurity ;
(c)Drop in revenues due to reduction inthe cash production s hare; and
(d)Increased unemployment among young women and men leading to arural exodus (job loss) and reduction of the


---
*Page 17*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13OF77
13C
local workforce.
Please describe the main goal and anticipated Output s of the project/programme, with reference to the baseline
scena rio.
Goal and long term anticipated output s
Project objective :
Theobjective pursued bytheproje ctis,therefore ,tocontribu teto overcoming these barriersandconstraints by bringing
added value toactions already tak ingplace and applying the most re cent best practices, including small -scale
interventions, engaging communities and creating incentives through improv inglivelihoods byparticipation by local
populations in the project interventions .The technological barriers and institutional barriers t oachieving a paradigm
shift willbe addressed mainly through two means:
-capacity development: the salty land mapping will provide relevant decision making tool for decision makers at
all levels. In addition, capacity building activities, introduction of new adaptation strategies and the
strengthening of organizational capacities will also contribute to a paradigm shift in the way land salinization is
tackled;
-innovation: the project strategy put emphasis on simple and affordable technologies easy to be re plicated and
maintained by local actors themselves.
Thesolution pr oposed is to ensure an effective prevention of the risks of land salinization due to climate change andto
develop appropriate mechanisms to reduce and manage salinized lands affected by sa linization. This will restore and
improve their fertilit y in a bid to enhance food security as well as e conomi c and financi al profitability .Such agoal must
be based on capacit y-building for the various stakeholders especially the techni cal servic es, l ocalcollectives ,
commun ities,theprivate sector,NGOs, etc.,in order to achieve the following results: (a)improved knowledge of the
causes andcons equences ofland salinization processes an dbetter monitoring and e valuation of the level and scope
of the phenomenon;(b)large -scale adoption of appropriate and effective techniques andtechnologies to pre vent the
risks of salini zation andrestorealready polluted lands ;(c)promotion ofmeasures that increase food security,improve
commun ity incomes (and liv elihood diversification) and promo te local private investment initiative s(job and income
generation );and(d)increased resilience of vulnerable groups (women and youth) to climate shocks and desalinization
through the provision of restored lands and the technical and financial support of the project to conduct production
activities ( ‘green ’jobs and incomes) enabling them to diversify their income so it isless vulnerable to the effects of
climate shocks to agriculture.
From this perspective, the project will achieve these results through the following three components: 1) Strengthening
individual and institutional capacities for improved land management to reduce salinization; 2) Improving
productivity of agricultural, pastoral and forest lands; and 3) En hancing the resilience of grass -roots
communities through the socioeconomic valorization of salinized lands.
The three components work in perfect synergy to enable the achievement of the general objective of the project.
Component 1 is designed to streng then the institutional and strategic framework through mainstreaming climate
change in the main development plan, the development of coordination mechanisms and the building of a sound
knowledge base. It includes a set of measures aiming to integrating cli mate change into the main local planning
documents and to provide local actors with appropriate decision making tools. Poor coordination and lack of accurate
and timely information on land conditions and its relation with climate change are among the main impediments to local
development in this area. Therefore, the activities planned under Component 1 will help address these barriers and
create an enabling environment for a successful implementation of Component 2 and Component 3. The integration of
climat e change into local planning documents will facilitate obtaining the necessary deliberations from the local
authorities for the implementation of the activities under components 2 and 3, It will also help to sustain these activities
beyond the project life time.


---
*Page 18*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14OF77
14C
Building on Component 1, Component 2 will allow to carrying out activities to enhance the natural capital. Activities
under Component 2 are key to controlling salinization and regenerating the vegetation cover. The project resources
under Component 2 will also allow to protecting land from erosion and harvesting rain water which in turn will make it
easy to developing resilience activities as planned under Component 3.
Component 3 will build on the enabling environment created through Component 1 an d 2 to develop activities that will
strengthen the resilience of grassroots communities. It includes the provisions of inputs, but above all capacity building
and organizational development support in order to promote income generating activities, with a p articular focus on
women specific activities. It is expected that the project resources under Component 3 will secure the sustainable
livelihoods of local communities.
The interlinkages between these 3 components will be reflected in the institutional arr angement for the implementation
of this project. From the elaboration of the working plans to the implementation of the activities, synergies will be sought
and established between implementing partners to ensure a greater consistency in the overall projec t implementation.
The project strategy is to take an integrated approach linking up the 3 components.
The project will intervene in six project sites, selected by local communities (see output 1 for details). These sites were
selected based on the followi ng criteria, among others: environmental vulnerability, socioeconomic vulnerability and the
degree of poverty, benefits and leadership potential for women, benefits for the greatest number of vulnerable people,
technical feasibility, and a lack of legal or regulatory constraints.
C.3. Project / Programme Description
Describe themain activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components.
Theproje ctwill be implemented through three compo nents
Component 1. Strengthen edindividual andinstitutiona lcapacities for improved land management to reduce salinization
Baseline
Climate change involves several stakeholders whose interventions are often poorly articulated reducing the ir
effectiveness and impact in terms of improving the restoration rates of salinized land areas and increasing land
productivity with a view to reduce food insecurity. The National Committee on Climate Change ( COMNACC )is already
in place ,yet it does nothave the resources toensur etheeffective coordination of interventions.
This situation can be explained by the absence of a common intervention base due to a lack of reliable information and
knowledge about salinized lands allowing the development of appropriate technical and technological packages for an
effective management of these soils.
Indeed, the causes of soil degradation mainly related to the climate are still poorly understood ,just like the affected
areas, the extent of the phenomenon and its impact on production systems ,in the absence of reliable information on
bad practices and climate change impacts.
Final ly, the actors are insufficiently trained on strategies through which tomanag e salinized lands and arepoorly
organized to address the phenomenon themagnitude and impacts of which require acoordinated effort.
Adaptive a lternatives
Through Component 1, the “Increasing the resilience of ecosystems and communities through the restoration of the
productive bases of salinized lands” project resources will be used to strengthen local governments and other local
institutions. This will be done by supporting district councils and communes to review district and local development
plans, and then to make changes to them in order to integrate climate change in their respective interve ntion areas. The
purpose is to define guidelines for the sustainable land development and management that will be reflected in the


---
*Page 19*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15OF77
15C
Communal Development Plan, the Communal Investment Plan, and the Land Use and Land -Use Change Plans.
Furthermore, salty land mapping will provide an important decision making tool to local government units, as well as to
local extensions. Capacity building activities will also target local institutions.
The effectiveness of salinized land management will be improved by the devel opment of an information and knowledge
management system for the supervision and monitoring of the evolution, as well as the continuous evaluation, of the
productive capacities of salinized lands. This will contribute to the understanding of their evolutio n under the influence
of anthropogenic activities and climate change and their impacts on agro -sylvo -pastoral and fishery productions; for
improved and effective decision -making.
Output 1.Theclimate change institutional and knowledge framework is streng thened
Actors involved in climate management have new mechanisms for improving governance in sustainable land
management through the following activities :
Integrating climate change and natural resource management into existing local conventions
Local conventions and codes will be updated by integrating a natural resource dimension, including information
regarding soils and soils vulnerable to salinization currently and in the future .This represents an important gap in
current planning practices as this land dimension is rarely addressed in current planning, regardless of the fact that it
determines the various appropriate forms of land use . The project will support the review and integration of land
management, salinization and climate change risks into at least 30local conventions.
This will be done by support ingdistrict councils and communes to review district and local development plans , and then
to make changes to them in order tointegrate climate change in their respective intervention areas. The purpose is to
define guidelines for the sustainable land development and management that willbe reflected in the Communal
Development Plan, the Communal Investment Plan, and the Land Use and Land -Use Change Plans .
Strengthening local climate change consu ltation committees to coordinate adaptation efforts
Under Act 3 (Phase 3) of the government’s Decentralization Plan, special attention is given to reinforcing the powers of
communes in the natural resource management of theenvironment and natural resource s.Inparticular , communes
have increased mandates to conduct arbitration so as to decide on land use depending on their agro -ecological skills
and their socioeconomic purposes). This activity strengthens the technical, physical, financial and organi zation al
capacities of existing local consultation committees to address climate change in their deliberations for the districts of
Fatick and Foundiougne. These committees will also be responsible for conducting wide spread community
consultations, including sep arate consultations with women’s groups, to identify the six project intervention sites. At
least 25 per cent of the composition of these committees will be women.
Output 2.The knowledge base on sal inized lands is improved
Local decision -making on land -use management to reduce salinization will be supported by an increased knowledge
base. A preventative approach, control lingthe causes, effects, andmagnitude of salinization in the project area will be
encouraged in order topreserv e the productivity of sites not yet affected ,and restor eaffected areas. To do this,theuse
of the following knowledge tools isplanned :
Creating maps of salinized lands for specialized users
A dynamic map showing the extent and size of salinized lands withintheproject inte rvention sites will help tobetter
estimate the affected areas; measure the gradient and determine areas at risk. It could be based on the invent oryand
mapping template for salinized lands already developed by PAPIL in collaboration with INP and the CSE f or the
purpose of rolling out across the country. Based on this, land -usesuitability maps will also be developed to determine
the levels of salinity and appropriate treatment modes to be assigned to each category of salty soil in order to improve
its prod uctivity. This will be supported by areal-time georeferenced databa se(GIS)that will be created, and shared with
all stakeholders through a website, news bulletins and policy briefs.  .


---
*Page 20*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16OF77
16C
The project will coordinate and collabor atewith ANACIM (National Ag ency ofMeteorology) and the Groupe de Travail
Pluridisciplinaire (Multidisciplinary Working Group) ,composed of several governmental agencies and some
international organizations or projects that meet every 10days during the agricultural season toprovid e a bulletin that
includes summaries on rainfall, water supplies, thestate and stage of crop s, pastures and livestock, etc. ,tocontribute
to generating climate information about the prevention and adaptive measures on sal inized lands.
Climate information will mainly focus on :
(a)Monitoring of piezometric data related to saltwater intrusion against rainfall evolution ;
(b)Monitoring of oceanographic data on the level sof oceans and swells ,and the risks of seawater intrusion along the
coastlines and sho relines ; and
(c)Rainfall monitoring to prevent the risks of low leaching of saline lands (low rainfall) and destruction of anti -salt dikes
with flooding and torrents (high rainfall), etc.
Disseminating climate information about sal inized lands to communi tiesand raising awareness
A local system for disseminating climate information on salinized lands will be set up in the project intervention
communes with the help of local media, including community radio stations, umbrella organizations and lo cal group s.
Information on rainfall will be provided on a frequency ranging from a 10-day period to a 30-day period and from the
season ( sixmonths), in relation to the data on the agricultural season monitoring. Regarding the information on the
levels of swells and their impact on sea encroachment, data will be provided annually through records from the Dakar
tide gauge. This information will feed into the technical and technological packages of the supervision and r esearch
structures and allow for an adapt ation of inputs (mainly seeds), farming techniques and types of crops to the salinity
level of lands in order to ensure the resilience of production systems. It will also be disseminated ona larger scale
through weather bulletins, the media and other communication schannels.
Component 2. Reduced salinity in agricultural, pastoral and forest lands
Baseline
Climate change is manifesting itself in increased droughts, increased temperatures, rainfall decline, flooding, seawater
encroachment, salt -water intrusion and h asexacerbated land salinization . This has resulted in :(a) aloss of lands with
the abandonment of large so ils,which have become uncultivated ;(b) lower soil fertility leading to a significant decline in
yield and production ;and(c) soil erosion mainly from run -off, etc. The current production techniques and technologies
are still inappropriate on salinized lands ,which are often worked using the same methods as in arable lands in the
absence of appr opriate technological packages approved by research. In deed, the current situation regarding
knowledge on salinized lands and its impacts requires improve ment . Most intervention structures have no reliable
information on affected areas let alone on gradients to adapt their intervention methods.
Adaptive a lternatives
Various technologies will be developed to reverse the land salinization trend. It is to combine technical activities
(fertilization, fight against erosion, reforestation, etc.) as well as water retention infrastructures and equipment (anti -salt
dikes) and rainwater storage activities . Integrated processing mechanisms that are biological, chemical and physical will
be developed according to the ability of each technology against the type of soil under review and its purpose
(agricultural, forest or p astoral) to favoursalineland restoration and improve their fertility. Effectiveness and community
ownership of these adaptive and preventive measures implies they should be both technically effective and
economically viable.
Output 3.Good practices on sustainable land management will be promoted for therecovery of salinized lands
Promoting reforestation (fodder species on grassy salt flats )
Secondary salinity of the soil is due to human activities such as land clearing and over -irrigation. These
activi ties result in groundwater rising to the surface, dissolving the salts and then depositing them in the soil. In
areas unfit for farming such as the project area, reforestation operations adapted to pastoralism will be
developed in close collaboration with theSenegal Forest Service ( DEFCCS ). Indeed, the project will combine


---
*Page 21*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17OF77
17C
large -scale reforestation and agroforestry techniques (intercropping, the taungya system, mixed cropping)
applied in open fields with species recognized for their ability to effectively participate in improving land fertility
under the influence of salinization. Protecting soils against the various forms of erosion (mulching)
Salinization is spread by erosion and transport of salts in poorly structure dsoils. Anti-erosion systems (DRS/CE S) will
be set up in various sites to fight against wind an dwater erosion particularly in watershed areas. The specificity of these
works is that they will be built using local materials (clay, straw ,etc.) and willusethelocal workforce only. INP has
already tried thisin the Diendiem Valley, Sedhiou area. In total, 10 basins with high agropastoral potential will be
identified to receive their interventions .
Mangrove restoration
Rising sea levels are further extending the reach of seawater into arable l ands. Mangrove splay an important role in
seawater flood control ( “buffer effect ”). The areas surrounded by mangroves are much less prone to seawater flooding.
Mangrove reforestation , a natural barrier to saltwater intrusion, will be carried out in the projectsites in collaboration
with the DEFCCS and research ( ISRA ) near the sea environments in Sine -Saloum to limit saltwater intrusion on lands
and safeguard agro -sylvo -pastoral and fishery productions in these areas highly sensitive to climate change impac ts.In
addition, this activity provides numerous co -benefits for coastal protection and for the fishing industry.
In addition, the mangrove ecosystem provides animportant role insupporting livelihood activities such as oyster
farming , wood for constructi on,in addition to related activities such as beekeeping (honey mangrove is among the most
popular).
Promoting biosaline agriculture
Varieties adapted to salty soils will be tested in the intervention sites in collaboration with research (ISRA), then
disseminated ona large scale to serve as alternative productions. Together with desalination activities ,which are often
lengthy and expensive ,other adaptive methods should be explored such as the use of biosaline seeds. INP has already
carried out alarge -scale experiment of millet seeds (sorghum and sunna) imported from China in thesalt flats located
in the village of Ndiaffate. The results are highly promising. The aim under the project is to spread it and at the same
time to develop research /development activities. In collaboration with national institutions (AFRICA RICE) and foreign
partners of INP, a wide range of seed varieties (sorghum, millet , maize, rice, etc.) will be grown over about 100 ha on
an experimental basis in each of the sixintervention sites of the project , leading to a total of 600 ha.
There will be introduction of new varieties to be piloted at a small scale. Later on the seeds can be distributed to local
farmers.
Improving soil fertilization
This act ivity will be conducted through :
Mineral amendments oflands :It includes inputs in natural phosphate of Matam. A total of 50,000 ha of
lands (including both salinized and not salinized lands) over the four years of the project’s life span
divided across the sixproject sites will get ame ndments in natural phosphate of Matam so the impact
on soil pollution will be relatively low ; and
Organic amendments tosalinized lands : they will help toaddress deficiencies in soil organic matter and
increase water retention capacity and nutrient fixati ve power of soil by strengthening their absorbent
complex. It will include inputs in manures and composts according to the availability in the project
areas. These amendments also aim to recover salinized lands , especially with peanut shells, among
other t hings. Considering the difficulties in meeting the inputs necessary toimprove compost in some
areas, a five -year goal of 1,000 composting units is set. The project will also support producers who will
freely commit to obtain some small composting equipmen t.
The development of grazing areas (agricultural, forest fallows and assisted natural regeneration )
Deforestation, land degradation and degraded lands are often caused by the search by farmers for grazing lands, as
theirs become unproductive from overuse and poor management. By improving grazing lands, farmers are less likely to


---
*Page 22*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18OF77
18C
contribute to land degradation and clearing for new grazing land. This activity will help to reduce some of the root
causes driving land degradation and therefore salinization. Natural soil regeneration techniques (assisted natural
regeneration (ANR)) through fencing on agricultural, pastoral and forest lands will be disseminated in collaboration with
DEFCCS and research (ISRA) to fight against erosion, facilitate infiltration, fost er biological rise and preserve these
lands. Focus will also be placed on a system to monitor these fenced areas and ondevelop inga simple management
plan for theultimate improvement of the protected areas.
Output 4.The construction of hydraulic works to reduce the effects of water run -off and leaching that contribute to
salinization
The installation of water holding works (small dams and artificial basins)
Run-off retention works in the form of small dams , which will be installed to allow leaching of salinized lands to foster
continuous development of production activities downstream. Artificial retention basins will also be installed in other
places with low availability ofsurface water.
The development of large ponds to ensure water availability fo r at least seven months
Develop ingponds through re -excavati onto increase their filling rate while carrying out reforestation in the surroundings
willreduce evaporation while organizing the exploitation of natural resources . The project will allow for:
(a)The establishment ofa baseline situation with themapping of all existing ponds in the target area and typology of
users as well as their needs and constraints ;
(b)The conduct ofa technical feasibility study for theoptimal use of the ponds ;and
(c)The complet ionofimprovement works in 10 ponds selected for theoperation .
Construction of anti -saltand anti -erosion works
Secondary anti -salt works made up of bunds will be built to support local populations using local materials to extend the
achievements of projects such as PAPIL and PADAER which are financing and making huge investments in this field.
These anti -salt works will be built mainly to control salinity.
200 frame bunds will also be built in the project areas that are affected by water erosion. These bunds are small works
placed in a moving strip (in successive rows or in squares) on the watersheds formed by the valley areas. They help to
stop the rainwater run-off on sloping fields so as to reduce gully erosion or through land transpor tation. The ultimate
goal is both to protect valley areas below silting (which makes them unproductive ), but also to facilitate water infiltration
blocking seawater intrusion ,while helping to recover part of this water for production needs . The number of bunds will
vary depending on the size of the each valley and the number of valleys considered. (See figure 2 photos of anti -salt
bunds).
Promoting small -scale irrigation (drip)
The project will disseminate small -scale irrigation especially with the ‘drip’system to regulate and rationalize
groundwater theoveruse of which is among thecauses of saltwater intrusion, salinity of vegetable lands particularly
and lower productivity of this important commodity both at social and economic levels for the country.
Component 3. Strengthening resilience of grass -rootscommunities
Baseline
The degradation of the environment, partly due to climate change, and the fresh water deficit, are among the main
constraints to the socioeconomic development of the country. The m ajority of the agricultural production is rain
dependent andtherefore highly subject to climatic hazards. Hence, the need for better water management to secure
production and ensure the continuation of productive activities throughout the year; thus provi ding an alternative to food
security, securing the jobs and incomes of the population and ultimately the growth of the national economy.


---
*Page 23*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19OF77
19C
In the project intervention area, food insecurity has become persistent due to the continuous decline of farm producti on
resulting from climate change but also from low investment in the farming sector as well as the rising prices of food
products. In addition, there is high pressure on natural resources, caused by land scarcity and/or degradation of local
livelihoods, in creasing the impoverishment of local populations. All of these factors contribute to land salinization and, at
the same time, are also a result of land salinization which is becoming more intense due to climate change.
Adaptive alternatives
This component seeks tocreate the social enabling environment to ensure the long -term sustainability of the previous
components . The aim istodevelop theresilience of local communities that have been severely hit by the increasing
trends in climate and desalinization by:
(a)Improving thefood security of populations through better control of production and management throughout the
year, especially during the bridging periods ;
(b)Promoting income -generating activities to compensate forloss of productivity and inc ome resulting from the
degradation of ecosystems due to climate change ; and
(c)Strengthening capacities mainly through information and training.
The project aims to better control rainwater resources for increasing resources and their best utilization foragricultural ,
pastoral, fishery production ,mainly through: ( a) improved water availability in large ponds for at least seven months of
the year ;(ii) development of fish farms toensure the availability of fresh fish ;(c) replicati onofadapted seeds ;and(d)
improv ement of theavailability of vegetable s, etc. These will provide diversified incomes so that the vulnerable
populations are more buffered against climate shocks. Without addressing human livelihoods, the cycle of poverty and
environmental deg radation will not be broken. Capacity -building and training for farmers to draw the most benefit from
existing agricultural production will reduce losses because of lack of access to processing and storage facilities. This is
important because it will redu ce the need to over -farm lands to make up for off -farm production losses. Ultimately, the
Green Climate Fund (GCF) resources through component 3 will contribute to the implementation of PSE, and
specifically its second pillar ( human capital, social protect ion and sustainable development).
Output 5.Food and nutritional security of grass -roots communities is ensured through improved production and income
from on -farm products
The provision of adapted seeds for at least 50 percentof farmers
This activity will be achieved through the development of farms for replicating certified quality seeds (maize, rice and
groundnut ). The programme will include :
(a) Identifying pilot producers of the targeted seeds based on criteria defined by the rural development ser vices ;
(b) Training 30 pilot producers on seed legislation and targeted seed production techniques ;
(c) Put tingin place inputs and small farm equipment for the production of targeted seeds ;
(d) Conducting farm monitoring in collaboration with the rural development services ;
(e) Performing the analysis and certification of the seeds produced ;
(f) Ensuring packaging of certified seeds obtained ;and
(g) Disseminating the certified seeds produced under the project .
Better management of bridging periods
It should result in better production planning throughout the year and building food security stocks in villages. It entails:
(a)Building and equipping 20 warehouses for storing local food products ;
(b)Building an initial stock of local food products o f 20tonnesper warehouse to support farmers during bridging periods


---
*Page 24*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20OF77
20C
through a loan scheme (zonal grain bank scheme );
(c) Equipping zonal grain banks with weighing equipment (weighing machines, scales, etc.) andcalculators ;
(d)Setting up committees to manage the zonal grain banks ; and
(e)Training members of management committee sand provid ingthem with management tools.
The conservation, processing and marketing of farm productions
Itinvolves the establishment of local processing units of easy use that are financially accessible, opening warehouses
for stocking crops and the implementation of a communication sand promotion alplan for local products, among other
activities, there are plans to :
(a) Develop 20 multipurpose units for processing farm pr oduce ;
(b) Support the establishment of unit management committees ;
(c) Organize training sessions of 30 beneficiaries per unit on processing, packaging and storage techniques with 10
members per management committee being trained on organizational devel opment, and another 10 members on the
administrative, financial and accounting management of processing units ;and
(d) Develop a communication sand promotion alplan of local products (shows, local forums, display s,brochure s,
participation in fairs outside the area ).
Organizing producers in cooperatives and facilitate partnerships
Producers will pool their knowledge, know -how and resources through collective or community -based organizations to
build their technological capacities (production of collective work, mechanization, etc.), financial and investment
capacity (joint surety), economic and commercial (negotiating and partnership) which can ensure thesustainability of
the project interventions. Thus, the project will support the establishment of seven cooperatives in the intervention sites.
Producers’ training on innovati vesalinized land management techniques
To address the anthropogenic causes of land degradation, producers will have to change their bad practices tomore
innovative and more appropria te techniques that will be disseminated by the project in close collaboration with the
research and development institutions involved in the sustainable land management. In total, 1,000 producers selected
from the cooperatives will benefit from this traini ng of 200 producers annually.
Training of producers on salt extraction techniques
In areas where the land salinization process is almost irreversible (the salinity gradient exceeds the maximal threshold
considered as the minimal threshold for reversing th e land salinity trend) and the populations are already engaged in
salt production, the capacities of producers will be reinforced in terms of collection, storage and transport of salt to limit
the adverse effects of run -off and winds on the contamination o f other areas. At least 500 farmers will be targeted in this
training programme on salt extraction techniques that will focus on: ( a) appropriate salt production techniques, ( b)
development of storage sites to avoid salt infiltration in the soil, and(c) protection of stocks against the spread of salt
silt by the wind, etc.
Output 6:Grass -roots livelihood diversification ofcommunities’ exposure to losses from climate change
Agro-sylvo -pastoral development of large ponds and basins
Itinvolves :
(a)Theestabl ishment of an institutional and organiz ational diagnosis of the various groups of users;
(b)Theestablishment and support of 10 pond protection committees;
(c)The d evelop ment and implement ation of a plan to s trengthen the technical, organiz ation al and institutional
capacities of the groups of users with 30 per site on the promotion of resilient activities (agriculture, livestock, fish
farming, agroforestry, reforestation, etc.), another 30for institutional and organiz ational development and 30 moreon


---
*Page 25*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21OF77
21C
partnership with other actors, including the private sector as well as in negotiating techniques; and
(d)The c onduct ofannual reforestation campaigns around the ponds from the establishment of village nurseries.
Availability of vegetable products andanimal fodder for at least eight months ofthe year
Operati ons will be carried out through :
(a)Theidentification of direct beneficiaries of vegetable production and the establishment of management commit tees
of 10 vegetable perimeters ;
(b)Thesupportofthe development of 10 vegetable perimeters of at least 5 ha each to recover water points (ponds,
boreholes, wells) ;
(c)The establishment of basins and adaptation of an irrigation system to the area ;
(d) The provision of inputs for vegetable produ ction and fodder cultivation as well as small farm and mowing equipment;
(e) Training of beneficiaries (30 per site) on the techniques of vegetable and fodder production, crop planning, product
marketing, storage and enhancement ; and
(f) Construction and equipment of 10 warehouses for stocking and storage of vegetable and fodder products.
Production of fresh fish in sufficient quantity for a long period of the year
Activities in this area mainly consist of:
(a)Developing at least fivefish farms ;
(b)Supporting the establishment of fish farm management committees ;
(c)Training of beneficiaries (30 per site) on the management and production techniques of fish farms ;
(d)Acquisition of juvenile fishto stock fish farms ;
(e)Feeding of juvenile fish;
(f)Securing small fishing equipment ( fishing nets, landing nets, basinets , scales, etc.) ;and
(g)The monthly monitoring of fish farming with the support of the National Aquaculture Agency.
Creation of women -specific income -generating activities to enhan ce their purchasing power
Activities will build on the creation of income -generating activities in villages, especially in the field sof culture de case
(in rural areas, agricultural activities near houses, usually by women) , small ruminants rearing, small trade, etc. Every
year 100 women producers will besuppl iedwith inputs and small equipment for culture de case. Another group of 100
women will be supervised in the development of small ruminant rearing (purchase of animals, veterinary care, feed and
watering, etc.). A fund of at least USD 100,000will be put in place forsmall trade development while the project will
provide intermediation to help tosell local products ,facilitate market access and promote real value chains.
C.4. Background Informati ononProject / Programme Sponsor
Describe project/programme sponsor’s operating experience in the host country or other developing countries.
The following is a description of the organizations participating in the implementation of this proposed projec t.
CSE is the national implementing entity , already accredited by the Adaptation Fund (AF),and capitaliz ingon its
significant experience in implementing climate change -related projects, including the InfoClim project (with the
International Development Research Centre –525,000 Canadian dollars in2008 –2011) ,which developed a
participatory information platform for vulnerable communities’ adaptation to climate change. Moreover, CSE has
developed the ‘’Adaptation to coastal erosion in vulnerable areas’’ p roject which received USD 8.6 million from the AF
and was successfully implemented (2011 –2014) under the direct access modality of the AF . The achievements of this
project include :the building of coastal protection works, the development of fish processin g areas and afishing wharf,
the update of the regulatory framework and important awareness raising and capacity -building activities. CSE has thus
acquired in -depth expertise in overseeing large -scale projects implemented following multi -partner arrangemen t.
Indeed, this project was successfully executed in close collaboration with a public institution, an NGO of national scope


---
*Page 26*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22OF77
22C
and a local women ’sassociation. Furthermore, CSE also provide dsupport forthe establishment of scientific service
centres on clim ate change in other countries like Ghana and Burkina Faso. CSE was one of the project pilot institutions
ofLADA (Land Degradation Assessment in Drylands) through which the land state assessment was conducted at the
national and local levels. CSE activitie s are also consistent with the result areas of the GCF as CSE works through five
major programmes , namely: Environmental monitoring and food security, Natural resources management and support
to local development, Environmental evaluation and risk manageme nt,Socioeconomy of the environment and finally
Research -development. In addition, the CSE governing body comprises representatives of the Senegalese
Government, the private sector and civil society which allows fora real involvement of stakeholders throu ghout allCSE-
managed projects and programmes.
RADI is an NGO that was established in1985 whose mission falls within the individual and collective promotion of
African populations through an integrated, participatory, popular and democratic development s trategy. It generally
intervenes in various areas such as: agricultural production and food security, village hydraulics and sanitation, natural
resource management, community health, human rights ,including gender, education, promotion of local products a nd
entrepreneurship, etc. It play san overarching role in social engineering and direct supervision of grass -roots
communities. It is active in the project intervention area mainly through village water programmes (construction of
boreholes, water towers, water supply systems, standpipe sand house connections), rural sanitation, food security,
social engineering and direct supervision of grass -roots communities (associations of borehole users, producers’
associations). RADI is financed by bilateral and mult ilateral partners in order to implement itsprojects and programmes.
RADI intends to take advantage of the project additionality to develop mechanisms for economic and financial
improvement of the investments made in fighting land salinity especially throu gh the promotion of genuine rural
entrepreneurship in the project area.
INPhas the sovereign mission ofassessment, restoration and regeneration of land across the country. INP and has
proven expertise in: ( a) mapping and characteriz ingsoils; ( b)combat ting salination through the application of
phosphogypsum; ( c) support (training, acquisition and application of inputs) for organic (compost) and mineral (rock
phosphate Matam) soil amendments; (iv) the implementation of DRS/CES actions (bund frame s, stone barriers, etc.);
and (v) anti -salt dike construction using local materials (sand, straw, etc.)and the abundant use of local labo ur
(Diendiem valley) .All these important experiences will be rolled out to scale in the project area. INP has developed a
methodology for mapping salinized lands at 1/100 ,000 (already experienced in the intervention area) and through this
project envisions developing maps at 1/5,000 for high efficiency interventions. Finally, INP has a network of delegations
in different regions and climatic zones within the country, particularly in the project area, allowing close project
supervision.
IUCNis an international organiz ation with a powerful network of memb ers co mprising government s, NG Osand
associations that share the same vision centr ed on e quity,development and theconservation ofnature. It seeks to
mobili zethousands of conservation experts who voluntarily contribu teto its sixglobal commissions and high -level
scientifi c and techni cal skills on issues pertaining to e ducatio nandcommunication ;environmental , economi c and social
policies ;therightsof the environment ;ecosystem management and species safeguard. It is very active inclimate
change adaptation attheregional level:in Mauritania (area in the Diawling National Park),in the Niger Interior Delta,
Mali andNorthCamero on (Waza Logone) .
IUCN -Senegal has had the privilegeof being selected by the Global Mechanism of the Convention to Combat
Desertification and Land De gradation asfacilitat or of the inter-sector aland inclusi ve process for drafting Senegal’s
National Strategic Investment Framework for Sustainable Land Management (CNIS/GDT) following a selection by the
Global Mechanism of the Convention to Combat Desertification and Land Degradation .
In Senegal, IUCN interv enes in the proje ctarea in the field oftheenviron ment and NRM i n generalandclimate change
(CC)in particul ar,according to an approach underpinned by thethree pillars –knowledge ,empowerment and
governance –with the development of several CC adaptation projects in the Saloum Delta area,including :


---
*Page 27*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23OF77
23C
-The proje ct“Integratin gclimate c hange adaptation in poverty reduction strategies inWest Africa”’orPREMI
(Districts of Fatick and Foundiougne) aimed at improv ingtheintegration of climate c hange adaptation
strategies inlocal-level development planning instruments ;and
-The proje ct“Ecosyste msforthe p rotection ofinfrastructures and commun ities”orEPIC (2013 –2017), in the
district of Foundiougne primarily seeks to promo teanecosyst emsapproach in natural disaster management .
Its ultimate goal is to enhance the resilience ofcommun ities and natural systemsthrough support to
endogenous climate change adaptation strategies in the areas of land salinit y,water e rosion anddeforestation
ofagroforest parks .
-
-These proje ctsmade it possible to develop several tools and methodologies such as :
-(a) Climate Proofing and the Toolkit for Planning and Monitoring -Evaluation of Climate Change Adaptive Capacit ies;
and
-(b)Various technologies in the fields of :
o(i)ANR ;
o(ii)Theconstruction of small anti -saltbunds using local materials ;and
-(c)The development of a mechanism toregulat eaccessto and use of natural resources ( forestry and fisheries )withthe
drafting of local conventions based on aterritorial approach .
-
IUCN intends to leverage the project addition alitytoscaleupthese expe riences and facilit atetheir large -scale
replication to furthe r highlight the expected potent ial positive impacts in terms of community and ecosystem resilience .
In addition to their intrinsic experiences and skills in their specific intervention areas, these stakeholders have the
following in commo n: (a) intervention in the same proje ctarea, (b)they belong to the same consultation and action
frameworks (i.e.COMNACC and the COMRECC );(c) compl ementarit y inappro aches and activity types .IUCN target s
more institution aland strategic capacity -building ; RADI targets the individua land collective capacities through social
marketing and e conomi c promotion of produc tsand INP thetechnologi cal capacities proper.These structures will
benefit from the expertise of CSE onenvironment and natural resources monitoring and it sexpe rience in managing
adaptation proje cts.
Finally ,thenational implementing entity(CSE) and implementing partners could build on a strong baseline through
research and development institutions and various other stakeholders (including local communiti es, NG Os,theprivate
sector, etc. )which are very active in the field of environment and natural resources management .
C.7.Institutional / Implementation Arrangements
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project, including but not limited to the organization structure ,
roles and responsibilities of the project management u nit, steering committee, executing entities and so on.
This project document is the basis on which agreement for project support will be reached and as such is the
instrument through which the project will be implemented and executed. The proposed instit utional arrangements aim to
ensure a good project execution and t he sustainability of its resul ts through the close involvement of various
stakeholders .Therefore ,theproje ctwill feed into the existing sustainable institution alarrangement swhile favo uring the
involvement of other stakeholders through a strong part nership based on consultation and action frameworks and
mechanisms, including anational steering committee (NSC) ,ascientific and technical advisory committee andregiona l
andlocalconsultationandaction frameworks .The project will be managed from a project coordination unit (PCU).
Project coordination unit(PCU)
ThePCUwill be based at CSE and will be run by a national Coordinator to be recruited through tender. He or she will
be assisted by a national expert in monitoring and e valuation, an Assistant Executive Secretary and support staff. PCU


---
*Page 28*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24OF77
24C
will be responsible for the design, implementation, substantive monitoring and internal evaluation of the project activities
under the authority of the implementing entity that runs the project administrative and financial management.
Implementing entity
Through its Climate Finance Unit, CSE will be responsible for overseeing the project and implementing partners,
including technical and financial implementation ,and ensuring that the project is consistent with the project design ;and
the due diligence, fiduciary and safeguards requirements to which it is held.
CSE also has an important role to play in building synergy between the project and othe r initiatives by Senegal in
complementary areas in order to facilitate experience sharing especially ofgood practices. More specifically, CSE will
be responsible forregularly submit tingto the GCF technical and financial progress reports related to the p roject ,thus
regularly reporting on the project management and level of achievement of the set objective and expected results. Asa
national implementing entity, responsible for thetechnical and financial supervision of the implementation of the project,
CSE will hire a consultant or firm to support the technical supervision and certification of work before formal approval for
payment (e.g. civil engineering works) .CSE will also be responsible for ensuring that the implementing partners meet
CSE fiduciary standards ,including AML/CTF risks in the project proposal.
CSE, as the implementing entitywhich de legatessome implementing respons ibilitiesto the implementing partners ,will
signagreements ,including contract specifications ,with each agenc y for im plementing the considered component .
Under the prerogatives of project e xecution supervision , CSE shall approve allcontra cts sign ed between the executing
agenc y and service providers .These agreements between the CSE and the implementing partners will be supplied to
the GCF Secretariat before the first disbursement is requested.
The modalities will be based on CSE’s Procedural manual, taking into account other CSE strategic documents such as
theProject cycle management manu al,theMonitoring and evaluati onmanual ,theEnvironmenta l and socia l risk
management manual as wellasitsGender policy.This Procedural manual will also be supplied to the GCF Secretariat
before the first disbursement is requested.
CSE will be the GCF implementing entity and will w ork through three implementing partners who are qualified to
implement the institutional -(IUCN), biophysical -(INP) and community -level activities (RADI). These capacities have
been described in the previous section above. CSE, as the GCF implementing entity, will be accountable for overseeing
the work of the three agenc ies and reporting to the National Steering Committee.
Thevarious committees that will set up aredescribed below:
 National Steering Committe e(NSC)
NSC members will include national designated authority, representatives of key public sector, private sector and civil
society stakeholder groups. Other members may be co -opted to the NSC to discuss emerging technical or
administrative issues. The NSC will be chaired by the President of the COMNACC and will meet at least twice a year to
consider project progress, budgets, workplans, targets and key reports. Additional meetings may be required to review
important documents or make decisions on issues/project direction. In order to ensure theultimate accountability of
CSE for project results, the decisions of NSC will be made in accordance with standards that ensure management for
development results, best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competiti on.CSE
will report to NSC on behalf of the implementing partners.
Local Steering and Technical Committee s
These committees will be set up in each of the two districts of Foundiougne and Fatick ,will be chaired by the Prefects
of those districts and organ ized around the existing regional climate change committee, COMRECC. It will be extended
to major stakeholder’s representatives at local level ( local communities, projects, communities, the private sector, the
district technical structures, etc.). Th esecommittee sarecharged with the supervision and monitoring –evaluation of


---
*Page 29*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25OF77
25C
project activity implementation at thelocal level according to the workplan in each district .CSE, on behalf of the three
implementing partners will report to these committees. All thr ee implementing partners will participate in these
meetings.
Scientific and T echnical Committee
The Scientific and Technical Committee will be built around theScientific Committee of CSE . This committee comprises
topsenior scientists in various fields ,including natural and social sciences. It will be extended as needed to any useful
resource person. This advisory committee aims primarily to provide scientific and technical support to the project for
designing strategies and activity programmes, monitori ng of their technical implementation mainly through field visits,
and evaluation of project results. It will provide technical advice on the documents drafted under the project and
technical recommendations upon request of NSC . It will have rotating chairm anship according to t he agenda and theme
considered.
Describe construction and supervision methodology with k ey contractual agreements
In order to stablish a legal framework to the execution of the project, implementation agreements will be signed
between CSE and each of the implementing partners. These agreements will state clearly roles and
responsibilities of each party, the procedures to be followed for the key activities such as procurements, budget
affected for activities involved, etc.  In t his regard, CSE’s key procedural and policy documents will be primarily
used and will beannexed to these agreements (handbook of contracting procedures, M&E manual,
Environmental and social policy and gender policy).
These conventions willallow CSE toperform an overall supervision of the activit iesofimplementing partners and
theproje ct.
Implementing partners in turn will es tablish service provision contra ctswith both public and private partners to
achiev ethe selected activit ies.
Aspart of the i mplementation , the proje ctwillsign memoranda of understanding with any structure that can
provide support forthe drafting of contractual arrangement sduly appro ved by the technical supervisory authority,
which shall guarantee observance of the project ’sfinancial and management proce dures inaccordance with the
Procedural manualof CSE used as a reference both for any contractu aloperation within the project and forthe
project’s relationships with its partn ers.Monitoring the compliance with the techni cal commitments rests with the
proje ctunder the contr ol of the executing agenc y and supervision ofCSE.
As the national implementing entity, responsible for the technical and financial supervision of the project
implementation, CSE will recrui ta consulta nt or consult ancy firm to support technically in the supervision of the works
and approval of requests of payment (civil engineering).
With the experience gained by CSE in running itsAdaptation Fund project, implementing agreements with the
implementing partners will be done as follows:
Signing of protocols: two to three weeks after confirmation of project approval; and
Payme nt of the first instalment :45working days after receipt of the funds in the dedicated CSE account .
It should be noted that the im plementing agencies will be obliged to comply with the Procurement procedures manual of
CSE. A copy of this manual will be provided to each entity when signing agreements. If necessary ,CSE will organize
workshops for the executing entities in order to exp lain the content of the manual. An agent of CSE will sit on each
procurement committee. All contracts will be subject to the approval of the CSE General Manager, sole authority to
decide o nthelast recourse ofthird parties in case sof dispute. The CSE Ge neral Manager always bases these


---
*Page 30*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26OF77
26C
decisions on the CSE Procedure manual.
IUCN, RADI and CSE are exempt from value added tax, while the INP is not.
Provide a timetable showing major scheduled achievements and completion for each of the major components
ofthe project.
Please see Table below in Section C.


---
*Page 31*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27OF77C
27C.8.Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable insection I (Annexes) . The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format
below is used, please refer to the act ivities as n umbered in Section H . In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be
completed.
ACTIVITY No COMPONENT/OUTPUT/ ACTIVITY Year1Year2Year3Year4
Component 1: Strengthened individual and institutional capacities for improved land management to reduce salinization
Output 1: The climate change institutional and knowledge framework is strengthened
1.1 Integrating climate change and natural resource management into existing local conventions
1.2 Strengthening local climate change consultation committees to coordinate adaptation efforts
Output 2: The knowledge base on salinized lands is improved
2.1 Creating maps of salinized lands for specialized users
2.2 Disseminating climate information about sal inization to communities and raising awareness
Component 2: Reduced salinity in agricultural, pastoral and forest lands
Output 3 : Good practice s on sustainable land management will be promoted for the
recovery of salinized lands
3.1 Promoting reforestation (fodder species on grassy salt flats, etc.)
3.2 Protecting soil against the various forms of erosion (mulching)
3.3 Mangrove restoration
3.4 Promoting biosaline agriculture
3.5 Improving soil fertilization
3.6 The development of grazing areas (agricultural, forest fallows and RNC6)
6Réserve Naturelle Communautaire ( Community -Managed Nature Reserve)


---
*Page 32*
---

DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28OF77C
28Output 4 The construction of hydraulic works to reduce the effects of water run -off and
leaching that contribute to salinization
4.1 The installation of water holding works (small dams and artificial basins)
4.2 The development of large ponds to ensure water availability for at least seven months per year
4.3 The c onstruction of anti -saltand anti -erosion works
4.4 Promoting small -scale irrigation (drip)
Component 3: Strengthening theresilience of grass -roots communities
Output 5: Food and nutritional security of grass -roots communities is better provided
5.1 The provision of adapted seeds for at least 50 per cent of farmers
5.2 Better management of bridging periods
5.3 The conservation, processing and marketing of farm pro ductions
5.4 Organizing producers in cooperatives and facilitat ingpartnerships
5.5 Producers’ t raining on innovati vesalinized land management techniques
5.6 Training of producers on salt extraction techniques
Outpu t 6: Grass -roots livelihood diversification to communities’ exposure to losses from
climate change
6.1 The agro –sylvo –pastoral development around large ponds and basins
6.2 Availability of vegetable products and animal fodder for at leas teight months peryear
6.3 The p roduction of fresh fish in sufficient quantity for a long period of the year
6.4 The creation of women -specific income -generating activities to enhance their purchasing power
6.5 Creation of w omen -specific income -generating activities to enhance their purchasing power


---
*Page 33*
---

RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
GREE N CLIMA TE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29OF77D
29D.1.Value Added for GCF Involvement
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme.
WITHOUT THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND
The various initiatives ofthe Government of Senegal and its development partners in salinized landsmanagement ,
listed in the baseline, still fac einstitution alandtechni cal ba rriers a s well as socio economi c constraints .Without GCF
support ,these initiatives willremain limited by the following:
-Atthetechnical level ,the current measures will be hampered by their one-off and scattered nature reduc ing
their spatial and temporal repre sentativ eness and thus comprom isingtheir e cologi cal, social and e conomi c
impact both a tthenational, r egional and global levels (interms oflessonslearn edto be disseminated);
-Attheinstitution allevel ,the poor coordination ofinterventions, inade quacy of laws taking into account the
CC spe cificit yinlocaldevelopment plans , difficult iesin mobilizing material and financi alresources for a real
and sustainable consideration of the CC dimension will remain ;
-Atthesocio economi clevel ,thegrass -roots commun ities’living conditions willfurther deteriorate with the
continuous process of land salinization and its conse quences on populations’ productivit y and incomes ; and
-Atthefinanci allevel,the State ’slimited resources and the grass -roots community poverty inhibit possibilit ies
to overcome the constraints andbarriersto combating CC and their impacts with regard to land salinization .
WITH THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND
TheGCF proje ctwillcontribu teto strengthening the techni cal, institution alandresilience capacities of commun ities as
follows:
-Atthetechnicallevel ,through the adop tionand scaling up of evidence -based adaptation practices in the
effective management of salinized lands ;
-Attheinstitution allevel ,stakeholders networking to develop an advocacy and put in place a mechanism of
consultation, coordination and action to bet ter address the CCissue at thelegislati ve, financi al, plan ning
levels (priorit y…), etc. In this regard ,according to the additionalit y principle ,the proje ctwillreinforce and
supplement actions from other stakeholders already active in the field of salinized lands such as PAPIL and
BARVAFOR amongst others ; and
-Atthesocio economi clevel ,by enhancing community resilience through improved yields and productions,
(food security); creation and/orconsolidation of green jobs (fight against the exodus of youth and women ),
improved acces sto land forwomen and youth through increased arable lands (with restoration), higher
incomes through increased cultivation of high cash products ( vegetable and fruit tree production )and the
develop ment of new sectors and va luechains.
D.2. Exit Strategy
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long -term fin ancial viability
demonstrated in E.6.3.
Project s trategy
Princip leofadditionalit y associated with this proje ct:Achieving sustainable impact is a major consideration in the
design of this project. Effective participatory, g ender sensitive approaches and vulnerability assessments, ensure that
project intervention is designed to meet beneficiaries’ needs and that all key partners and beneficiaries have strong
ownership of project outcomes. Adaptive management, through effectiv e monitoring and evaluation, ensures that
project implementation builds on theongoing assessment of project results ’impact and lessons learn ed, as perceived
by beneficiaries and partners, to enable thefine-tuning of activities and the implementation app roach. Alignment with
key national strategies and plans ensures that the project operates within the framework of nationally agreed priorities


---
*Page 34*
---

RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
GREE N CLIMA TE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30OF77D
30towards long term objectives and targets.
It is essential for the project management team to assess and monitor the likely sustainability of all aspects of project
support during implementation, in order to ensure that sustainable outcomes are achieved. Capacity -building for
national and regional institutions will help to ensure that institutions are able to contin ue to monitor the effectiveness
and sustainability of their actions following completion oftheproject, and to improve their effectiveness. Capacity -
building and technology transfer under the project will only be ‘effective’ in the long term if it helps t o establish
sustainable systems, institutions and approaches. One crucial consideration here is that the ‘solutions’ and
approaches introduced by the project must be appropriate to the financial and technical resources available in the long
term. Learning from past initiatives, the project will not use its substantial resources to introduce measures that are too
expensive or too sophisticated to be maintained beyond the project ’slifespan , given the resources that are likely to be
available locally. The pr oject will therefore deepen its engagement with key technical services like INP and the
Regional Directorate for Rural Development (DRDR), inter alia, to agree to theoperation and maintenance of the
project’s outcomes in the long run .Furthermore, Senegal isexperiencing a decentralization process, started since the
French colonization period. Nowadays, the process is in its third phase resulting in more powers transferred to local
government units for all local development -related initiatives, including i n the area of environment and natural
resources management, development planning, land management, etc. This is why almost all communes have
developed a local development plan. Therefore, local authorities and local communities have the mandate to continue
sustaining project outcomes. At this end, there will be MOUs and agreements between the local governments,
landowners, and NGOs on the arrangements for maintaining works after implementation. Ultimately ,the project’s
resources will be used to prepare a c oordinated strategy for gradually shifting from a project -approach towards long -
term thinking and strategic action. Planned to be executed no later than 12 months before the end of the project, this
exit strategy will allow for the prepar ation ofrecipient s to maintain and consolidate the achievements at project
completion. It will take into account gender considerations in order to safeguard the interests of women and vulnerable
groups beyond the project life.
Environmental sustainability is a core princi ple of project support, consistent with GCF objectives; the project objective
to increase the resilience of ecosystems and communities will only be effective in the long term if the approaches
developed under the project are environmentally sustainable. By increasing resilience to climate change in the
agriculture sector, and increasing awareness of key issues and risks at all levels, the project will have a corresponding
impact in strengthening the environmental sustainability of agricultural production sy stems.
Under this project ,the following types of partnerships with other stakeholders will be considered :
Memoranda of understanding to complete project activities with institutional support will be established with
State regional technical services, res earch institutes, training institutes, etc. ,in their respective areas of
competence, especially for thetechnical supervision of local populations. They provid efinancial and technical
support to State structures mainly responsible for the supervision and monitoring of project activities so as to
ensure the sustainability of their interventions. To do so, emphasis will be placed on the project response to
actual financing needs (gradual support in the State ’sordinary investment budget) and technical stren gthening
(integration of new technologies in the ordinary technical packages of supervision structures) ;
Contracts will be developed with apex organizations that benefit from the project to support farmers’ groups.
These plancontracts to be established in a tripartite manner between the project –the supervision structures
and producers’ groupings –will help toorganize producers, facilitate their access to technologies, funding and
credit to enhance their autonomy in implementing the activities and subse quently their future interventions ;
Co-financing protocols will be signed with partner projects and programmes in order to support common or
complementary programmes established among the parties ;
Intermediation will be developed by the project to link lo cal communities with other stakeholders who are
active in areas not directly addressed by the project. It willfacilitate the development of partnerships between


---
*Page 35*
---

RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
GREE N CLIMA TE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31OF77D
31local communities and other stakeholders in areas that are useful and complementary to project activities. It is
in this context that we can put together partnerships among actors of the same sector to set up value chains
or cooperation agreements between cooperatives and some private individuals (mainly suppliers) even with
some NGOs involved in t he social and economic fields ; and
Contract specifications will be set with companies responsible for the completion of infrastructures. The idea is
to define the conditions for maintenance, by the company, of the works to be built against their lifetime. In
addition, as part of the participatory implementation of the project and public –private partnership to be
developed, the shares of responsibility in the maintenance of each stakeholder will be defined both for the
private sector and local collectives, t he State and local communities.


---
*Page 36*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32OF77E
32In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance
of the proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity -specific sub -criteria and
indicative assessment factors, wh ich can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework , should be addressed where
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2 .
E.1.Impact Potential
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas
E.1.1. Ada ptation impact potential
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub -criteria and
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework .
The project directly contribute sto two of the GCF level impacts through:
GCF result area 1: The project will increase the resilience and enhanced livelihoods of129,804 ofthe most
vulnerable people in th esixcommunes in the project area. It is estimated that 50 per cent of these persons
will be women, 20,769 will be direct beneficiaries and 109,035 indirect beneficiaries ; and
GCF result Area 4: Through a number of direct biophysical activities ( component 2) as well as by removing
some of the socioeconomic drivers of salinization ( component 3), the project will improve theresilience of
ecosystems and ecosystem services of 51,800 haof productive lands by reducing and preventing
salinization, which is exac erbated by increasing temperatures and more erratic rainfall patterns , but also by
replanting mangroves and creating access to restricted forest areas (“ zone mise en defens ”), community -
managed nature reserves, etc .
GCF outcome 5.0 :Strengthened instituti onal and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and
development; Outcome 6.0 :Increased generation and use of climate information; and 7.0 :Strengthened adaptive
capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks, will be achieved through component s1 and 2 of the project which
will contribute to enhancing the capacity of local governance structures, including at the governmental and
community levels, through training, integration of climate change into up to seven local plans, and the development
of improved knowledge and practical tools on salinization and climate change effects on salinization. A participatory
approach will engage local farmers to apply and pilot new technologies and methods designed to adapt lands to new
climate conditions that i ncrease salinization.
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below.
Under the co –benefits related to activities of other projects in the baseline, the following data  are available
Expected to tal number of direct and indirect
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to
total population (adaptation only)Total20,769 direct beneficiaries and 109,035
indirect beneficiaries leading to a total of
129,804 beneficiaries (consisting of the
population of the sixcommunes of the
project intervention area) ;50per cent of
which will be women.
Percentage
(%)20% of the population (of whom 50%
arewomen) in the two districts of the
project area


---
*Page 37*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33OF77E
33Other
relevant
indicators51,800 haof productive reclaimed lands by reducing and preventing salinization and rehabilitating land
condition . In combination with community -level activities, it is estimated that food and nutritional
security of10,000 persons will be better provided for , and 1,000 households will be more food
secure during the bridging periods between seasons ( output 5).
The improved overall livelihoods in the project area areexpected to create and/or revive sustainable
activities in the loc al economy that are resilient to climate change directly or indirectly involving more
than 20,769 people in the activity value chains such as vegetable production, fish farming, thecraft
industry, livestock, etc. (local communities, traders, machinists, a rtisans, women and youth groups,
product processors, transporters, etc.) .
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one -off project/programme investment
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replicati on (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale)
Describe expected contributions to global low -carbon and/or climate -resilient development pathways through a
theory of change for scaling up and replication (e.g. in terms of multiples of initial impact of the proposed
project/programme).
The project will focus on promoting locally available and low -cost technologies that can be easily maintained by
communities. This contributes to the potential for scaling up and replication because it is based o n adaptations that:
(a) have been shown by research and development institutes to be highly effective ; and (b) are accessible because
they use mostly available and cheap local materials which can be easily mobilized by most local communities.
The project will exten dthe benefits of previous project experience and best practices, such as those realized through
aPAPIL support project by the African Development Fund. This project built major impoundment works to which this
project will significantly contrib ute through the construction of secondary works or complementary development’s
enabling the largest number of people to benefit from such investment. Owing to the infrastructures built through the
PAPIL project, rainwater that used to go directly into the sea have been retained and thus improving productivity and
increasing the number of producers that can undertake agriculture activities in the PAPIL’s intervention sites. The
number of producers working in the area has increased, as well as the activities, including rice growing, beekeeping,
fruit growing and market gardening.
Replicating the results of the project which is strongly related to its sustainability will be provided mainly through:
stakeholders’ capacity -building activities, scaling up of the p roject experiences; dissemination of its results and
lessons learn edthrough various information and communication systems.
Lessons learn edfrom the project especially in terms of innovations in the technical, technological, organizational,
institutional andfinancing areas will serve other projects both nationally and internationally through the G CF project
portfolio in the fields of climate change adaptation. Training and participatory approaches used to implement this
project will increase the chances th at participants will continue to apply the setechnologies and knowledge to other
parts of their livelihood creation.
Finally, the integration of climate change adaptation in local land management tools and supporting data and
information, such as higher r esolution land salinization maps, will ensure that climate change adaptation approaches
are reapplied through their application through those umbrella policy and planning mechanisms.


---
*Page 38*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34OF77E
34E.2.2. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment
Descr ibe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of
private and public sector actors in low -carbon and/or resilient development.
The project will build the capacity of all stakeholders, including public and private sectors and the communities, in the
area of climate change adaptation in general and salinized land management in particular. It will support the
capacities of stakeholders primarily through the faire-faire strategy used in Senegal.
Thefaire-faire strategy describes a partnership approach between government, civil society organizations, the
private sector and communities that promotes coordination, information sharing, broad -based participation,
optimizing resources, and sharing of ro les and responsibilities to achieve project or program outcomes. This concept
is reflected in the project design and institutional arrangements, particularly the setup of local steering and technical
Committees and the active engagement of local government s at the district level to date. The faire-faire strategy will
also be supported through:
(a)  Activities under component 1 which will focus on strengthening the government institutional capacities in
legislation, financing, planning and other activities for improved climate resilience ;
(b)  The institutional arrangement which will emphasi zeconsultation, coordination, and participatory monitoring and
evaluation of project activities to be conducted by the various stakeholders. This will be actualized t hrough
participation of COMNACC and COMRECC, which bring together relevant actors at the national and local levels, in
thenational and local steering committees ;
(c)  The technical and technological outputs of the project which will be evaluated in a co nsensual manner through
the Scientific and Technical Committee and be made available to all stakeholders.
In the longer term, project outcomes are expected to develop an enabling environment that will strengthen the
operational capacities of the individu als by promoting new agro -industrial sectors and value chains, ensuring the
effective development of salinized lands and related activities. Activities under the third component will also build
technical and organizational capacities of grass -roots communi ties for the creation of green jobs.
E.2.3. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national/local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically
drive investment in low -emission technologie s or activities, promote development of additional low -emission policies,
and/or improve climate -responsive planning and development.
In line with national policy guidelines on climate change adaptation, as illustrated by the signing of the UNFCCC, the
development of two national communications and aNAPA, the project, through component 1, seeks to strengthen
theindividual, institutional and systemic capacities of actors in land management.
In addition, by developing the capacities of local government, the project supports the implementation of national
government’s Decentralization Plan, now in its third phase of implementation. The decentralization plan includes
plans todevelop new District Pilot Plans for Communal Development that integrate the clima te change dimension in
local development. The GCF project will greatly contribute to this strategy by developing local capacity and


---
*Page 39*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35OF77E
35knowledge, as well as more directly by drafting priority local action plans on climate change that can be integrated
into th e District Pilot Plans for Communal Development. This will further ensure the sustainability and replication of
the GCF project results. In addition, the central government plans, through the Local Elected Representatives
Association (AEL) and the Parliame ntarian Network on the Environment, to facilitate thereplication of results from
such project as this, and to integrate best practices into the country’s national development policies, strategies, plans
and budgets.
E.2.4. Potential for knowledge and l earning
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning
processes, or institutions.
Knowledge management is based on an information and communication system enabling thecollection of
information data, their storage and sharing through thenetworking of various actors following a one -to-one process.
It builds on various materials and tools for information, training, education and communication which are summarized
through:
•Institutional com munication with institutional partners to facilitate information collection, storage (in viable
structures) and exchanges among them ;
•Education communication based on the training of technicians and education of communities; and
•Social communication to al low a large diffusion of climate information for behavio ural change and the data
provision by technicians and populations to populate the database.
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential
Wider benefits and priorities
E.3.1. Environmental, social and econ omic co -benefits, including gender -sensitive development impact
Describe environmental, social and economic co -benefits listed above, including the gender -sensitive development
impact. Examples include:
Economic co -benefits
-Total number of jobs created 2,840
Social co -benefits
-Improved access to education 7,680 persons
Environmental co -benefits
-Improved soil quality 50,000ha
-Improved biodiversity 1,200 ha
Gender -sensitive development impact
-Proportion of men and women in jobs created 50 % men ;
50% women
Economic co -benefits:
The project will contribute to thecreat ionof2,840 direct jobs related to salinized land management through: the
consolidation of production activities on poorly affected lands by securing salinized land tenur e or creating new jobs
related to salinized land management. Appropriate technical and technological packages (adapted seeds, adequate
farming techniques, production inputs, equipment, etc.) will be provided for improving production and creating new
employ ment opportunities. Fifty per cent of men and 50 per cent of women are estimated to benefit from these jobs
in order to comply with the gender dimension of the project.
The project will also contribute tothetraining of2,560 people in cascade who, in t heir turn, will each train at least
three others which gives a total of 7,680 people over the four years. Th iscascade training includes capacity
strengthening of relay farmers that were selected in villages who will deliver continuous training of farmers in their
own and nearby villages.


---
*Page 40*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36OF77E
36As a whole, agriculture is the primary productive activity as it employs most of the workforce in areas where land
salinity is the major constraint, any improvement in production techniques and technologies will favo ur producers’
training and the creation of jobs for the majority of population.
Environmental co -benefits:
Reforestation, land -use management and soil structure improvements (i.e. mulching) to be carried out across the
project area will improve soil structure as a means ofreducing the conditions of environmental degradation, such as
low soil organic content, contributing to salinization. The planted areas will contribute to the densification of
vegetation cover, soil fixation as well as attain mitigation co -benefits through potential carbon sequestration. All these
activities will enhance the protection of several hectares of land in the project area and foster rainwater infiltration to
help tofeed the underground aquifers and reduce leaching, another cause o f salinization. Through mangrove
planting, the project will participate in efforts to combat coastal erosion and reduce saltwater intrusion into productive
lands, and increase fish habitats. In addition, the project will increase water availability through thebuilding of water
impoundment structures that will increase water availability and reduce water stress.
Social co -benefits
The positive impacts on thelocal population’s living conditions include: increase in revenues from the marketing of
vegetable products (vegetable production, livestock, salt ,etc.) helping topay for costs related to children’s education,
clothing, drug purchase ,etc.;improvement in the nutritional value of diets through diversification; longer flooding
duration of ponds facili tating livestock watering and reducing pressure around boreholes and wells ,and conflicts
between farmers and herdsmen.
The revival of agropastoral productions and/or creation of new income generating activities like vegetable production,
fish farming, sa lt extraction to generate additional jobs to ensure both food security and sustainable income creation
for local communities, particularly the vulnerable ones.
In terms of gender, the project includes a number of specific activities focused on bringing wo men into leadership
roles in decision -making through the local consultative committees, thus ensuring that adaptation strategies meet the
needs and further the role of women in society. Their leadership across different project activities, particularly in land
management activities will also be promoted. Specific income generating activities have also been included in
component 3, valuing the role of women in small business development. Moreover, women’s participation in activities
such as reforestation, ve getable production, and agro -pastoral activities will be enhanced.
E.4. Needs of the Recipient
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only)
Describ e the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the project
addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups).
Vulnerability: events and threats
The ec oclimatic vulnerability of Senegal is almost structural due to its geographic position (700 km of coastline with
differences among the interior regions) and its climate (Sudano –Sahelian with a high seasonal variability of rainfall
and temperatures).
Thecountry’s vulnerability is seen at various levels and affects all of its natural resources:
-Climate variations: projections of warmer temperatures by about 2 to 4° C, receding cloud cover by 5 to 10
per cent and a sharp rainfall decline of between 5and 25per cent were made ( Gaye 1968; Malou etal.


---
*Page 41*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37OF77E
371999 );
-Water resources: the sharp decline in rainfall due to drought results in reduced surface water potential and
an almost systematic resort to groundwater causing itsoveruse thus leading to saltwater intrusion and land
salinization which poses a real threat to the country’s high annual potential of 35 billion m3(Malou et al.
1999) ;
-Health: the ecoclimatic environment favo urs the resurgence of various diseases such as malaria ,which is
the leading cause of morb idity and mortality in the country , waterborne diseases like schistosomiasis,
filariases, etc. ;
-Coastal areas: these areas are severely hit by coastal erosion mainly due to the rising sea level (evaluated at
1.4mmper year from records of the Dakar tide g auge ( Elouard et al. 1977; Emery and Aubrey 1991 ) with
strong swells resulting in strong sea encroachments into lands (with an average of receding rates of about 1
to 2 m annually in sandy areas and over 100 to 150 m annually in extreme events such as the breakdown of
Pointe de Sangomar ( Diarra 1999 ), rivers and soils ;
-Agriculture: mainly rain -fed,itsuffers heavily from the influence of climate events through rainfall decline by
about 35 per cent and erratic rainfall distribution (later start and shorter rainy season –Diagne 2000 ). The
rising temperature trend associated with rainfall decline result sin falling yields as well as agricultural, forest
and pastoral production ,posing a real threat to the resilience of agro –sylvo –pastoral ecosystems, local
community survival and the economic development of the country which is heavily dependent on the primary
sector ; and
-Extreme events are also noted like flooding which is almost recurrent in cities and villages, seawater
intrusion, off -season rainy spells (He ug 2002) with their share of environmental and human disasters mainly
with: 18 per cent losses in cereal production, 5 per cent of cattle mortality, about 85 per cent of severely
affected households ( seetheNational Social Protection Strategy).
However ,the most pernicious and enduring threat remains the evolution of the salinization front, resulting from
climate hazards which increased salinized lands in Senegal and more specifically in river –sea areas and interior
lands in the region of Fatick, the proje ct intervention area.
The increased size of salinized lands resulted in: thereduc tionoffarmlands by about 45 per cent ;declin einyields
and production; pollution of fresh aquifers prompting food insecurity; lowering incomes of populations; a growth
deficit for a country for which the economy is essentially based on agriculture.
Land salinization has among other consequences :
Attheindividual level: a loss of jobs due to the abandonment of large areas of lands that have become
uncultivated and to ru ral exodus particularly of young people further emptying the countryside and
compromising the future of rural youth ;
Atthehousehold level: family break -up due to exodus and emigration, but also definite feminization of the
workforce, contributing to inc reasing heavy work performed by women and their workload. Nowadays, there
aremore and more rural women heads of households (in the absence of men either temporarily or more
permanently), which was relatively rare in the past . The number of women heads of households is estimated
atover 20 per cent –according to thelast census in2012 ; and
In agro –sylvo –pastoral communities: a shift from traditional production activities and a loss of traditional
ethno -scientific knowledge and know -how, which stillrema in valid in many respects. Indeed faced with the
degradation of their environment due to climate change and the delay of response from the research –
development community, the population use salternatives that have so far helped itto often maintain a
minim al production.
The project will contribute to technically boost ingagro–sylvo –pastoral activities (for their continuation and


---
*Page 42*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38OF77E
38development) and enhanc ingtheir contribution to theeconomy (through the development of value chains involving all
socio -profess ional categories of the sectors considered). Thus, the project will contribute to rehabilitating individuals
through the consolidation and or creation of green jobs pertaining to the revival and/or creation of new productive
activities. The existence of in situ employment and income will help socially and economically tosecure households
and promote gender equity by occupying both women and young boys inimplement ingthe productive activities
which will need all available labour . The improved production, c onsumption and income resulting from these
measures will contribute to achieving food security and improving the living environment and standard making the
countryside more attractive for grass -roots communities and allowing better land development (fight against rural
exodus, aim for better wealth distribution between the cities and the countryside, etc.).
The choice of intervention sites of the project addresses this concern. Indeed, the districts of Fatick and Foundiougne
are among the areas where salini ty is the highest in the country. Yet, at the same time ,they are among the country’s
leading producers of cereal (staple food) and groundnut (cash crop by definition). Moreover, despite the constraints
of salinity, vegetable production is increasingly dev eloping here.
Therefore there is a real production potential in this area which requires only toovercom ethe barriers and
constraints related to salinity for further development. The ultimate goal is indeed to make it one of the country’s
breadbaskets andto strongly contribute to achieving food security and growth as laid out in the PSE (Senegal
Emerging Plan) goals.
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:
Economic a nd social development level of the country and the affected population
The project will contribute to developing new technologies more adapted to climate change and therefore more
productive for the restoration of salinized lands and improvement of their fertility. In doing so, it will guarantee
productivity so as to secure household consumption, ensure anincome level, provide benefits to women and youth in
the country by enabling access to recovered lands ,and develop related activities in the production sector (green
jobs). At the macro socioeconomic level, the project will strengthen the country’s food security, reducing imports even
increasing exports (especially for vegetable and fruit -growing areas which are severely hit by salinity), and therefore
improve the country’s trade balance and foster improved living standard sand theenvironment. This improved
macroeconomic environment can trickle down to other important economic gains in social sectors such as education
and health.
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity
The project will strengthen the capacities of institutions such as the technical structures and local communities that
are major actors in the project implementation. The project will provide support through:
(a)Training on the most appropriate adaptation technologies ;
(b)Material and logistic support in implementing the activities ;
(c)Strengthening local communities’ capacities toplan environmental issues and ithe legislative and regulatory fields
related t o climate change ;
(d)Enhancing the communication means in order to facilitate the creation of a network for disseminating climate
information among various users ; and
(d)Strengthening private sector capacities to address work completion operations.
Through this partnership approach designed to reinforce gains and complement other stakeholders’ actions, the
project will ensure its ownership by these measures and guarantee the sustainability of actions and their replicability
by empowering the actors respo nsible for its takeover .


---
*Page 43*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39OF77E
39E.5. Country Ownership
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including N AMAs,
NAPAs and NAPs
Please describe how the project contributes to country’s identified priorities for low -emission and climate -resilient
development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional
framework, or includes policy or institutional changes.
The project objectives and activities are in line with the strategic objectives of the National Strategy for Economic and
Social Development 2013 -2017 (SNDES7in French) through its 3 priority axis8andto the 3 pillars9of the PSE 2014 -
2018 (Plan Senegal Emergent10). The 3rdAxis of the SNDE put a particular emphasis on Women Empowerment. The
PSE which is currently the overarching strategic development framework put emphasis on the development of
agricult ure (under Pillar 1); the development of human capital, the reduction of populations vulnerability due to
climate change adverse effects and preserving the resource base and environmental services they provide (under
Pillar 2); and local empowerment (under Pillar 3). They are also aligned with the objectives of the Policy Statement of
the Fisheries and Aquaculture (LPS -PA11) Sectors which aims, inter alia, the development of inland fisheries and
aquaculture. The project activities contribute to the objective of the LOASP (Loi d’Orientation Agro -Sylvo -Pastorale12)
which aims to increasing the contribution of the agricultural sector to the economic and social development. Through
activities under Components 1, 2 and 3, the project resources will contribute to st rengthen the institutional and
strategic framework, create an enabling environment, diversify the productions, facilitate access to inputs, build
conservation facilities, strengthen food security and provide producers with trainings and organizational deve lopment
support. All of this will contribute to creating an integrated development of rural economy, the promotion of gender
equity and equality and a sustainable development. This should result in reducing the vulnerability and improving
productions and p roductivity of key productive sectors (agriculture, herding and fisheries) which are among the
objectives of these strategies.
The project considers the objectives of the “2013 -2017 Five -year Agricultural Programme” (PAQ in French) which
aims to ensure fo od security and improve rural living conditions by creating incentivizing conditions for rural
populations to live, work and stay in their community. The PAQ is structured around five major pillars including ‘’the
issue of farmlands’’ this project is l ooking to protect and preserve.
The project reflects the priorities defined in the National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) to Climate Change which
considers that the main environmental concerns (including water and soil salinization, mangrove degradation and
variations of fish stocks) the Senegalese coastal areas are witnessing are somehow directly related to climate
factors. The NAPA thus includes a priority programme (Programme 3: “Protection of the littoral”) dedicated to coastal
protection, reforestation, the construction of protective structures and training/information among the adaptation
options selected.
Activities under this project will contribute to the overall objectives No 1 (Maintain existing natural and archaeological
heritage and restore degra ded areas) and especially No. 3 (Promote eco -development activities for populations in
7National Strategy for Economic and Social Development
8Axis 1: Growth, Productivity and Creation of Wealth; Axis 2: Human Capital, social Protection and
Sustainable Development ; and Axis 3: Governance, Institutions, Peace and Security
9Pillar 1: Struc tural transformation of the Economy and Growth ; Pillar 2: Human Capital, Social Protection
and Sustainable Development; and Pillar 3: Governance, Institutions, Peace and Security
10Strategic Plan for Senegal’s Emergence
11Lettre de Politique Sectorielle Pê che-Aquaculture (Sectoral Policy Letter for Fishing and Aquaculture)
12Agro -Sylvo -Pastoral Orientation Law


---
*Page 44*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40OF77E
40the RBDS) of the Integrated Management Plan of the Saloum Delta Biosphere Reserve. Expected results of this
management plan include: "strengthening conservation and mana gement measures of the RBDS areas", "mitigation
of natural factors of environmental degradation (drought, salinity)", "strengthening organizational and mobilization
capacities of village communities and local institutions" and "improving the living conditi ons of local populations
through the implementation of income -generating projects".
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project
The project implementation builds ,through cooperation with many institutions ,an implementing entity and three
implementing partners .
CSE is the implementing entity wit hextensive experience in themanagement ofprojects for climate change
adaptation in collaboration with the Adaptation Fund. Moreover, CSE has been co-opted by the Adaptation
Fund as the implementing entity of climate change projects. Finally, CSE enjoys a proven technical expertise
as well as administrative and financial procedures recognized worldwide ( e.g. the GCF) and nationally for
autonomous project management ;
INPis a national body specializ edin land evaluation and management in general and in sal inized lands in
particular. It operates in the field with its regional centr es located in the country’s various agro -ecologic
zones. It conducts studies and experiments in conjunction with the research and technical development
structures which helped it todevelop several technologies on salinized land management. It sexpertise and
experience recognized in this field will provide the project with a technical and technological package for
direct and easy use to be scaled up ; and
RADI is an NGO that conducts many local development initiatives, especially in supporting grass -roots
communities for promoting climate change -resilient activities. It could therefore provide a significant
contribution to the project in social marketing, economic improvement of devel oped productions, educative
(information, training), organizational and managerial capacity -building thus promoting a dynamic local
entrepreneurship.
IUCN is very active in environmental and natural resource management, especially in the field of climate
change where itimplement svarious projects in the GCF project intervention area. It has developed various
technical and technological tools which serve as good practices that the project could use and scale up.
Furthermore, IUCN has a large network in the various decision -making structures which it can provide to the
project as part of the institutional strengthening mainly with advocacy, communication, climate change
mainstreaming in local planning documents, etc.
The a ctivities of these institutions arecomplementary and in perfect synergy through: ( a) CSE supervision to ensure
project compliance with the strategic directions and management requirements of the GCF; ( b)thepromotion of an
institutional, legal and communication framework conducive to the p roject implantation by strengthening the
institutional and strategic capacities via IUCN; ( c)thedevelopment of technically adapted and financially accessible
technologies through INP strengthening of the technological capacities ;and ( d) the economic enh ancement of the
project area through the development of activities with high added value with RADI strengthening of individual and
collective capacities. All these considerations are guarantees for completing the project goals, achieving the
expected resul ts as well as the sustainability and replicability of the activities.
These institutions will collaborate in project implementation. The programme of activity will be divided in tothree
technico -financial components with each managed by an executing agenc y, pursuant to a memorandum of
understanding signed with CSE. Programmes will be defined in common with the identification, for each activity, of
the institutional, technological and socioeconomic components that will be divided according to the tasks to b e
fulfilled among the institutions responsible for these components. Thus, the programmes will be better managed and
activities entrusted to each entity in relation to its well -defined skills and responsibilities. The resources necessary for
the specific i mplementation of each task will be allocated to the structure responsible for the completion, without
prejudice to the common or cross -cutting tasks that will be directly managed by the CSE. This management mode


---
*Page 45*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41OF77E
41will help toprovide the necessary autonomy to each structure for fulfilling its share of responsibility while supervising
the direct monitoring of activities by the implementing entity, CSE, which then can: ( a) exert control before and after
implementation , (b) provide support –advice in due cours e,and (c) provide when necessary, the corrections to
redirect activities.
E.5.3. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders
Please specify the multi -stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal
was developed.
Following the CSE accreditation by the GCF, an extensive communication has been made nationally to inform
stakeholders about the challenges of such accreditation for Senegal and the procedures for submitting a project. An
information letter had been sent to the Minister of Environment and Sustainable Development copied to the national
designated authority (NDA). Subsequently, the Minister sent an information letter to the President of the Republic.
CSE also held a workshop chaired by the Executive Assistant of the Minister, and attended by various actors
(including technical services from various sectors, local communities, NGOs, academia, private sector), during which
the GCF was presented as well as the modalities to acce ss its resources.
A large number of project ideas were then submitted requesting financing from the GCF. All requests received were
publicly evaluated and ranked, and only after this process, was this project selected. It was presented to the NDA ,
who, af ter discussing with the project holders, and insuring that the project goals and activities are in line with the
national priorities as defined within the NAP and other related documents, encouraged the continuation of the
process. Indeed, awareness at the highest level of the Senegalese State of the consequences of land degradation in
general and salinization in particular on food security has led to the drafting, over the last few years, of a
CNIS /GDT13, endorsed by the Senegal Academia of Science.
The fo rmulation of the concept note (project idea) was the result of a broad participatory and inclusive process
involving all stakeholders ,that is, the central government (Ministries), local communities, the projects and
programmes that are active in their fie ld of activity, research institutions, the technical structures, the technical and
financial partners such as IUCN, grass -roots communities and their organizations, NGOs, etc.
A project writing workshop according to the ZOPP participatory method was held over fourdays bringing together the
various stakeholders to help toconfront ideas and itresulted in the use of a consultant tosupport the elaboration of a
consensual concept note that was subsequently selected from 15projects by a reading Committee w ith the climate
change focal point approval. The participatory approach to the project formulation was pursued in drafting the full
project with the support of a consultant. In addition to the various technical meetings organized around CSE between
theimplementing partners of the project, field visits were organized in the districts of Fatick and Foundiougne in order
to update the project baseline through the following: (a) the identification of projects and NGOs operating in the area ;
(b) determination of the constraints and limitations related to climate change mainstreaming ;(c) evaluation of
implemented activities; ( d) definition of the needs for strengthened capacities to address climate change by
stakeholders ;and ( e) the share of thecontribution of each stakeholder to the project effort to adapt to climate
change .
These initiatives helped to collect, analy se and process information making it possible to ensure that the activities
planned under the project are fully in line with the populations’ expe ctations. The project holders were also endorsed
by the local authorities. In addition, it should be noted that the NDA was regularly informed on all steps of the
submission process and associated with the interactions with the GCF Secretariat.
13Cadre National d’Invest issement Stratégique pour la Gestion Durable des Terres ( Nation Strategic
Investment Framework for Sustainable Land Manageme nt)


---
*Page 46*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42OF77E
42In the imp lementation of the full project, the same approach will be pursued to create conditions for project ownership
from its start to the final evaluation. The concrete responses to community needs, the lining with national policies and
strategies to combat CC, the priorities of development partners are captured in formulating the objectives, the
components, the expected results and the activities. Besides these responses , the project anchoring in the viable
structures of the State and local communities as well a s its collective implementation by implementing partners that
have complementary actions are a guarantee of success. The participatory co -management and monitoring –
evaluation system involving all stakeholders in the various phases from the design to the im plementation of activity
andtheevaluation of results also contribute to its sustainability.
Stakeholders participation plan
Each stakeholder will provide a significant contribution to the project implementation with the pursuit of its activities in
land management (baseline), while benefitting from the project support (by subsidiarity) to implement the commonly
agreed project activities.
A detailed participation plan will be developed to define the roles and responsibilities of all the project implementa tion
stakeholders nationally, regionally and locally. The table below lists the expected project stakeholders that will be
involved and their role in the project.
Table of theroles and responsibilities of land management actors in the project
Actors Role s in the project
Technical structures (Directorates, non-
NGOs)•Technical partnership with the project/support in training and
organizational development of producers
Coordinating committees (COMNACC,
the National Committee GDT, etc.)•Coordination/support to the project in integrating climate change in
plans and programmes/ scaling up the project lessons and
experiences
Private sector•Intermediation with local populations
•Model farmers for implementing some technologies
•Completion of some activities (the faire–faire approach)
•Access to new technologies and seed varieties
Local communities•Political, institutional support to the project in activity
implementation
•Social mobilization of populations and elected representatives
around the project objective s
Projects •Coordination with other complimentary projects
•Scaling up of the project activities and sharing of lessons learn ed
Local populations, community -based
organization s•Direct or indirect beneficiaries of the project
•Role of oversight, ensuring community benefits and social
protection
Community radio stations•Outreach and larger scale dissemination of climate information and
on the project results/Participation in workshop sand forums for
disseminating the project results for reporting and docu mentaries
Research and training institutions•Project direct beneficiaries and major stakeholders with
communes/Relays for scaling up thereplication of the project
activities
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness
Economic and, if appropriate, financial s oundness of the project/programme
E.6.1. Cost -effectiveness and efficiency


---
*Page 47*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43OF77E
43Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives,
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providin g the least concessionality; and without crowding
out private and other public investment.
Theproject financial arrangement
Financing of the project will be sought from the GCF to bridge the technical gaps and inadequate financial resources
in addressing climate change issues by the State and other stakeholders mainly due to the various climate change
events and their magnitude. The project financing approach is based on the additionality principle which implies that
the project will seek to consolidate t he institutional, technical and technological gains (good practices), economic
gains (sector -based and value chain approach) and social gain (gender dimension) through the strengthening of
stakeholders’ capacities by overcoming the barriers to their effect iveness. Thus the inter -sectoral approach (technical
level) and value chain approach ( socioeconomic level) will be developed by the project so as to assist all public and
private stakeholders as part of a participatory and interactive approach.
Please des cribe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate
benchmark.
The project will contribu te both in its life span and in relation to the dissemination and replication of its actions in the
reference period of 20 years (2016 –2035 in relation to PSE14) to:
(a) Improving overall fertility of lands (50,0 00 ha in total )
(b)Recovering salinized lan ds (1,000 ha in total );
(c) Improv ingtheproductivity of salinized lands (by about 50 per cent (in keeping with the results of the PAPIL
project) ; and
(d)Mobilizing clean water resources for the diversification of productive activities ( nature of acti vities: number of
green jobs and anticipated income levels, etc. ).
Comparison between the project investment costs estimated at 8,160,260USD andthe economic and financial gains
expected from the project gives the following results in terms of costs /ben efits.
In terms of effectiveness, the project will promote other adaptation technologies to improve production activities inthe
evolving climate so as to guarantee a level of production compatible with the needs of grass -roots communities and
the country .
These two approaches will be combined into the mobilization of additional resources in land (recovery and
restoration), water (run -off recovery and desalination), workforce (job creation or consolidation), financial capital
(carbon market and reinvestm ent in productive activities of the agricultural sector and other related sectors such as
industry and trade), and human capital (rehabilitation of vulnerable groups through access to the means of
production and reduction of the exodus of women and youth w hich is an economic and financial benefit), etc.
The number of direct beneficiaries in the project area is estimated at20,769 out of the population of the six
communes ( 129,804inhabitants); while indirect beneficiaries include the remaining population of the six communes
(109,035). However, owing to extended family and ancestral relationship ,inter alia ,families and surrounding villages
in the project area, up to district level will more or less benefit from the project .
In addition, about 200 private companies or individuals will benefit from thesupport of production activities (supply of
inputs, equipment, transportation of products, marketing, maintenance, etc.)
14Plan Senegal Emergent ( Plan for Senegal Emergency )


---
*Page 48*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44OF77E
44Partnership with the stakeholders cited in the baseline will help todevelop activities that will generate co -benefits that
can be spread across the project area even all the Groundnut Basin area and Casamance which, combined with the
effects of salinized land management performance, will provide asignificant contribution to:  ( a) the achie vement by
Senegal of self -sufficiency in rice production; and ( b)theboosting the country’s exports through the development of
horticultural production.
In terms of efficiency, the project will promote the use of local technologies and resources combining them, if
necessary, with modern adapted technologies. This approach will help to cut the cost of major investment
significantly , to pay off investment in a better way by dividing itacross the activities and to mak esure it benefits from
large interventio n areas and larger segments of populations (especially as part of the scaling up).
For illustration: Comparison between the construction costs of one kilomet erof anti -salt work in local
materials and in modern materials such as concrete and iron.
-The an ti-salt work done using local materials mobilizes resources such as sand, straw, water, used tires,
etc.,combined with shrub plantations in order to stabilize the work with a strong use of thelocal workforce.
The estimated cost of such work is: XOF 5,625 ,000 or USD 11,250 (INP data).
-The modern anti -salt work in reinforced concrete uses, for the equivalent scale : soil from coastal dune s,
compacted cement, iron of various sizes and concrete. It also mobilizes a skilled workforce: engineer sand
technicians in civil engineering ,and often machinery (excavators, compactors, etc.). Its average cost is
estimated at XOF 24,525,200 or USD 49,050 (data from the PAPIL report) .
Therefore, the work in reinforced concrete is about fivetimes more expensive. The finan cial resources thus spared
will be used for better dimensioning and reinforcing the works with local materials w hile fostering their replication for
a larger number of direct beneficiaries (supervised by the project) and indirect ones (nearby villages).
The sustainability of the project investment will be provided at two additional levels: maintenance and replication. It is
heavily dependent on the level of involvement of beneficiary stakeholders and their ability to cover the related costs.
-Maintenance ofworks and equipment :
It will be provided through a direct and indirect financing by the stakeholders who are: the State, local
collectives, communities and other direct beneficiaries.
(i) Direct financing : (a) Under the Priority Action Programme of PSE whi ch is the main document for
strategic planning, the Senegalese State has a large budgetary component forthe construction and
rehabilitation of agricultural facilities. Investments made by the project could benefit from such a
programme; (b) local collecti ves ( district and municipal councils) are also responsible for supporting
the maintenance of infrastructures built in their territories, in accordance with their prerogatives
under Act 3 of Decentralization. These communities were involved throughout the p rocess and
therefore are ready to integrate this requirement in their regular budget ;(c)local communities have a
key role to play because the infrastructures are labo ur intensive (HIMO) and comprise local materials
mainly mobilized through self -supply by the same workforce that facilitates maintenance of the
works ;(d) the private sector through agribusiness developers will pay royalties to tap into resources
from the use of theinfrastructures put in place.
(ii) Indirect financing: Beneficiary populations wi ll be organized in tocommittees to manage the
infrastructures in order to better organize their sustainable use but also and above all toprovide


---
*Page 49*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45OF77E
45maintenance. Taxes on production will be set for beneficiaries and co -beneficiaries of the
contribution of inf rastructures to fund the work maintenance. These management committees will be
organized in tosubcommittees with specific tasks of supervision, control and management of funds
thatwillbe broken down in a budget intotwo headings: maintenance and investme nt.
-Replication and scaling up of investments and activities :
The pilot infrastructures built will be more easily replicated due to the availability of the various basic
elements which are: the local materials, the well -controlled technology and the wo rkforce comprising local
communities. The technical training for completing the production and technological activities (for the
construction of works) delivered by the project across the intervention area, the results in increased
production obtained in t he areas benefiting from the work as well as the involvement of the State supervision
structures are guarantee sof replicability and scal ability oftheinitial investment made by the project.
E.6.2. Co -financing, leveraging and mobilized long -term invest ments (mitigation only)
N/A
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged) .
E.6.3. Financial viability
The funding requested under this project is consistent with th e priority thrusts defined by the NAPA ,which aims to
complement and bolster the initiatives already under way and reflected in the baseline. The purpose is to overcome
the socioeconomic constraints as well as the remaining technical and institutional barr iersthatinhibit possibilities to
adopt, scale up and disseminate good adaptation practices within the framework of a sustainable and integrated soil
management. Emphasis will be placed on strengthening the individual and collective (information, training ,
sensitization), institutional (financial, legislative and regulatory ,etc.),systemic (policies, plans, programmes, etc.),
and still inadequate technical and technological capacities. In doing so, the project will contribute significant ly
towards the eff orts made at thenational and local level sby the stakeholders ,that is, the State, local communities,
grass -roots communities, the private sector, NGOs, etc. ,to increase the resilience of communities and ecosystems
(adaptation).
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention.
Under the project ,financing byforeign partners will contribute to:
(a)Improving and upgrading climate change adaptation techniques and technologies with support from research and
development ins titutions;
(b)Disseminating and scaling up of these techniques and technologies across the project focus areas and beyond;
(c)Providing technical and institutional support to the State technical structures , communities and consultation
frameworks and c oordination to strengthen their planning capacities (prevention, adaptation) and thesustainable
management of climate events ;
(d)Strengthening the material and financial capacities of local communities to facilitate planning, adoption and
application of new technologies that generate green jobs, incomes and create a decent living environment;
(d)Providing advocacy, information, education and communication for disseminating lessons learn edon good
adaptation practices, especially on salinized land manag ement at thenational, subregional and international levels
by building a knowledge sharing network; and


---
*Page 50*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46OF77E
46(e)Promoting the national private sector to foster the development of local and national entrepreneurship.
More specifically, the breakdown of the GC F resources will be presented in detail through the project’s various
components and the budget.
This total project cost over four years is USD 8,160,260, divided as follows:
-GCF project grant USD 7,614,260in cash financing ; and
-Co-financing :USD 546,0 00 (in kind) .
Thenational implementing entity management fees are not included in this amount.
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the
analysis conducted in F.1.
Without the G reenClimate Fund Financing
The baseline highlighted various country -level initiatives to address climate change. The economic impact of
measures taken has been relatively low considering the magnitude of the land salinization issue in particular. Indeed,
the tendency toloss of land andtherefore of production, jobs, incomes, etc., was compounded in such a way that
some parts in the regions of Fatick and Foundiougne have become real salt deposits with all the consequences of
this already mentioned. The fin ancial resources mobilized ,therefore ,clearly appeared insufficient for the
implement ation of the proposed measures to eradicate the phenomenon. In addition, resource utilization turned out
to be ineffective due to the diversion of efforts insmall areas without anyreal impact on the phenomenon which
require ssubstantial resources and a real coordination of efforts.
With the G reen Climate Fund Financing
The GCF project additionality will help tocomplement the ongoing initiatives through scaling up of g ood practices
already identified with proven effectiveness. The economic benefits will be perceived through various sector sof
activities with high added value such as: agriculture, livestock, forestry, agroindustry, trade, etc. ,with direct and
induced ef fects in terms of production, consumption, jobs, income ,revenues, etc. ,spelledout in PSE.
The financial cost -effectiveness of the project is to contribute to the productive activities and willdiversify in order to
develop a real value chain allowing w ealth creation. The expected gains in financial terms on the lifetime of the
project and beyond 20 years corresponding to PSE timeline is at least fourfold the project investment costs.
E.6.4. Application of best practices
Please explain how best availa ble technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices.
Several effective good practices on salinized land treatment have already been test ed by research ersand
implemented by the State technical structures , projects and programmes, NGOs and local communities. The project
will conduct more systematic and extended supporting activities, further taking into account the climate information
for adopting and disseminating the technologies that are most appropriate as they are more effective and accessible,
depending on the sites under review. The technical packages thus developed and approved for each soil category by
research structures will be di sseminated, in collaboration with the technical supervision structures among the various
users for effective scaling up and large adoption atthelocal (project area), national and international levels
(dissemination of good practices as part of exchanges ). A system for monitoring andevaluation of technologies will
be set up to support their dissemination so as to ensure their adaptability and therefore the sustainability of their
effectiveness according to climate evolution and effects on the resilience o f ecosystems and local communities.


---
*Page 51*
---

EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47OF77E
47E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators N/A
GCF
core
indicatorsEstimated cost per t CO2eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions
(mitigation only)


---
*Page 52*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48OF77F
48* The information c an be drawn from the project/programme ap praisal document.
F.1.Economic and Financial Analysis
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the
financial model, taking into consideration the inf ormation provided in section E.6.3).
Analysis of the e conomi c and financi al cost -effectiveness of the proje ctis based on three keyfacto rs:
The economi ccost-effectiveness will be measured through various effects:
-The project contribution to improving the living standards of local communities (households )
The proje ctwillcontribu teto increasing arable lands and farm yields , and to diversif ying the productive activities ,with
the recovery of salinized lands ,purchase of produc tion inputs and improvement of production techniques and
technologies. The contribution of these new variables will result in increased yields and production for use in
consumption and income generation .This has the double benefit of helping to make savingsinpurchase smade on
the basic commodity market (self-supply ),andtoshore up investment capacit ies (cash productions).
-Contribution topromotin gthe private initiative ( business ):job and wealth creation
In its approach based on the faire–faire andintermediation, theprivate sector is a preferred partn erof the proje ct
which, in addition to the demonstration activit ieswillgive priority to skills transfer toproducers and their e conomi c
andcommercia l partners .In doing so, it will contribu teto incr easing the techni cal and financi al capacities of private
operators, including both the populations organi zed into group s and individu alprivate actors with technical expertise
to carry out the allocated tasks .The ultimate goal of th isapproach is to promo te real value and wealth chains (job-
income creation) involving all the socio -profession alcategories of a sector so as to promo te empowerment and
system sustainability .
-The project structuring ’seffect on the national economy (State)
Increased production results in a significant contribution to food security thus reducing the import s of staple foods ,
while the diversification of production activit iesin high added -value secto rslike vegetable or tree -growing production ,
livestock ,tree cultivation ,amongs t others, will help toincrease export s.The resulting agricultural sector development
(through the revival of productive activities ) will have a knock -oneffect both locally and regional ly with the
development of related sectors and agro–sylvo –pastoral valuechain sunderpinning agro-industri alpromotion .This
double trend (lowerimport s and boosted exports )will translate in the country’s improved trade balance and re-
investment of financial gain sin the socia l and production sectors (the project developme ntgoals).
As to the project ’snegative value addition,it remains relative ly low in view of the following conside rations:
-Atthehousehold level,the primary activit y that can be compromised by the proje ctaction is salt extraction
which excludes all othe r activitie s (it cannot co-occur with any other activity ), emplo ys a rather small portion
of the workforce ,andprovides relative ly limited incomes due to strong depende nceon professional sales
agents ;
-Atthebusiness level ,salt extraction remains a marg inal and poorly structured activit ywhich is carried out in
a rather closed marketinvolving no more than two categories of sale agents: primary farms (local
populations) and traders reducing the impact of the activit y on the local e conom y; and
-AttheState level ,it is true thattheactivit y ensures self -sufficiency even export s,itsmacro economi c impact
remains limited by its low contribution i n terms of food security,foreign currency and job creation .
The cost–economi c benefit ratio of project activit yis therefore large lypositi vedue to its positive and structur ing
effects on the national e conom y through job and income generation contribu ting to achieving the project
development goals and the e mergence of the country in its own right which depends on t hedevelopment of
households and the private sector supported by the public sector .


---
*Page 53*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49OF77F
49Financially ,the cost -effectiveness will be ref lected in the financial cos t–benefit ratios of the project
investment.
The proje ctoperates in the area softheenvironment andrural develop ment as well as social andeconomi c
advancement . It therefore includes both recoverable produ cts (agricultural production a nd others )and non -
recoverable produ cts (environmental restoration and social costs ).
Intrins ic cost -effective ness of the funding
Recoverable produ cts
Todetermine the project cost -effectiveness based on the recoverable produ cts,the focus will be placed particularly
on vegetable production with high added value (empl oying most vulnerable groups ( women and youth )withan
alternative resilient activit y)andmerchant rice .
Based on yields per hectare obtained by PAPIL in the same area and using the same technologies, we note average
productivit y gains of 2.5tperhectarefor rice (6,008tfor the region ofFatick in 201 4)and 6tha-1for vegetable
production .
Out of the 50,000 h awhich overa ll fertility will be improved ,weenvisage a minimal case sce nario of planted area of
about 1,000ha per year for vegetable production and 1,000 h aper year for rice .
Based on an in itialproduction (minimal scenario of 6tha-1for vegetable production and 3tha-1for merchant rice
(PAPIL evaluation report ),theproduction would then be :
-Vegetable s: 1,000 h ax 6 t/haor6,000 t @USD 600orUSD 3.6millionper year ; and
-Merchant r ice:1,000 h ax 3 t/haor3,000 t @USD 500orUSD 1.5million per year .
Total annual income would be estimated at :USD 5.1million.
However, with water control , recovery of new lands and increased productivit y in addition to a double campa ignfor
theproduction of rice and vegetables mainly ,an even more optimist icscenario can be envisaged , especially as
several other productive activities like livestock rearing ,fish farming or processing are not considered here.
With the delayed effectof some inves tments mainly related to land restoration ,which is made in the medium oreven
long term, the expected effects from these investments are likely to be felt further in the replication phase of the
project activit ies.These arenon-recoverable investments inthe short term just like thesocial invest ments planned by
theproje ctin addition to those provided in the environ ment al field thebenefitsof which willbeseen indirect ly in other
related sectors. It is then possible to expect an e conomi c and financi alcost-effectiveness of the proje ct.
Calculati ngthenetvalue added prior to project financing
The NVA is set a tfixed prices regardless of the operating costs .The discount rate correspond ingto the opportunit y
cost of the capital insteady prices is no t considered either .
Revenues stand at USD 5.1billionper year orUSD 20.4million over fouryears .
The i nvestment is:USD 8.160,260 million.
Description YEAR 1 (USD
million)YEAR 2(USD
million)YEAR 3(USD
million)YEAR 4(USD
million)


---
*Page 54*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50OF77F
50Export earnings
Vegetable
production3.6 3.6 3.6 3.6
Merchant ri ce 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
Total Inflows (a) 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.1
Invest ments 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
Operating costs 0 0 0 0
Total outflows (b) 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
Cash flows (a–b) 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9
NVA +1 +1 +1 +1
The NVA prior to financing is positive and demonstrat es the cost -effectiveness of the invest ment.
Thecost–benefit ratio o rannu alperformance of the invested monetary unit (RUMI) provides a quick ,simple
charact erization of the intrins ic cost -effectiveness but makes sense only if inflows and outflows are steady .Here the
RUMI was calculated based on steady inflows and outflows prior to operation (without taking into account any
increase in investment andestimated operating costs ).However ,thisgives us an ideaoftheintrins ic cost -
effectiveness of the investment.
Calcul ating the payback period
Based on RUMI, the payback period is twoyears .
F.2.Technical Evaluation
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen,
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme.
Thetechnologi cal package chosen by the project app ears to be the most appropri ate in view of : (a)the extent of the
climate change phenome non and the current findings of research anddevelopment ;and(b)its consequences on the
ecologi cal(land salini zation), techni cal (inade quacy of current production techniq uesagainst the phenomenon)and
economi c plans (deterioration of the living conditions ofcommun ities).These consid erations suggest that the
technologies selected by the proje ctshould be relevant and effective enough to (a)provide a technical response to
land salinization ;and (b) provide an e conomi c and financi al response to the improved living conditions of
commun ities, promotion of the private sector and improving the country’s growth .
Indeed land salinization may be inherent to rainfall decline ,butalso to rainwater waste by the poor control of water
run-off.  Better management would allow leaching of soil and reduce the salinity. Technologies to fight against water
erosion in the watersheds (valleys) contribute at the same time to water infiltration to lower the saltwater level and
leach salty soils. They are complemented by works for thedrainage of saltwater ,andbythestorage of freshwater
used for multiple purposes such as agricultural, pastoral lands and fish farming .
To address such an issue ,thetechnologies chosen for the implementation of project activit ieswent throug ha
rigorous selection based on specific criteria:
-Theirtechnical effectiveness identified through research (byISRA) and development ( byINP) in relation to the


---
*Page 55*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51OF77F
51magnitude ofclimate change ,to their ecologi cal impact (land saliniz ation) andtheinade quacy of current pro duction
techniques against the phenomenon;
-Theirefficienc y due t o their relative ly low costs against the value added ;
-Theiravailability due to the use of local easily accessible mate rials;and
-Their ownership abypopulations whichisstrongly involved in their utilization.
The sustainability and replicability of the results achieved is enhanced by selecting technologies that meet these
criteria , which is the ca se in this project.
This is the basis for the selection of the proposed technologies implemented through the project activit ies, and listed
in the table below .
Table ofselected technologies
Activitie s Selected t echnologies Evaluation
1. Promoti on tree
planting (fodder species
on grassy salt flats , etc.)Use of spe cies
available at the
techni cal services
(forestry )andresearchCostsUSD 1,000ha-1
2. Development of
agroforest ry techniques-Use of ANR
-Reforestation-Needs only commitm ent and mobiliz ation of
produc erstoprotect wood spe ciesin farms
-Use the speciesavailable at the techni cal
services (forestry )and research -cost:
USD 125 ha-1,USD 60of which isfor the
workforce
3.Soil p rotection against
forms of e rosion-Framework
embankments
-Hedges
-Weirs
-Stone barriers
-Mulching film-Use of local materials(wood ,stones , sand,
etc.)andlocal workforc e (populations)
-Local shrubs and herbs ,local workforce ;
cost:USD 190 km-1(including USD 100 for
theworkforce )
-Local m aterials(branches) and workforce
(populations)
-Use of local materials(stones )and
workforce (populations) cost: USD 530 ha-1
(with USD 280 for the workforce ,57per
cent)
-Use of local materials(harvesting ,
branch es,straw,etc.)and workforce
(populations)


---
*Page 56*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52OF77F
524.Construction of anti-
salt and anti -erosion
worksSecondary anti -salt
worksand frame bunds-Use of local materials(sand ,water ,straw ,
used t ires, etc. )and shrub planting to
stabiliz ethe works
-Local workforc e(populations)
-CostUSD 11,250 km-1withUSD 5 ha-1per
day-and USD 568 of support in equipment
tocollect construction materials for use in
other ope rations5.Promoti ngbiosaline
agriculture-Adapted v arietiesofmilllett
and rice developed by
research-Use of salt -tolerant varietie s
6.Develop ing initiatives
of soil organic and
mineral fertiliz ation-Mineral f ertilization
-Organic a mendement-Use of natural phosphate from Se negal
(Matam) at low cost (USD 12 ha-1)
-Use of compost pr oduced from local
materials (animal s and plants )
–Compost cost :USD 56.5 2T-1ha-1
(with USD 32 for workforce and
transport ation )
7.Installation of run -off
water impoundments-Local m aterials(sand ,
stones ,straw , used tyres ,
etc.)
-Tree planting to stabiliz e
the worksUse of local workforce (populations)
Examples of pictures to illustrate the merits of local technologies and their level of integration and control by
local communities.
Local materials proposed to implement these techn ologies are:
Wood and rubble (stones) for filtering bunds and stone barriers ; and
Clay and straw for secondary anti -salt dikes.
As shown in the figures below, t hey are accessible to popu lations and were successfully used in combating the types
of degrad ation concerned.
Fig. 3: Mixture of clay and straw in laboratory Fig. 2: Rice straw used Fig. 1: Weighing of clay


---
*Page 57*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53OF77F
53
Combating water erosion will foster fresh water infiltration thu s avoiding salt capillary rise.
Fig. 4: Clay extraction by thepopulation s on the ground Fig. 5:Mixture of clay and straw on the ground
Fig 6:Use of used t yres to bui dtanoutlet
Fig. 7: Construction of a frame bund Fig. 8: Stone barrier on a plateau slope


---
*Page 58*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54OF77F
54F.3.Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations
Describe the main Output of the environme nt and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g.
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Envir onmental and Social Safeguard
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy
and Action Plan.
Compliance of the project with the G reen Climate Fund-specific standards on impacts
This project falls under the environmental and social category (C) (meaning activities with minimal or no adverse
environmental and/or social risks and/or impacts). Therefore:
-The project will have no direct impact on the allocation and redistribution of lands. Indeed, infrastructures will
be built at the request of communities and local authorities, and ofnational institutions with the mission of
managing the sectors considered .The p rovision of lands required for the project will be made inconsultation
with benefici ary village communities and local authorities under the State supervision. They will be subject to
administrative records duly established at thenational level for ensuring thesecurity of the community
investment.
-The project will cause no populations re location or compensation. On the contrary, it will help to better settle
local communities in their lands through the restoration and recovery of lands that had b een abandoned for
their unproductive nature. Furthermore , water control will allow theconduct ofproduction activities in any
season, consolidating jobs (by settling population sin their land s), increasing revenue sand ensuring some
food security ;
-The development of theproject will have a few negative impacts more or less persistent in the interv ention
areas, including thebreakdown of soil around some of the infrastructures to bebuilt, some deforestation,
sampling materials, etc. However, these losses will be largely offset by the fact sthat ( a) the actions meet the
needs expressed by the entire local community ;(b) accompanying measures will be undertaken to restore
degraded environments, in particular through reforestation ; and (c) employment and wealth will be created
for the benefit of the whole community ;
-Vulnerable populations willreceive thepositive benefits that will enable them to improve their conditions and
living standards in relation to their specific needs, through specific program mes developed for their benefit ;
-The project will have no negative impact on the cultural heritage oflocal populations because its action is
more in the technical field ,which is common to all the local community irrespective of sex, religion or caste.
The project willinstead develop a gender -sensitive approach which will mainly aim to improve the condit ions
of both men and women. It is about strengthening their respective capacities in the distribution of the tasks
entrusted to them in society and in implementing the project in particular ;
-The works built by the project will be scaled taking into account the set goal, the size of the site to be
handled, the project lifespan, theavailability of local materials, themobilization of local workforce and the
existing technologies and will be well controlled nationally. A technical feasibility study was condu cted for th is
purpose ( seethe a nnexes) ; and
-Large nationwide and local consultations were organized to ensure project ownership by all stakeholders,
particularly at the local level, in contact with beneficiary local communities, local authorities (local
communities), the technical ministries that have the mission of managing  the sectors considered, the private
sector involved in the implementation, etc.
Field investigations showed that several structures are active in the project intervention area for whi ch they serve as
thebaseline. Stakeholders helped inidentify ingthe constraints and failures and gains in adaptation from the existing
documentation and thefield achievem ents of these structures.
The project then conducted further studies to better sit uate its action in time and space in addition to the baseline.


---
*Page 59*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55OF77F
55Thus a preliminary technical feasibility study (see the a nnexes) was conducted to determine modalities for
implementing its planned activities.
During the project formulation and in preparation for its intervention, abaseline environmental assessment (EEI –see
details in theannexes) was developed. It seeks to assess the potential positive and negatives impacts ofthe project
and the measures to be taken for improving thepositiv eimpacts and mitigating thenegative impacts as well as the
other necessary supporting measures. It highlighted potential positive and negative environmental and
socioeconomic impacts of infrastructure (anti -salt dikes and related works) on the environment and on popul ation
social and economic conditions in relation to the future activities of the project in various fields, including:
-Thepotential positive impacts which can be summarized as follows : (a)attheenvironmental level:
increase in water availability with po sitive impacts on improved biodiversit y,replenishing groundwater
and improving water quality ; (b)at the socio economi c level :the revival of agropastoral productions and
consolidation and/orcreation of new activit ieslike vegetable production ,fish farmi ng,salt extraction and
commercial activit ieswhich can generate high value -added jobs also ensuring both food security and
sustainable income creation. This will significantly contribu teto improving the living environment of local
communities ,particular lythe vulnerable ones ; and
-Thepotential negative impacts mostly comprise: some deforestation for the purpose of development
works ,a loss of habitat for wildlife ,soilexpos ure to e rosion, pollution of air through dusts , chemicals and
ofsoilswith miner al amend ments especially ,and noise pollution forpopulations, etc.
The resulting environmental and social management plan has highlighted the following improvement and mitigation
measures:
Improvement m easures forpotential positive impacts
Summary table of improvement measures for positive impacts
Components Potential positive Impacts Improvement m easures
Vegetation -Gradual improvement of the biologi cal diversity
in the area (reappearance of animal and plant
species)
-Increased plant cover (re forestation )
-Good regeneration of tree and wood specie s
with the replenished water tablePromo ting mechanisms for sound
management of natural resources
Water -Greater availability and improved water qualit y
-Replenishment of the water table-Develop ingwater uti lization rules
-Setting up the management
committee
Soil -Recovery and protection ofsalinized lands -Associ ating systems tocombat
salinit y
Wildlife -Rehabilitation of housing ,land and avian fauna
which is particul arlyrichandvarie dReinforc ingprote ction actions
Populations -Increased incomes
-Improved nutritional valueof diets
-Shorter working time for women
-Wood availability
-Integrati ngwomen in the local e conomi c and
social fabric-Strengthen ing the capacit iesand
promo tingthedevelopment of income -
generating activities
-Capitali zingon the time saved in the
sensit ization o r in capacity -building in


---
*Page 60*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56OF77F
56specific areas
-Putting in place a systemfor the
sound management of wood resources
-Strengthen ingwomen’s capacitie sin
the areas of vegetable p roduction ,
marketing , acc essto land and income -
generating activit ies
Summary t able of mitigation measures ofnegative impacts
Components Potential ne gative Impacts Mitigation m easures
Construction p hase
Vegetation -Deforestation -Compensator y refores tation using
the same species as much as
possible
Wildlife -Loss of habit atsin particul arforbirds (noise )-Compensatory reforestation and
rehabilitation
Soil -Destabiliz ation of the soil structure (expos ure to
erosion)
-Expos ure to pollution through accident alspills
ofhydrocarb ons-Reforestation to combat e rosions
and rehabilitation (levelling )
-Devel opinga watertight system for
hydrocarb on storage
Air -Emissions of dust and smoke from machines
near the in habit ed areas-Watering and compact ing the
truck s crossing roads
-Covering of dump trucks for the
transport of materials
Population -Noise
-Airpollution caused by dust
-Potential confli ctsrelated to local workforce
recru itment-Usingmachinery in good condition
and work ingoutside rest hours
-Water ingand compact ing the
trucks crossing roads
-Enabl ing consultation with local
populations
Operation alphase
Vegetation -Conditions of suffocation that can cause tree
loss-Develop ingawaterworks control
syste m (r egulation of the water
table )
Water -Contam ination by farm inputs (chemical
fertilizers andpesticides)-Promo ting natural fertilization
techniques (composting ,using
organ ic manure ,etc.)
-Consulting with users and
sensi tization on the practiceof an


---
*Page 61*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57OF77F
57-Prolife ration of waterborne diseases vectors
-Production ofsolid andliquid wastesthat cause
soil and water pollution.environmentally -friendly agriculture
-Treatingof water bodies
(disinfection)
-Develop ingasystemfor managing
solid andliquid waste
Population -Resurgence o f waterborne disease s
-Confli ctsbetween farmers and herdsmen
-Reduced water acces sfor the cattle-Measures to control waterborne
diseases (information and
sensit ization)
-Build ing an IEC (information
education communication)
programme
-Settingmanagement rules (local
conve ntion s)
-Providingrangelands for greater
access to water points
Livestock -Transmission of diseases especially zoonosis -Support ingtheveterinary service
for health monitor ing of cattle
Supporting m easures andenvironmental andsocial monitoring plan
In complementarity to the necessary supporting measures, t heenvironmental and social management plan of the
proje ctwill address the various improvement and mitigation measures mentioned above, including :
-An ope ration alsearch for evaluating the nature an d extent of the positive and negative impacts to provide
appropriate improvement and mitigation measures ,respective ly,at each stage of the implementation
process ;
-Refinement andadaptation of the project intervention strategyso as to integrate the appro priate mitigation
and improvement e lements in its annual action plan as well as environmental and social monitoring elements
in its monitoring -evaluation system; and
-The selection of actions to be taken and resources to be mobili zed according to their impactand mitigation or
improvement measures likely to effectively contribu teto the sustainable management of the adverse effects
on the environment as well as to the populations’ living environment and standards .
During its implementation, the project is l ooking to develop an environmental and social impact assessment to extend
and complement the EEI for bet ter environmental and social monitoring of its action and tomake the necessary
corrections through its management plan.
As part of additionality , the p roject complementary action to other partner projects and programmes mentioned on the
baseline, such as PAPIL which built some infrastructures in the area, could also seek to address some technical and
technological, institutional and organi zational, educa tional and communicational supporting measures, in planning,
etc. It mainly includes: (a) restoring and maintaining the soil fertility with theadoption of water and soil conservative
techniques; (b) protection of upstream glacis or plateau areas against g ully and erosion; and (c) protection of
downstream lowlands against sedimentation and silting. In doing so, the project will contribute to improving the
physical and socioeconomic environment in the area for a more comprehensive positive impact on the envi ronment


---
*Page 62*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58OF77F
58as well as on the economic and social living conditions of the populations.
Gender and development
The gender issue remains ever present in the project approach .The problem of soil salinization, particularly of
productive agricultural lands, affec ts women and men differently. Women cultivate 70 per cent of land and account
for 80 per cent of agricultural outputs. With the persistence of land salinization, agricultural outputs and incomes are
reduced and hence alternative sources of incomes such as home gardens and other livelihood activities become
important. The decreased land productivity also results in rural exodus, mostly of men going to cities to work, leaving
women to become heads of households.
Indeed ,this social cate gory is the primary and most active and responsive workforce ,while it remains strongly
marginali zed in the accesstoproduction means and respons ibilities.The project gender approach therefore is mainly
twofold : (a)equitable access of women and men to production means, includ ing land ,training , financ ing,etc.,and to
collective and community decision -making centres; and(b)the distribution of rolesandrespons ibilitiesinproduction
between men and women . It is understood that the project has no intention ofchalleng ingfrontally and imme diately
theage-oldsocial rules governing the life of local communities for fear of rejection and tensions because such a
gender process should run over time .Still the proje ctwillcontribu tetoreducing this barrierbyapplying participati on
criteria and proce dures marked with positive discrimination .
The project will take various initiatives under the traditional activities where women usually have the upper hand such
as food through the cultures de case , small breeding, small daily or mo dern and new expenses such as: vegetable
production, fish farming or even theprocessing of local products.
-The revival of traditional production will be made through the supervision of cultures de case , small breeding
and trade. Some 200 women will benefi t from the support of the project which will also mobilize about XOF
50 million ( USD 25,000) to support commercial activities for theeconomic valorization of local products ; and
-The development of new income -generating activities is often left to women: ( a) vegetable production with
the construction of about 10perimeters equipped withresources for dewatering and production inputs
allowing production to reach high yield levels ;(b) fish farming with the development of fivefish farms ; and (c)
the setting up of local product processing units with high added value, etc. ( see C3). These new resilient
activities have the benefit of contributing to food security due to the continuous production activities and of
providing significant income toincreas ewomen’s purchasing power.
The end goal of such initiatives is to enhance women’s purchasing power thereby to foster their rehabilitation in local
decision -making structures through their greater involvement in the production and exchanges. Indeed , they make up
most of the workforce and therefore areessential in implementation processes of the project activities. This project
approach is also inconsistent with the current approach by public authorities to make women the driving force for
economic revival with the ir apex organizations at all levels (national, regional and local) and with State investments to
reduce their heavy chores and ensure their social promotion. ( Seethe Emergency Community Development
Programme –PUDC and the women’s advancement funds).
Expe cted environmenta l and socia lbenefits (attheinternational andnational level s)
The project expected benefits are twofold :environmental and social .
Atthenational level :
The project will contribute to improving knowledge on salinized lands and developi ng appropriate mechanisms for
adaptation in general and salinized land management in particular. Thus, good adaptation practices will be
disseminated among users in in the various eco -geographi cal areas of the country. It will thus favour:
(a)Water contr ol which remains the most decisive factor because of its impact on improved production


---
*Page 63*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59OF77F
59mainly offood ( andso of consumption) with the improvement of the fertility of 50,000 ha of lands ,and the
recovery of 1,000 ha of salinized lands .,
(b)Improvement of food security during the long bridging periods through better management of food stocks
with the opening of 20 warehouses ;
(c)Thecreation and/or consolidation of over 2,840 direct green jobs and about 10,000 indirect jobs related to
the rehabilitatio n of traditional farm activities and the creation of new activities such as vegetable production,
fish farming, among other things ,to curb the exodus of youth and women from the area;
(d)Increase in the added value of local products through storage, proc essing and marketing with the opening
of stores, processing units and the development of value chains ;
(e)Increased revenues resulting from greater productivity and diversification of production activities
estimated on average between USD 500 and 600perha for rice and vegetable production ,respectively ,and
also for fish farming and trade ;
(f)Animproved level of education and training of over 7,000 people benefitting from the project ’sdirect and
indirect supervision ;
(g)Strengthening the sel f-financing capacities of producers and the private sector as well as their credit
access which so far ha sbeen one of the major obstacles to the development of local initiative which
represents a guarantee for sustaining the financing andtherefore thesustainability of activities ;
(h)Improved food and nutrition which is a basic condition for increasing theproductivity of the workforce
mainly comprising women and youth ;
(i)Promotion of saline land management in areas where restoration is impossible prov iding sources of
relatively high incomes to women who often make up the primary workforce. Surveys conducted in farms and
local communities show that some areas of activity, although marginal, generate income of about USD 120
permonth forthe workforce mainly responsible for handling the equipment ; and
(j)Theorganization of producers in tocooperatives ( seven in the project main sites) in order to promote the
development of value chains through the creation of a critical mass of producers allowing prof essional
relationships with other sales agents to establish and to build its negotiating and trading capacities. These
cooperatives will also help toexpand the project targets, spread its products, effects and impacts more
quickly ,and facilitate thescaling up of the project activities through umbrella organizations.
These benefits from the project at thelocal level will have a knock -on effect on other economic activities mainly
related to the development of sectors and value chains thus contributing to attaining the PSE goals in terms food
security, agro -industrial development, etc. It is the case thatthe development of rural private entre preneurship has
taken place with the promotion of thelocal craft industry for therepair and maintenance of equipme nt and
infrastructures, of small local businesses for processing local products with the project support  (especially women),
as well as the development of related commercial activities. Moreover, due to the key nature of agriculture in Senegal
contributin g over 20 per cent of the national GDP also employing about 70 per cent of the workforce and faced with
the scale of the land salinization phenomenon, the project ’sindirect contribution will be more significant.
Other socio -environmental benefits expected from the project include:
(a)Rehabilitation of the agricultural and forest biodiversity with water control and the development of new climate -
resilient seeds ;
(b)Creation of a micro -climate enabling the development of crops theproduction of which hadbeen compromised
dueto the regulating effects of the hydro -agricultural works ; and
(c)Building a climate management culture incorporating climate information in the operation and management
practices, etc. ,ultimately the project seeks to integrate the climate input in the technical and technological packages
of the various productive activities and tofavoura genuine climate adaptation strategy that is consistent with the
approach esofCOMNACC and COMRECC.


---
*Page 64*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60OF77F
60As an illustration, the project ’sdirect posit ive impacts can be measured through improved yields in the two staple
crops in the area ,that is, merchant rice and vegetables . Productivity rates above 20 per cent are estimated on rice
and vegetable production up to 2.5 t ha-1and 6 t ha-1,respectively, for respective income gains of USD 500and600
perton,corresponding toan average household using 1 ha of rice and 0.5 ha of vegetable stoyield respective
income gains of USD 500andUSD 300;or for a double crop a cumulated maximum amount of USD 1,600per year .
Such gains compared to the project area are estimated for beneficiaries at:
-Vegetable s: 1,000 ha x 6 t /ha,or 6,000 t@USD 600pertonne, orUSD 3.6million per year;
-Merchant rice: 1,000 ha x 3 t /haor3,000 t @USD 500per ton ne, orUSD 1.5millio nper year.
Total annual incomes would then be: USD 5.1million.
Attheinternational level :
Lessons learn edfrom sustainable salinized land management will be disseminated at thesubregional and
international levelsin countries facing the same issues ina bid to promo te good practicesand effective mechanisms
against climate change globally ,in accordance with the guidelines of the UNFCCC and N APA.
F.4.Financial Management and Procurement
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, incl uding financial accounting,
disbursement methods and auditing.
The proje ctwill be managed according to the direct execution modalit ies (DEX). The CSE Proceduralmanual will be
used .The proje ctwill be subject to CSE accounting rules according to a monit oring –contr olmechanism before and
after project completion .Based on the approved budget and the annual workplan validated by th esteering committee
to which CSE and the project implementing partners belong ,quarterly cash advances are put in place. The f inancial
execution will be performed by the implementing partners who will submit for double -check q uarterly execution
reports with supporting documentation toUCP andCSE that is tasked with project supervision ,prior to mobilizing any
new request for fun ding.An annual audit will be carried out at CSE request by a private consulting firm selected
through tender .
The choice of private companies will be made through tender .The procedures u sed will be those described in the
Procedural manual of CSE and the procurement commission willbe set up toensure compliance with all
procurement p rocedures .Bids will be evaluat edby a technical commission appointed according to the procurem ent
specificit ies.Final approval of the choice made after the tender will rest with CSE with support from a design (or
contr ol)office .Dismissal of any choice by the la ttershould be motiv ated.
CSE has already suggested that the executing entities anticipate the managing of the project funds by opening
dedicated separate accounts. These accounts will be subject to regular and unplanned investigations and the
monthly bank reconciliations will be checked. CSE uses theSYSCOA/OHODA system. This system isin force in the
WAEMU countries (SYSCOA) and ECOWAS (OHODA) and system meets the s tandards of theInternational
Federation of Accountants (IFAC ).
Disbursements to implementing partners will be made in local currency (XOF). However, reports to theGCF will be
made in foreign currency (USD). The exchange rate to be used will be the excha nge rate o nthe first receipt of funds
(for signature). This rate will prevail until the end of the project and necessary adjustments will follow.
Applications for funding will be made quarterly, based on the supplied and approved reports and the amounts
planned for the following quarter. Spot checks will be made, bank reconciliations will be submitted before the 10thof
each month and each quarter, supporting documents will be submitted for verification and approval.
A period of 10 days is given to imple menting agencies for the provision of technical and financial reports at the end of
each quarter.


---
*Page 65*
---

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
GREEN CLIMATE FUN D FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61OF77F
61After approval of the technical and financial reports, CSE has a period of seven days in which to make available the
next disbursement .Disbursements depend on both technical and financial reports and audits conducted.
The steering committee is the forum for exchange between the implementing agencies and CSE. Any current or
potential problems, difficulties encountered, expected support, reporting, enforcement , auditing, etc. ,will be
discussed at meetings of the steering committee .
Project funds will be managed by the authorities (leaders) of the implementing partners and the Managing Director of
CSE. At CSE and IUCN there is a system of co -signing between th e Managing Director and the Head of Finance .
At the end of each year an audit ingfirm of international standing will be recruited. The firm will be responsible for
auditing all project funds (among implementing agencies and CSE).
The standards used in th e audits’missions will be generally accepted in the profession ,including IFAC standards.


---
*Page 66*
---

RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62OF77G
62G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitiga tion measures.
Selected Risk Factor 1
Description Risk c ategory Level of r iskProbability ofrisk
occurring
Insufficient financial resources for the imple mentation
of project activities , which would be due to price
inflation for materials and equipmen t and other inputs.FinancialMedium (5.1 -20
per cent of
project value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
In parallel with theproje ctareongoing programmes (co -financ ing),establishment of memoranda of understanding
(MOUs) with some stakeholders and suppliers andthedevelop ment of thefaire–faire approach and interme diation .
In addition, a contingency alloca tion w ill be considered in the project cost. The MOUs with stakeholders and
suppliers will reflect price agreements that will not increase with inflation.
Selected Risk Factor 2
Description Risk category Level of riskProbability of risk
occurring
Producers l ackmotivation toadopt technologies due to
thephysi cal and /orfinanci al investment costs .FinancialMedium (5.1 -20
per cent of
project value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. D o the mitigants lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Involve all stakeholders by organizing large community consultations, including women, youth, socio -professionalG.1. Risk Assessment Summary
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be
elaborated in G .2.
Implementing such aproje ctwhich focuses on techni cal and technologi cal innovations may face some barrie rsand
constraints that may compromise the achievement of its objecti ves and results. The main risks include : (a)
insignificant mobiliz ation oftheresources ne cessar y for the a doption andparticularly thedissemination of good
practicesthus limiting the project ’simpact ;(b)communities’ reticence toadopt new technologies that demand
working time and capita l in areas where poor populations often live ;(c)thelack of involvement of research –
development structures which often cite thelack of resources to provide a significant contribution ;(d)thecasesof
force majeur ewith unexpected climate disruptions such as droughts (high saltwater intrusion )or strong seawater
encroachments , (e)poor availability of climate information to est ablish adequate forecast and adaptation
programmes ; (f) the most intense consequ ences of climate change and their impacts on activity programming and
the work dimensioning , etc. A drastic rainfall decline would reduce theleaching of salty soils and accelerate
saltwater intrusion thus compromising salinized land recovery. Conversely, the resulting storms and floods may
jeopardize the project and compromise investment progra mmes .


---
*Page 67*
---

RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63OF77G
63organizations, etc.
Selected Risk Factor 3
Description Risk category Level of riskProbability of risk
occurring
More intense climate change i mpacts/ poor acces sto
climate informationTechnical and
operationalHigh (>20 per
cent of project
value)High
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
-Use the climate information monitoring programmes and develop adapted technologies (re search–develop ment) ;-
Leverage information from lessons learn ed.
Selected Risk Factor 4
Description Risk category Level of riskProbability of risk
occurring
Low consideration of the gender dimension inaccess
to capital and land resources .Social and
environmentalMedium (5.1 -20
per cent of
projec t value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
-Target women and youth group s which are the most active workfor ce and strengthen their techni cal and financi al
capacities asrelates to theadoption anddisseminat ionoftechnologies ;and
-Involve local communities infacilit atingaccessto the sites due to be restored.
Selected Risk Factor 5
Description Risk cat egory Level of riskProbability of risk
occurring
Conflict between farmers selected to participate in the
program meand those who are not .SocialMedium (5.1 -20
per cent of
project value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identifie d risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Establish the selection of beneficiary farmers by involving umbrella organizations, local authorities and technical
services, with transp arent criteria. Also, the redress mechanisms of the CSE, for which it has been accredited, will
be used in the case of conflict.


---
*Page 68*
---

RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64OF77G
64Selected Risk Factor 6
Description Risk category Level of riskProbability of risk
occurring
Low consideration of the sp ecificity of salinized lands
inlocaltexts (land allocation )and local development
plansOtherMedium (5.1 -20
per cent of
project value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Support local communities in elaborati nglocal develop ment plans inte grating the climate dimension with the help of
COMNACC andCOMRECCs .
Selected Risk Factor 7
Description Risk category Level of riskProbability of risk
occurring
Perpetuation of bad land management practices OtherMedium (5.1 -20
per cent of
project value)Medium
Mitigation Measure(s)
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitig ants lower the probability of risk
occurring? If so, to what level?
Organize awareness campaigns on best practices in sustainable land management and promote climate information
and enhance producers’ training on innovative techniques and technologies
*Please expand this sub -section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.


---
*Page 69*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 65OF77
65H
H.1.Logic Framework
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Results Management Framework and
Performance Measurement Framework .
Note: Baseline and targets will be confirmed during projec t initiation
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level15
Paradigm shift objectives
Choose appropriate
expected resultImprove the climate resilience of salinized land ecosystems and communities by
restoring the productive bases of sa linized lands
Expected Result IndicatorMeans of
Verificatio
n (MoV)BaselineTarget
AssumptionsMid-term
(if
applicabl
e)Final
Fund -level impacts
1.0Increased resilience
and enhanced
livelihoods of the most
vulnerable people,
communities, and
regions1.2Number of
males and
females
benefitting from
theadoption of
diversified,
climate -resilient
livelihood options
(including
fisheries,
agriculture,
tourism, etc.)Monitoring -
evaluation
reportsCurrently
about 40,000
persons are
benefittin g
from the
adoption of
diversified,
climate -
resilient
livelihood
options10,000
more
than the
baseline
(50%
women
and 50%
men)
(leading
to a total
of
50,000
person s)20,769
more
than the
baseline
(50%
women
and
50%
men)
(leading
to a
total of
60,76 9
person s
)Alternative
livelihoods/activit
ies identified are
attractive to the
population
15Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinemen t):
<http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf >.


---
*Page 70*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 66OF77
66H
4.0 Improved resilience
of ecosystems and
ecosystem services4.1Coverage/scale
of ecosystems
protected and
strengthened in
response to
climate variabili ty
and change (in
hectares)Midterm
evaluation
and final
evaluation
reportsThe baseline
in the project
area is
27,942 ha of
ecosystems,
protected
and
strengthened20,600h
ato be
added to
the
baseline
(leading
to a total
of
48,542h
a)51,800
ha to be
added
to the
baseline
(leading
to a
total of
79,742 )Awareness
raising activities
foster the
population’s
mobilization for
reforestation ,
mangrove
restoration
activities ,
organic
amendment,
promotion of
biosaline
agriculture,
mineral
amendment and
rehabilitated
salinized land


---
*Page 71*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 67OF77
67H
H.1.2. Outputs, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level
Expected Result IndicatorMeans of
Verification
(MoV)Baselin
eTarget
AssumptionsMid-term
(if
applicabl
e)Final
Project outcomesOutputs that co ntribute to Fund -level impacts
5.0
Strengthened
institutional and
regulatory systems for
climate -responsive
planning and
development5.1 Institutional and
regulatory systems
that improve
incentives for climate
resilience and their
effective
implement ationVerification
of local
developmen
t plansBaselin
e is
zero.
CC
consider
ations
are still
poorly
address
ed in
local
develop
ment
plans4 local
plans are
develope
d and
implemen
ted
against
the
project
activities7 local
plans
are
develo
ped
and
implem
entedDrafting of
implementation
texts related to
Phase 3 of
Decentralization
provides an
opportunity to
integrate the CC
dimension in tothe
new local plans
6.0 Increased generation
and use of climate
information in decision -
making6.2 Use of climate
information
products/services in
decision -making in
climate -sensitive
sectorsMonitoring -
evaluation
reportsThe
baseline
ofthe
project
districts
is zero.
The use
of
climate
informat
ion in
develop
ment
activitie
s
remains
rudimen
tary20% of
project
stakehold
ers use
climate
informati
on in
their
decisions50% of
project
stakeh
olders
use
climate
informa
tion in
their
decisio
nsIncreased
awareness of
climate change
impacts by
communities
favours greater
use of climate
information
7.0Strengthened
adaptive capacity and
reduced exposure to
climate risks7.1Development
and use of GCF -
supported tools,
instruments,
strategies and
activities to respond
to climate changeMonitoring -
evaluation
reportsThe
baseline
is zero.
Low
capacity
to
respond4 tools,
instrume
nts or
strategies
are used
by project
stakehold10
tools,
instrum
ents or
strategi
es are
usedCapacity -building
and outreach
activities foster the
adoption of to ols,
instruments and
strategies
developed by the


---
*Page 72*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 68OF77
68H
and variability to
climate
change
and
variabilit
yers by
project
stakeh
oldersproject
Project outputs Outputs that contribute to Outcomes
Output 1. The CC
institutional and
knowledge framework
is strengthened1.1. Number of
planning documents
integrating CC at
district and
communal (local)
levelsReview of
document
sNo
considerati
on of CC in
planning
documents
at the
district and
commune
levels15 local
conventio
nsand 3
local
plans
integratin
g the CC
dimensio
n30 local
conventio
ns and 7
local
plansTheever
striking signs of
CC and their
impacts on
development
are a context
enabling
awareness -
raising by
decision -makers
of the necessary
integration of
CC in policies
Output 2. The
knowledge base on
salinized lands is
improved2.1 Number of
public /private
institutions and
producers regularly
using the climate
information
produced by the
project to make
decisions to reduce
and prevent
salinizationActivity
reports
from local
governme
nt offices
Interviews
with
farmers,
producers
,
cooperati
vesand
women’s
groups
Review of
calls for
proposals
issued by
governme
nt and the
private
sectorBaseline is
zero5
different
new
technolo
gies are
tested by
local
populatio
ns
20
institution
s atthe
district
level
(including
producer
s, local
governm
ent,
extension
services,
local
NGO s,
etc.) cite
climate10
different
new
technolog
ies are
tested by
local
populatio
ns
50
institution
s atthe
district
level
(including
producer
s, local
governm
ent,
extension
services,
local
NGO s,
etc.) cite
climateKnowledge of
interactions
between climate
and land
salinization is
the basis for
implementing
adaptation
measures


---
*Page 73*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 69OF77
69H
change
adaptatio
n in their
decisionschange
adaptatio
n in their
decisions
Output 3. Good
practices for
sustainable land
management are used
fortherecovery of
salinized land and
prevention3.1. Rehabilitated
salinized land in haMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
n reportsCurrently
total area
rehabilitate
d is 1,775
ha500 ha
(leading
to a total
of 2,275
ha)1,000 ha
(leading
to a total
of 2,775
ha)Knowledge of
the C C impact
on salty lands
will help to
develop
appropriate
adaptive
practices
Mangrove restored
in haMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
nreports800 ha
(from
previous
projects)100 ha 200 ha Mangrove
reforestation will
limit seawater
intrusion and
safeguard agro -
sylvo -pastoral
and fishery
activities
Promotion of
biosaline agriculture:
Tolerant  varieties
seeds grow in haMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
nreports0 - 600 ha of
various
tolerant
varieties
seeds are
grownUse of tolerant
varieties could
help adapting
agricul ture to
changing the
environment,
here land
salinization
Mineral amendment
ofin ha Monitorin
g-
evaluatio
nreportsActual
area under
mineral
amendmen
t (30 % of
the project
interventio
n area :
25000 ha)20000
ha50 000
haAs nutrients of
lands were
depleted over
the years, the
use of mineral
amendment
should improve
land fertility
Organic amendment
in haMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
nreportsActual
area under
organic
amendmen
t (15 % of
the project
interventio
n area :400 ha 1000 ha Use of organic
amendment will
further improve
land fertility
particularly to
the d esalinized
lands


---
*Page 74*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 70OF77
70H
13000 ha)
Nature and number
of hydraulic works to
be builtMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
n reportsFew ponds
and frame
bunds exit
in the
project
interventio
n area-5 ponds
-100
frame
bunds-10
ponds
-200
frame
bundsConstruction of
hydraulic works
will help to
reduce the
effects of water
runoff and
leaching that
contribute to
salinization.
These will
promote various
activities
(including
agriculture,
pastoral,
fisheries,
drinking, etc.)
and ultimately
contribute
reversing land
salinization
trend
Protected areas to
be developed in haMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
n reportsAbout
4000 ha of
lands are
presently
under
various
forms of
sustainabl
e
manageme
nt and/or
protection- 1 000 ha Natural soil
regeneration
techniques and
improved land
management
could help
fighting against
erosion while
facilitating
infiltration,
fostering
biological rise
and ultimately
preserving and
protecting lands.
Output 4. The
construction of
hydraulic works to
reduce the effects of
water run -off and
leaching that
contribute to
salinization4.1 Nature and
number of works
builtContracto
r’s
completio
n report0 5 ponds
100
frame
bunds10 ponds
200
frame
bundsThere is a
strong demand
by grass -roots
communities
justifying works
construction
Promotion of small -
scale irrigation :
Area under waterMonitorin
g-
evaluatio10 ha
under
water5 ha
under
water10 ha
under
waterWater -saving
techniques
could help


---
*Page 75*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 71OF77
71H
saving techniques
(drip system) in han reports saving
techniques
; involving
10 women
organizatio
nssaving
techniqu
es
5 women
organizat
ions
involvedsaving
technique
s
10
women
organizati
ons
involvedbetter manage
the use of
groundwater
and limit
saltwater
encroachment
Output 5. Food and
nutritional security of
grass -roots
communities is better
provided5.1 Number of
producers using
locally -produced
adapted seedsMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
n reportsCurrently
about
2,700
producers
are using
locally -
produced
adapted
seeds300 more
added to
the
baseline600 more
added to
the
baselineResults from
pilot farms can
be an incentive
to producers
5.2 Number of food
secure households
during the bridging
periodMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
n reportsAbout
4,000
household
s are food
secure500 to be
added to
the
base line1000 to
be added
to the
baselineIncreased local
production
should foster
thisoutput
5.3 Number of
varieties of local
products stored and
processed in situMonitorin
g-
evaluatio
n reportsCurrently
there are
less than 5
varieties of
local
products3 new
varieties
of local
products6 new
varieties
of local
products
(in total to
the
baseline)The availability
of surplus of
agricultur al
production will
bring more
opportunit iesfor
storage and
diversification of
processed food
Output 6. Grass -roots
livelihood
diversification to
communities’
exposure to losses
from to climate change6.1 Increased
revenues for local
population sLocal
governme
nt census
data,
interviews
with
househol
dsAverage
household
income of
USD 300Increase d
by 10%
Activities Description Inputs Notes
1.1Integrating climate
change and natural
resource management
into existing local
conventionsThetwodistricts of Fatick and
Foundiougne as well as sixother
pilot communes ( three per
district) will, under the
implementatio n of the new
planning tools from the reform-Management
guidelines
incorporating the CC
dimension are
developed
-Planning sessions willWith support ofthe
consultant in
decentralization and local
technical structures such as
the Local Development
Support Centre and the


---
*Page 76*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 72OF77
72H
(Act 3 of Decentralization) benefit
from the project support to
integrate CC in their local
development plansbe orga nized at various
levelsState representatives, the
new documents will be
developed in close
consultation with the variou s
stakeholders
1.2. Strengthening local
climate change
consultation committees
to coordinate adaptation
effortsIt is to put in place a local
consensual framework
guaranteeing a concerted and
sustainable management of the
environment and natural
resource s by all users under the
control of the entire community
with the supervision of the local
community-Good practice charter
-Control body
-Committed
communityLocal conventions will build
on a well -defined charter,
accepted by committed
communit ies,and placed
under the arbitration of the
elders and supervision of the
local community controlling
compliance with regulatory
texts
2.1. Creating maps of
salinized lands for
specialized usersMap to the 1/10,000th (conduct
survey at each km) of salty land s
in the project sites-Prospection trips
-CartographerA cartographer will help in
the elaboration ofthe field
surveys
2.2.  Disseminating
climate information
about salty lands to
communities and raising
awarenessVarious information materials will
be developed for large
dissemination among users-10-day bulletins,
listening networks,
media , etc.A climate information
dissemination network will
be developed with relays
among users
3.1. Promoting
reforestation (fodder
species on grassy salt
flats, et c.)It is about using species adapted
to saline ecosystems to conduct
reforestation and agroforestry
activities-Plant material
-Technical package
-Small equipmentThe technology will be
developed in conjunction
with DEFCCS and ISRA
3.2.  Protecting s oils
against the various
forms of erosion
(mulching)Anti-erosion mechanisms
(DRS/CES) will be put in place to
fight against wind and water
erosion-Stone materials
-Vegeta blematerial
-Small equipmentHuman investment will be
mobilized and locally
available materials will be
given precedence
3.3.  Mangrove
restorationMangrove reforestation activities
will be conducted to limit
seawater intrusion and safeguard
agro–sylvo –pastoral and fishery
activities-Vegeta blematerial
(propagule)
-Small equipm ent
-Techniques usedHuman investment will be
mobilized and local
populations will be trained
on good planting techniques
3.4.  Promoting biosaline
agricultureThe works are built with clay and
straw using anabundant local
workforce. They will be buil t in
valley swith high production
potential-Local materials
-Techniques usedThe use of local materials
helps toreduce the cost,
facilitate maintenance and
replicate the works
3.5.  Improving the soil
fertilizationNatural phosphate will be used t o
amend over 50,000 ha of land-Study
-Inputs (phosphate of
Matam)
-Technical training ofMatam natural phosphates
will be purchased with the
project support. Supervision
structures will have to


---
*Page 77*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 73OF77
73H
1,000 composting units will be
set up to amend salty landsproducers
-nputs (water, straw,
manure)ensure the dissemination of
technology
Producers will be
encouraged to build manure
reserves with the help of
supervision structures
delivering the training
3.6.  The development of
grazing areas
(agricultura l, forest
fallows and RNC)Seeds adapted to highly salty
areas will be developed- Adapted seeds
(maize, millet, rice)
- Production
techniquesAdaptive technologies will be
promoted
4.1.  The installation of
water holding works
(small dams and artifici al
basins)Small dams and retention basins
will be built to collect run -off in
the sites with low availability of
surface water-Local materials
-Technical expertise
and workforce
-FinancingPopulations will provide the
materials and workforce
The project will provide
technical and financial
support
4.2  The development of
large ponds to ensure
water availability for at
least 7 seven months
(10 ponds)The operation involves re -
excavating ponds or building
retention basins to collect water
and e nsure its availability over a
long period of the dry season so
as to guarantee continuous
production-Studies
-Civil engineering
works
-Local workforce
-MaintenanceThe main ponds and sites
fortheconstruction of basins
should be subject to studies,
developments will be made
withtheactive participation
of public services, the
private sector and local
populations
4.3.  Construction of
anti-saltand anti -erosion
worksAnti-salt and anti -erosion works
will be built in sixdifferent sites
according to various types to
reduce land salinity-Technical studies
-Civil engineering
works
-MaintenanceStudies will help to
determine adequate sites
andthesize of the works
prior to joint works project –
populations –supervision
4.4.  Promoting small -
scale irrigation (drip)Water -saving techniques will be
developed to better manage the
use of groundwater especially
and limit saltwater encroachment-Diagnosis study
-Equipment
-Technical trainingDiagnosis of adequate sites
will be performed as well as
equipment purchase while
the project will provide the
technical training
5.1.  The provision of
adapted seeds for at
least 50% of farmersThirty jobs of seed operators will
be created. Apart from this ,
autonomy in the supply of farm
seeds will be develo ped to
improve the availability in
quantity and due time of this
essential input-Replication sites
-Foundation seedsAgricultural services will
support the project in
training seeds operators who
at the same time will be
relay trainers
5.2.  Better m anagement The construction and equipment -Studies With the technical feasibility


---
*Page 78*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 74OF77
74H
of bridging periods of 20 warehouses for storing food
products will help toensure a
minimal food security stock
during the recurrent bridging
period of the dry season-Civil engineering
works
-Equipment
-Foodstuffsbeing determined,
warehouses will be built,
equipped with weighing
machines and handling
equipment ,and supplied
from locally -purchased
products
5.3.  The conservation,
processing and
marketing of farm
producti onsThe c reation of 500 jobs for
women processors of farm
products -Trainers
-Training materialsActive private partners in this
field will provide the training
using accessible materials to
facilitate knowledge transfer
5.4.  Organizing
producers in
cooperatives and
facilitat ingpartnershipsIt is about training 20 community
facilitators to fight against
malnutrition severely affecting
children of 0 –5 years and
pregnant women through the
PAIN programme (Integrated
Nutrition Packages) using local
produ cts-Trainer
-Women facilitators
-Training modulesHealth services will be put to
use for training women relay
facilitators with training
materials highlighting the
consumption of locally -made
products
5.5   Producers’ training
on innovating saliniz ed
land management
techniquesTrain 1,000 producers in dynamic
organizations on the various
techniques to fight against
salinization and recover salty
lands-Degraded sites
-Producers’ dynamismThe project will build on pilot
producers to disseminate
good practices that will be
scaled up
5.6 Training of producers
on salt extraction
techniquesItinvolves training 500 producers
on sound salt extraction
techniques in compliance with
the hygiene, environment
standards and protecting nearby
productive act ivities against
contamination-Operating standards
-Hygiene standards
-Environmental
standardsTraining will mainly focus on
salt recovery in sites where
the salinization process is
irreversible and asalinity
level too high to be restored
6.1.  The a gro–sylvo –
pastoral development of
large ponds and basins300 producers on the 10 sites will
be organized in management
committees of 10 members and
get training for thesustainable
use of water resources and
proper maintenance of the works-Trainers
-Populations
-Training materialsTraining sessions will be
organized in situ with various
specialists to better explain
the potential offered and
methods for using the works
6.2.  Availability of
vegetable products and
animal fodder for at least
eightmonths in the yearThe development of 10 vegetable
perimeters of at least 5 ha and
the training of 300 women will
help to increase productions and
improve incomes-The enabling site
-Equipment
-InputsAppropriate sites will be
identified and equ ipped with
the approval of the local
community
6.3.  Production of fresh
fish in sufficient quantityFish farming, a high value -added
activity will be developed through
the management of at least five-Studies
-Civil engineering
worksStudies will help to
determine the enabling sites
and development works will


---
*Page 79*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 75OF77
75H
for a long period of the
yearfish farms to improv e
consumption, produce incomes
and create green jobs (1 80 or 30
per site)be completed
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Eva luation
Please specify institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting. Please indicate how
you will organize mid -term and final evaluations.
A participatory monitoring –evaluation system will be set up. It will be struc tured around a monitoring –
evaluation plan to be built on a scheduled system at thenational, regional and local levels. The control –
monitoring –evaluation system will cover both the technical level (substantive monitoring) and the financial
area (audit) .
Communities will be involved in various manners, but the most formal way is through the local steering
committee. This committee, including Local Government Units ( LGU), extensions and community
representatives, will be tasked to overseeing the implementation of the AWP and to disc ussing difficulties
and bottlenecks that could arise during project implementation. In addition, the communities will be the main
target of the MTE and the final evaluation. Ultimately, the community representatives will play a key role in
the post -project monitoring and evaluation.
The M&E system will be organized around the following steps corresponding to the project implementation
phases:
The project start phase: monitoring the start is essential to allow stakeholders toupgrad eand
distribut eroles a nd responsibilities in the implementation ;
Periodic monitoring of the implementation is provided on a six -monthly basis and produces a half -
yearly report on the progress of the project activities. At year end, the six -monthly reports shall be
consolidated intoan annual report on project implementation ;
Evaluation by participants will be done through annual site visits enabling and helping stakeholders
(including the project steering committee) to ascertain the project results ;
Amid-term evaluation is p lanned in order to measure the fulfilment rate of the results of the ongoing
project and make the corrections and adjustments necessary to achieve the set objectives ;
The f inal evaluation allows for the measuring ofthe achievement of the expected results i n terms of
potential outputs, effects and impacts ;
An annual audit will be conducted to control the proper use of the project resources, in accordance
with the current procedures of the State ; and
A final audit will be conducted by an independent cabinet nine months after the end of the project .
For mid -term evaluation, final evaluation, annual financial audit sand final audit, the selection of the
consultant will be done in compliance with themanual of contracting procedures of CSE .


---
*Page 80*
---

RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDIN G PROPOSAL | PAGE 76OF77
76H
The mid -term eva luation and annual financial audits will be undertaken by thenational consultant recruited
through national competitive bidding.
The final evaluation will be conducted by independent evaluators recruited through international open call for
tenders and on a competitive basis. The final evaluation will take place after the four -year period of project
implementation.
In addition, an exit strategy will be developed at the latest one year before the end of the project. This exit
strategy will include provisio n for a monitoring and reporting plan for the post -implementation phase of the
project. A budget of USD 50,000 has been allocated in year four of the project for such purposes. The
monitoring and evaluation specialist hired to conduct monitoring over the c ourse of the implementation of
activities will be retained for continued monitoring and will report to theproject steering committee, the local
government units and the local committees set up by the project will play a key role in overseeing this
monitor ing.Monitoring and reporting will take place every six months over the course of three years. The
project steering committee will approve the reports which will be submitted by the Implementing entity to the
GCF Secretariat.
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key Outputs of the project/programme.
Monitoring the key results of the project will be conducted according to the result -based management
through:
oProduct indicators (outputs) which contribute to achieving them and me ansofverifying their effective
fulfilment. The Logframe method will be used for monitoring ;
oThe Delphi method will also be used to verify the reliability and comprehensiveness and collected
data; and
oTheSWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and t hreats) method will also help tocarry out a
more accurate diagnosis of achieved results .
Combining these methods will allow for the better substantive monitoring of the project results and will
develop a reporting system highlighting the evolution of ac tivities and the level of progress towards achieving
the results (from outputs to potential effects and impacts).


---
*Page 81*
---

ANNEX ES
GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77OF77I
77* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting
documents.I.Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal
x NDA No -objection Letter
x Feasibility Study
x Integrated Financial Model that provides sensi tivity analysis of critical elements (xls format)
x Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co -financing commitment
x Term Sheet
x Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
X Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations
X Evaluation Report of the baseline project
X Map indicating the location of the project/programme
X Timetable of project/programme implementation
X Project/programme confirmation (see the template in Annex I to the Accreditation Master Agreement)


---
*Page 82*
---

 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.03  
  
 
No-objection letter issued by t he national designated authority


---
*Page 83*
---

 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.03  
  
 
 
 
 
________