=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20240715144841+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.2.20895
/ModDate: D:20240715144841+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.2.20895


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
15 – 18 July 2024  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 10  GCF/B.3 9/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
15 July 202 4 
Consideration of funding proposals –  
Addendum  XV 
Funding proposal package f or FP2 40 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following s ix parts:  
a) A funding proposal  summary  titled “Collaborative R&DB Programme for 
Promoting the Innovation of Climate Technopreneurship ” submitted by Korea 
Development Bank (KDB) ; 
b) No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure ;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation  of the funding proposal . 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “ Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the 
Innovation of Climate Technopreneurship ” submitted by Korea Development Bank (KDB)  is being 
circulated on a limited distribution basis only to B oard Members and Alternate Board Members  to 
ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive  information of 
the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.39/02 /Add.15/Rev.01  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  101 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure  107  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   110  
Response from the accredited entit y to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment  119 
Gender documentation  121


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation 
of Climate Technopreneurship  
Country(ies):  Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Philippines, and Vietnam  
Accredited Entity:  The Korea Development Bank (KDB)   
Date of first submission:  [2022/02 /28]  
Date of current submission  [2024 /06/17]  
Version number  [V.11]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4 .   
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Programme  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Private  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area (s)  
Check the applicable GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co -financers’ contribution respectively.  
*Figures  (%) are all indicative based on investment scenario.  GCF  
Contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total  50 % 50 % 
☒  Energy generation and access  16 % 16 % 
☒  Low -emission transport  32 % 32 % 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  2 % 2 % 
☐  Forestry and land use  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total  50 % 50 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  10 % 10 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  40 % 40 % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  Indicate greenhouse gas 
(GHG ) emission reductions or 
removals in tCO2eq over total 
lifespan of the 
project/programme2 
 
1,639,681 tCO2eq * A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  Indicate total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries  
Indicate number 
of direct 
beneficiaries  
1,180,881  
(women, 50%)  Indicate number 
of indirect beneficiaries  
1,132,408  
(women, 50% ) 
Indicate % of 
direct 
beneficiaries vis -
à-vis total 
population  
2.4% Indicate % of 
indirect 
beneficiaries vis -
à-vis total 
population  
4.0% 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  221.2149 million  USD   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  104.471 million  USD  
 
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the 
investment are expected to be effective. This is different from the project/programme implementation period.  
3 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 2 
 A.10 . Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply  and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8 .  
☒  Grant  USD 20.721  million  
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☒  Equity       USD 83.75 million  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  11 years * 
 
* Fund lifespan A.12. Total lifespan  30 years (5+25 )* 
 
* 5 years of the f und investment 
period + a pipeline with the 
longest lifespan estimated  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/  
programme, if available.  
 
10/31/2024  A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
 
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF  
support been used 
to prepare this FP ? Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐    No ☒


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 3 
 A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The programme has  four Executing Entities (EEs)  as below.  
 
(1) The Korea Development Bank  (KDB): Accredited Entity , co-Executing 
Entity of Components  1 and 4 
 
The programme will leverage the proven three-tier  venture investment 
platforms  (KDB NextRound, NextOne, and NextRise ) and global  VC and 
acceleration networks of  KDB Headquarters and its Singapore/London 
Venture Desk and KDB Silicon Valley LLC (VC subsidiary) . Above all, KDB 
will serve as the control tower that aims at seamless interlinked management amongst the four (4) different components across five (5) NOL countries in capacity of both Accredited Entity and Executing Entity . 
 
(2) Global Green Growth Institute ( GGGI ): co-Executing Entity of Components  
1 and 4 
 GGGI is a treaty -based intergovernmental organisation that has been 
carrying out a number of climate actions and green growth promotion 
activities across the developing world. As a trusted advisor with a 
prominent in-country presence, GGGI has built trust with the five NOL 
countries’ National Designated Authorities (NDAs). During the Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) phase of the programme, GGGI had closely 
consulted the five NDAs for designing Components 1 and 4 to be properly 
aligned with the five governments’ national policy direction and spec ific 
needs. GGGI will contribute to designing and operating the programme’s 
core governance structure for strengthening country ownership –  
Sustainability Management Unit (SMU)  – in consultation with NDAs  and 
key local stakeholders in the five NOL countries .  
 Its signature initiative, entitled “Global Greenpreneur s Program”, has 
supported high-potential  local green entrepreneurs  – ca. 800 youths in total 
over the last four years –  while providing inc ubation and acceleration 
services for 57 teams from 20 countries . In addition, GGGI has extensive 
experience in working with the private sector particularly with start-ups and 
MSMEs in diverse sectors with various green investment interventions.  
 
(3) NH Investment & Securities  (NHIS) : Executing Entity of Component 2  
 
NH Investment & Securities  (NHIS) is the leading comprehensive financial 
investment company with overwhelming competitiveness in all business 
areas  in Asia. Given that a  call of the time for corporates to create ESG 
values and initiative is increasing, NHIS provides eco-friendly  and green 
finance services , and has been committed to leading “Green Impact 
Finance” by fully leveraging its capabilities.  
 
NHIS has been striving to lay a solid foundation for practical execution of 
ESG by revamping ESG -related organizations  and invest ing ca. USD 15 
billion in green impact related investment banking & brokerage activities 
across green finance and CSR.  
 
In addition, its  Carbon Finance Team has  accumulated experiences in 
diverse GHG reduction projects in Korea and abroad,  and has provided  
comprehensive carbon-offset consulting services, with a pursuit to lead the 
client-targeted carbon market through carbon credit brokerage and 
development of diverse financial products .


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 4 
 (4) NH Absolute Return Partners ( NH ARP): Executing Entity of C omponent 3   
 
NH ARP  Pte. Ltd., a subsidiary 1 00% owed by NH Investment & Securities  
(NHIS ) under the NH Financial Group ( A+/S&P, A1/Moody’s, A/Fitch), is a 
licensed fund management company in Singapore, with global investment 
expertise in private equity and debt deal opportunities . It has successfully 
driven performance with several leading investments in notable deals 
across Southeast Asian countries : in particular, specialised in growth stage 
investments in innovative technology -based companies within Southeast 
Asian .  
 NH ARP’s capacity in leveraging core networks and securing high-quality 
investment opportunities  will support the CTF to optimise investment 
portfolio and achieve returns . On the other hands, Carbon Finance Team 
of NH IS HQ , experienced with carbon financial services  as the right 
solution,  will support the fund’s maximising climate outcomes. NH ARP will 
be the general partner and investment manager of the CTF, a limited 
partnership to be established in Singapore. 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
 
“Climate Technology Acceleration”  at the Core of a Paradigm Shift towards Low Carbon and 
Climate Resilient Innovation Pathways. This climate technology acceleration initiative has been inspired 
by the U nited Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFC CC, 2018)4 that spotlights  a need 
to support developing countries to “ facilitate access to foreign exchange for entrepreneurs to purchase 
technologies not available in local markets that they need for developing their solution on an economically 
viable scale (p.50).”  The programme, ‘Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation of 
Climate Technopreneurship, ’ highlights the importance of supporting the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN) to source and digest climate technology solutions through technology transfer in 
advancing mitigation and adaptation actions amid rapidly exacerbating climate crisis , with a strategic focus 
on five countries from Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, and the Philippines to Vietnam ( in alphabetical order ). 
Pivoting from the five countries , the programme will  support the regional innovation ecosystem conducive 
to replication and scaling of technology -enabled climate solutions in place, which will be instrumental in 
achieving a commonly forged vision of shared prosperity in the ASEAN community.  
 
Programme Canvas 
 
 
 
NOL Countries Shall Accelerat e Climate Technology Leapfrogging as the Solution, while Climate 
Actions Are More Urgent than Ever . Many sour ces demonstrate that t he five ASEAN economies  are 
 
4 UNFCCC. 2018. Climate Technology Incubators and Accelerators. Bonn: United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change.


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 5 
 severely exposed to climate vulnerability and its adverse impacts and associated risks.  Alarming 
consequences include worsening natural disasters and extreme weather events such as hurricanes, 
tornadoes, heavy rainfall and floods, and droughts, in terms of frequency, intensity, and impacts of 
submersion of inhabited coastlines, deteriorating quality and quantity of water supply, declining agricultural 
productivity, increased outbreak and spread of water -borne diseases, and reduced effectiveness of natural 
coastal defences. The ravages of COVID -19 and the post-pandemic economic slowdown have 
disproportionately increased climate risks to the most vulnerable, compounded the negative impacts of 
past and current resource management practices, and magnified the sustainable development challenges.  
 
The fastest climate solutions therefore need to be deployed throughout the five NOL  countries  given the 
climate urgency. Surrounded by worsening multi -dimensional ravages of global warming, developed 
economies have affordable and market-ready climate solutions. The programm e shall blaze the trail for the 
five countries to kick their carbon intensive pathways through partnering with entrepreneurs armed with 
already existing technology -enabled climate solutions. It will offer  a collaborative research, development 
and business (R&DB)  platform on a quest for tailored business models that best fit the five countries’ 
mitigation and adaptation technology needs, set  up an investment fund at scale to encourage the market 
penetration of disruptive  technology solutions, a nd empower the regional ecosystem  eager for innovation 
uptake.  
 
Local – Global Joint Venture (JV) Partnership as the Key Technology Transfer Mechanism that 
Promotes Climate Technology Leapfrogging in NOL Countries.  The programme conceives ‘ technology 
transfer via a joint venture (JV) as a result of collaborative R&DB acceleration’  as a key profound concept, 
given that UNFCCC (2018)5 spotlights the importance of supporting developing countries to source, digest, 
and deploy climate technology solutions through technology development and transfer in advancing 
mitigation and adaptation actions amid rapidly exacerbating climate crisis. JVs will eventually lead up to 
multi -faceted impacts that would curtail greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions , enhance climate resiliency , 
and, most importantly, strengthen local human capital capacity that is a crucial factor in internalising and 
accelerating technology innovation towards net zero in the long run, along with the engagement of diverse, 
cross-border innovation ecosyst em stakeholders from academic institutions and start- up support 
intermediaries to large corporates under the common agenda of sourcing and disseminating tech-inspired climate solutions.  
 NOL Countries’ Strong Ownership. The programme will build on existing local platforms and initiatives 
for the sake of the absorption of the programme into local governance. Every programme country has a 
national body for promoting entrepreneurship or relevant mechanism, though they demonstrate different forms, level s, and maturity. The program me will team up with such bodies  to maximise the use of the 
contextually settled system and infrastructure, ensuring timely and efficient operationalisation, and staying on track even after the GCF-KDB exit . It shall minimise ex penses for a new office set- up with newly 
purchased office supplies, electronics, and furniture. This satisfies a governmental demand to minimise the 
creation of new mechanisms that typically fragment, duplicate, or overlap the efforts of local governments. 
In addition, recognising that the public sector engagement on public policy and regulatory framework is key 
to a genuine success of the private sector intervention, the programme will invite NDAs and line ministries 
of the five NOL countries to be part of the Project Steering Committee that will  give guidance for the overall 
programme execution by leading a high-level ministerial coordination and providing advice to each 
country -specific activities in the country -specific Sustainable Management Unit (SMU). The contextually fit 
SMU governance will ensure strong country ownership and participation of individual NOL countries.  
 
 
 
5 UNFCCC. 2018. Climate Technology Incubators and Accelerators. Bonn: United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change.


---
*Page 10*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 6 
 Country Ownership -built SMU Implementation Structure (indicative)  
 
“SDG 17. Partnershi ps for the Goals” –  Cross -border 
Collaboration with Advanced Innovation Ecosystems to be 
Convened through Global Climate Technology Providers 
Joining the Initiative.  In pursuit of the vitalised global partnership 
embodied in the Sustainable Development Goal (SD G 17), the 
programme shall invite and attract climate technology innovators 
from advanced ecosystems, including, but not limited to, Canada, 
Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Singapore, the U.S., and the 
UK, where leading climate technologies are being developed and 
accelerated. By leveraging the extensive network consisting of 
VCs, accelerators, and other startup support intermediaries (e.g., 
CATAPULT, 500 Global, Techstars, Plug and Play) with global 
presence, global innovators in climate space will be sourced to scale up their impactful technologies to flow into the ultimate 
destination – the five emerging ASEAN markets as the test -bed. Some concrete examples of networks and 
how they are to be leveraged for the programme are as follows: 
 
• [KDB, Accredited Entity] Global presence of KDB, through its Silicon Valley LLC  and London 
and Singapore Venture Desk , will add value to the programme in sourcing global innovators in 
climate space through regular Global NextRound events (KDB’s signature IR events), alongside leveraging its Global Partnership Fund (KDB -led Fund of Fund scheme investing in global VCs, 
e.g., Kleiner Perkins). Besides, KDB global branch offices will support regular/ad-hoc venture 
meet-ups and sourcing events in the format of demo day to reach out to top-tier climate tech 
providers.  
• [VC] The GP will leverage its connection to VCs based in advanced climate responsive 
ecosystems, namely, Collaborative Capital, DCVC (based in San Francisco, US), Mekong Capital 
(based in Vietnam), SkyRiver Ventures (based in Boston, US) and PITANGO and Cardumen


---
*Page 11*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 7 
 Capital (based in Tel Aviv, Israel) , Innovision (based in Singapore and Japan) , Pana LCE (based 
in Singapore), Vertex (based in Singapore)  that are currently executing climate tech-related 
investments or operating global open innovation programmes and have potential to join investment 
rounds for the programme. Furthermore, the vast VC network into which the GP is plugged also 
spreads over the ASEAN region, having room for major VCs on the ground, e.g., Archipelago 
Capital Partners, Openspace Ventures, Wavemaker Impact, Tin Men Capital , Genesis Alternative 
Ventures , Indogen Capital  (based in Singapore), East Ventures, AC Ventures, Alpha JWC 
Ventures, Indies Capital (based in Indonesia), Viet Capital Ventures , Do Ventures (based in 
Vietnam), Kickstart, Gentree Investment Management,  and Tallwood VC (based in Philippines), to 
be connected to the programme and draw climate innovators at both global and regional levels. The programme plans to strengthen collaboration with the VCs and surrounding communities for 
climate theme-centred sem inar/IR events. Venture ESG, an EU -born, global ESG community of 
VCs and financiers, is a solid example in which the programme can potentially engage on such 
occasions.  
• [Corporate]  The GP will leverage the pool of global technology providers , including but not limited 
to, previously reviewed by the its connections  in the US (New York), China (Beijing, Shanghai), 
Indonesia (Jakarta), Vietnam  (Hanoi, Hochimin),  and UK (London), to support businesses with 
potential for scalability in the ASEAN market. This initiative is part of the GP's endeavour  to aid the 
business development of NHIS's global subsidiaries, with a special focus on Southeast Asi a. 
• [Academia] The programme will leverage global academic -corporate cooperation activities (see 
below) hosted by EcoLabs C entre of Innovation for Energy under Nanyang Technology University 
of Singapore as well as Bandung Institute of Technology of Indonesia which engages and invites 
global corporates in their open innovation projects that can connect with the programme.  
• [Embassies] The programme will seek to interact with the embassies of advanced climate 
ecosystems operating innovation and R&D programmes to proactively access the global climate 
technology providers. Innovation Centre Denmark, administered by the Danish Ministry of Science, 
Innovation and Higher Education, and the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Swissnex, 
managed by the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs and under the initiative of the State 
Secretariat for Education, Research, and Innovation are some of the global launchpad examples 
that the programme could collaborate with, ultimately to enlarge innovation on a global scale.  
  
The Programme’s Thematic Goal of Technology Transfer Shall Pitch its Prominent Role at the  
UNFCCC COP2 9 Climate Summit . Building on meaningful insights on the 9th agenda of “Matters relating 
to development and transfer of technologies” at the 27th session of the Conference of the Parties of the 
UNFCCC (COP27) , at the COP29 to be hosted by the Azerbaijan in 2024, the programme will therefore 
pitch its  role as the very  first of its kind technology transfer initiative that will accelerate developing 
countries ’ capacity to uptake and digest climate responsive technologies . The year of 2024 will be a 
monumental year for this programme that goes beyond the BAU climate business model and embraces an 
ambition to tackle root causes which have hampered developing countries from being equipped with 
innovative capacity to combat climate change. The programme will be  officially  showcased at the COP29 
as a kernel initiative for a sustainable future that would contribute to addressing innovati on ecosystem 
hurdles and technology uptake/digestion barriers, thereby enhancing the developing world’s access to 
climate responsive technologies . This technology transfer initiative will be poised to support, accelerate, 
boost, and scale up sustainability achievements in various technology -themed result areas. In addition, the 
programme will create a vibrant space for entrepreneurial participation of the conventionally disadvantaged 
groups such as youth in poverty , women and girls in engineering and technician fields , and vulnerable 
local SMEs  without capacity to carry out technology -driven climate actions. In particular, the targeted 
ASEAN countri es are to seize the golden opportunities of being powered to experience a broad spectrum 
of technologies that ensure sustainability in energy security, healthcare protection, water  resource 
management, resilient agricultur e, food supply chains, and so on. The programme will be part of 
supporting COP 29 to pave the way for a brighter future ambition to effectively tackle the glob al challenge 
of climate change.


---
*Page 12*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
   
  
6 World Bank (2023). “Indicators.” https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=Z4  
7 Asean (n.d.). “Chapter 5: Urbanisation Wave and ASEAN Regional Agenda.” Global Megatrends: Implications for the ASEAN Economi c 
Community. https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Ch.5_Urbanisation- Wave -and- ASEAN -Regional-Agenda.pdf   
8 Center for Strategic and International Studies (2022). "Southeast Asia’s Challenge of Decarbonizing While Growing Rapidly.” 
https://www.csis.org/analysis/southeast-asias-challenge-decarbonizing-while-growing-rapidly   
9 World Bank (2022). “New World Bank country classifications by income level: 2022-2023.” https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/new-
world-bank-country-classifications-income-level-2022-
2023#:~:text=The%20World%20Bank%20assigns%20the,the%20previous%20year%20(2021) .  
10 World Bank (2023). “Indicators.” https://data.worldbank.org/indicator   
11 USAID (2022). “Addressing the Climate Crisis in Southeast Asia: A Regional Approach.” https://www.usaid.gov/asia-regional/fact-
sheets/addressing-climate- crisis -southeast-asia-regional-
approach#:~:text=Southeast%20Asia%20is%20globally%20considered,intense%20and%20unpredictable%20weather%20events .  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately 2 pages ) 
 
Climate Context of the Targeted NOL Countries. The five target countries for the pro gramme make up 
21% of the total population for East Asia and the Pacific6. The total population of Southeast Asia grew at 
an annual average rate of 1.02% between 2015 and 2020, while the urban population grew at a rate of 
2.21%.7   Economic growth in the region has increase at an annual average rate of 5%, while fossil fuel 
generated energy demand has increased at an annual average rate of 6%.8 Though all economies are 
classified as lower middle income, poverty rate and access to goods and services vary widely within the 
region; countries like Cambodia and Lao PDR have higher poverty rates and lower levels of access to 
goods and services.9 A table below provides a snapshot of the countries’ socioeconomic context. 
 
Socioeconomic Context for the Programme Countries10 
 
  Economic Context  Access to Goods & Services  
Country  GDP ($ 
Billions)  Urban 
Population  Rural 
Population  Poverty 
Rate (%)  Food 
Insecurity 
(%) Water 
Security 
(%)* Access to 
Healthcare  
Cambodia  26.96  4,092  12,496,843  17.7 15.1 28.0 0.2 
Indonesia  1186.09  156,833  116,919,988  9.8 0.7 .. 0.5 
Lao PDR  18.82  2,742  4,682,315  18.3 8.3 18.0 0.4 
Philippines  394.08  54,302  59,577,632  16.7 4.8 47.0 0.6 
Vietnam  366.13  37,088  60,379,495  6.7 0.6 .. 0.8 
 
 
Climatic patterns in the region are somewhat consistent with defined dry and wet seasons, generally 
substantial annual rainfall amounts, consistently moderate to high temperatures with intermittent extreme 
heat conditions, and annual cyclonic activity . The countries have a collective 142,000 km of coastline and 
support several large transboundary rivers (i.e., Mekong River (Cambodia), Tonle Sap River (Cambodia), 
Red River (Vietnam)) whose floodplains provide delicate ecosystems to cultivate rice and other crops. I n 
all countries, national plans and policy frameworks have emphasised the critical need for climate 
technology i n response to the countr ies’ high climate vulnerability and aspirations for low -carbon and 
climate-resilient sustainable economic devel opment. 
 
 Need for Adaptation. Southeast Asia is considered one of the most climate vulnerable regions in the 
world.11 The climate hazard trends  in the target countries show increases in rising atmospheric 
temperatures, changing precipitation patterns, sea level rise, ocean warming, and cyclones. Populations, natural systems, and built infrastructure within the region are experiencing increased 
exposure to these climate hazards. Combined with pre-existing vulnerabilities that communities 
experience —high rates of poverty and inequality, urbanisation and population density, insufficient 
healthcare systems, unsustainable agriculture, inadequate water resources and infrastructure, and *Cells displaying “..” indicate that data are not present within World Bank indicators database for select


---
*Page 13*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
   
  
12 ND-GAIN Country Index. University of Notre Dame. July 21. https://gain.nd.edu/our -work/country -index/ 
13 Countries are given a combined score of vulnerability and adaptive capacity and ranked amongst nearly all sovereign nations ( the index 
includes 182 countries). The bottom row in the table below identifies the relative ND- GAIN score for the countries, with most countries 
ranked in the latter half of the Index (i.e., below at least 90 countries), signalling vulnerability and a lack of adaptive c apacity in the face of 
climate- related risks.  gender inequality —significant impacts (i.e., realised risks) will lead to predominantly negative effects 
on human health, productivity, the economy, financial resources, and more.  
 
A below table shows the key climate-related natural hazards and vulnerabilities based on reviewed 
data and evidence; per capita GHG emissions; and the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative Index 
(ND-GAIN)12 score, which is a summary of a country’s vulnerability to climate change impacts and its 
capacity to improve its resilience and adapt to climate impact.13 The Climate Rationale (Annex 24) 
reveals a clear resilience gap in the five countries —evidenced by recent climatic trends and some 
empirical evidence for the effect on people, economies, natural systems, and infrastructure—and an 
increasing adaptation need demonstrated by accelerating effects from climatic changes. 
 
Climate Hazards and Vulnerability Indicators by Country 
 
      Cambodia  Indonesia  Lao PDR  Philippines  Vietnam  Climate Hazard 
Category  Temperature-
related hazards  Extreme heat  ● ● ● ● ● 
Ocean warming    ●       
Water -related 
hazards  Changing 
precipitation  ● ● ● ● ● 
Sea level rise  ● ●   ● ● 
Wind -related 
hazards  Tropical cyclone  ●     ● ● Vulnerability 
Indicators  Poverty  ● ● ● ● ● 
Urbanisation    ●   ●   
Insufficient healthcare  ● ● ●     
Unsuitable agriculture  ●   ●   ● 
Inadequate water resources  ● ● ● ● ● 
Gender inequality  ● ● ● ● ● 
GHG -Emissions (per capita)  1.0 2.3 2.6 1.3 3.5 
ND-GAIN ranking  133 107 145 115 126 
  
 Need for Mitigation. High rates of urbanis ation and economic development coupled with an increase 
in energy access have led to a greater dependence on fossil fuels and higher emissions in Southeast 
Asia. In Vietnam, for example, rapid economic growth has propelled a steep increase in vehicle 
owner ship – car registration increased 15% per year from 2014 to 18 - with transport emissions 
representing 11% of the country ’s GHG emissions in total . With one of the world’s highest 
deforestation rates  – at 1.2% annually – Southeast Asia experienced the most rapid increases in 
carbon dioxide emissions in the world between 1990 and 2010.   
To meet the Paris  climate  pledges , ASEAN nations will have to reduce emissions by 11% by 2030 as 
compared to current trajectories. Present lagging progress for needed investment and emissions rate 
of change,  the International Energy Agency  (IEA) concludes that making improvements in regulatory 
and financing frameworks in Southeast Asia would reduce the costs of clean energy projects. For example, the levelised cost of energy (LCOE) of solar PV in Indonesia could be around 40% lower if 
its investm ent and financing risks were comparable to advanced economies.


---
*Page 14*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
   
 NOL Countries’ Prioritised 
Climate Responsive 
Technology Needs. To better 
define the range of optimal 
interventions against these 
adaptation and mitigation needs, 
the programme performed 
climate vulnerability situation 
analysis and technology needs 
assessment, with reference to 
Technology Needs Assessment 
Step by Step guidebook (UNEP 
ETU Partnership, 2019). 
Extensive review of country -
specific climate vulnerabilities, national development plans 
including NDCs, NAPs, and 
other climate strategies, relevant 
policies, multi-disciplinary 
assessments, and multi -level stakeholder consultations, including potential technology and/or innovation 
suppliers, revealed a range of appropriate technologies for which there is deployment demand pull, which 
can be segmented into seven (7) technology groups . A Table below shows these prioritised climate 
technology groups mapped to each country and GCF results area. For more information on the 
methodological approach and country -specific and/or cross -country analysis, see Annex 2.  
 
Grouping of Seven (7) Prioritised Climate Technology Needs 
 
Technology Group 
(TG) Sub Technologies  Result 
Area(s)  C I L P V 
TG 1: Renewable 
energy generation  Ocean energy  M1  ○  ○ ○ 
***Bioenergy  (renewable biomass)  M1  ○ ○ ○ ○ 
Small -scale hydropower  M1   ○   
Solar energy  M1 ○ ○ ○  ○ 
Wind energy  M1  ○   ○ 
Other ** M1 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TG 2: Transmission, 
distribution, and 
electricity storage  Modern renewable off -grid energy systems  M1 ○  ○ ○  
Connection of isolated grid  M1   ○   
Battery storage  M1 ○   ○  
Other ** M1 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TG 3: Low-emission 
transport  Low-carbon/energy efficient mass transport  M2 ○ ○   ○ 
EVs (e.g., e -cars, e -motorbikes, e -bicycles)  M2 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
EV infrastructure  M2 ○  ○   
Alternative transport fuels  (next generation 
advanced zero- emission biofuels, green 
hydrogen)  M2  ○ ○ ○ ○ 
Other ** M3, M1  ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TG 4: Residential 
and industrial 
energy efficiency 
technologies  Building energy modelling  M3, M1       
Lighting  M3 ○  ○ ○ ○ 
HVAC  M3, M1  ○  ○ ○ ○ 
Appliances  M3, M1  ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ Prioritisation of Climate Responsive Technology Needs    
 
 
[Step 5] Climate Technology Prioritisation
Identify top priority technologies in each sector with sensitivity analysis
[Step 4]  Climate Technology Rating and Scoring
Rate and score each criteria per technology with a pre- determined 
scale
[Step 3] Criteria Weighting
Consult with key stakeholders to allocate weighting for each criteria
[Step 2] Climate Technology Prioritisation Criteria Settting
Develop unified criteria across all sectors for technology prioritisation
[Step 1] Climate Vulnerable Sector Prioritisation
Identify the target sectors via climate vulnerability situation analysis


---
*Page 15*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
   
  
14 UN Environment Programme, Climate Technology Centre & Network Taxonomy (published December 15, 2017): https://www.ctc -
n.org/resources/ctcn- taxonomy  Other ** M3, M1  ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TG 5: Agricultural 
technologies and 
practices  Sustainable agriculture  A1, A2  ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
Climate -resilient plant/ animal genetics/breeding  A1, A2  ○ ○   ○ 
Water saving and efficient irrigation methods  A2 ○ ○  ○ ○ 
Flood and drought management technology  A1  ○ ○  ○ 
RE-powered equipment  A2 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
Other low carbon and climate -resilient farming 
methods and climate -linked insurance products  A1, A2   ○ ○ ○ ○ 
Other**  A1, A2  ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TG 6: Water 
management and 
treatment  Nature based solutions  A2  ○ ○  ○ 
Management of water resources  A2 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
Small -scale, decentralised wastewater plants  A2 ○ ○    
Wastewater  treatment  A2 ○    ○ 
Water treatment processing  A2 ○ ○    
Water desalination  A2    ○  
Other ** A2 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TG 7: Waste 
management and 
treatment  Mechanical -biological treatment  A2, M1  ○ ○ ○  ○ 
Aerobic/semi -aerobic digestion  A2, M1  ○  ○   
Waste to energy  M1 ○  ○ ○ ○ 
Composting  A2, M1  ○ ○   ○ 
Other ** A2, M1  ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
 
* [Abbreviation by Country] Cambodia (C), Indonesia  (I), Laos (L), Philippines (P), and Vietnam (V)  
* [Indicator] O = Country provided examples of the respective technology needs or generic area of the needs  
** Other is included as a technology group category to indicate that technology deployment opportunities will evolve 
over time as brand new and/or unprecedented climate responsive technologies are brought to market over the life 
of the investment cycle (i.e., by earlier  2030 s) and that not all possible solutions are presently identified. The UN 
Climate Technology Centre & Network (CTCN) Taxonomy14 or equivalent can be referenced for potential 
technologies that may be considered over the life of the fund.  
*** In case of bioenergy (renewable biomass), relevant investments should not give rise to negative climate and/or 
sustainability concerns.  
 
Tailored and Focus Investment Plan by Country.  The indicative priority sectors have been identified as 
below by the GP, while the investment is open for all technology needs identified by the NOL countries. See Annex 25 for more information on GP investment plan. 
 
 Cambodia – The GP sees impactful investment opportunities in agricultural technologies including 
but not limited to water saving, irrigation, flood and drought management, and climate-resilient 
crops/livestock/fishery technologies. While Cambodia aims to incorporate renewables into its 
energy mix, the GP seeks to invest in technologies and businesses that increase the efficiency of renewable energy generation, in the middle of the availability of the technologies together with 
government alignment and support.  
 Indonesia – The GP seeks to invest in technologies in the area of the EV and adjacent ecosystem 
for the sake of low -carbon transformation in mobility, along with the electrification of transportation 
pushed by the Presidential Degree. Another focus is the entire agro-foo d sector contributing to 
35% of the populous country’s GDP.  
 Laos – The GP will prioritise agriculture tech practices and waste amid a specific regulatory 
framework not yet established. In addition, as for forest management, it is believed that public -
private-community partnership-based investment would be needed in the future as below. 
 
Public/Government  NH ARP  Community


---
*Page 16*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
   
  
15 Asian Development Bank (2020). “Climate Change in Southeast Asia: Focused Actions on the Frontlines of Climate Change.” 
https://think -asia.org/bitstream/handle/11540/720/climate- change- sea.pdf?sequence=1 
16 International Labour Organization (2019). “Working on a warmer planet: The impact of heat stress on labour productivity and decent 
work.” https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/--- dgreports/--- dcomm/--- publ/documents/publication/wcms_711919.pdf 
17 Asian Development Bank (2015).“Southeast Asia and the Economics of Global Climate Stabilization.” 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/178615/sea- economics -global -climate- stabilization.pdf  
18 Asian Development Bank. “Climate Change in Southeast Asia: Focused Actions on the Frontlines of Climate Change.” https://think -
asia.org/bitstream/handle/11540/720/climate- change- sea.pdf?sequence=1 
19 Asian Development Bank (2015). “Southeast Asia and the Economics of Global Climate Stabilization.” 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/178615/sea- economics -global -climate- stabilization.pdf  
20 IEA (2022). “Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2022.” https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/e5d9b7ff- 559b- 4dc3- 8faa-
42381f80ce2e/SoutheastAsiaEnergyOutlook2022.pdf 
21 IEA (2022). “Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2022.” https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/e5d9b7ff- 559b- 4dc3- 8faa-
42381f80ce2e/SoutheastAsiaEnergyOutlook2022.pdf - Sustainable wood and NTFP 
supply and ecosystem services 
(forest cover, carbon sinks, 
biodiversity soil, water) provision  
- Political, institutional, and 
financial risks  - Climate impactful investments 
in forestry relevant industries 
with a reasonable return  
- policy, technical, financial and 
reputational risks  - Increased food security, 
reduced poverty, sustainable livelihoods resilience to climate -
impacted market fluctuations  
- Risks mainly related to land 
access and livelihoods  
 
 Philippines – The GP will prioritise renewable energy generation and low -carbon transportation 
as it is the most in need of solution, along with the governmental adoption of a national energy 
policy and regulatory framework with incentives to increase the use of electri c and hybrid vehicles.  
 Vietnam – The GP will mainly see opportunities in industries of renewable energy generation and 
storage and low -carbon transportation, in partnership with other financing entities with the aligned 
mission for climate action. Relevant industrial ecosystems –  e.g., es tablishment of a value chain 
for greener battery production beyond the traditional lead-acid battery production will be supported 
under the programme.  
 
Most likely Scenario in the Absence of Intervention.  In the absence of technological intervention for a 
shift from carbon-intensive to low carbon development and increased climate resilience, climate driven 
impacts will continue and worsen. By 2100, rising temperatures in the region will reduce agricultural yields 
by 50% compared to 1990 levels15 and decrease agricultural labour productivity by 8.8% due to heat 
stress.16 Water stress in the region is projected to affect nearly 185 million people by 2050.17 Sea level rise 
is predicted to cause a loss of nearly 1% of land and associated capital assets by 205018—much of this 
damage occurring in highly populous, coastal cities such as Jakarta (Indonesia), Manila (Philippines), and 
Ho Chi Minh (Vietnam).19 Simultaneously, carbon-intensive growth trends will continue.20 Energy demand 
is projected to rise at an annual rate of 3% per year in Southeast Asia through 2030; 75% of this growth 
will be met by fossil fuels causing a 35% increase in CO 2 emissions.21 Countries will continue to be reliant 
on fossil fuel and vulnerable to energy market shocks, outdated infrastructure, and energy supply 
fluctuations. Rural and remote areas will remain underserved, urban buildings will remain inefficient, and 
clean transp ortation infrastructure underdeveloped.  
 
Technological Leapfrogging is Necessary for Quick, Strong, and Enhanced Climate Actions. Urgent 
climate solutions, in short, immediate actions, need to be deployed throughout the five countries  during this 
state of climate urgency. Many climate technologies available today , like renewables and lithium -ion 
batteries , have recently emerged to compete with emission-intensive technologies; it has taken decades, 
not years, for such technologies  to mature to the point where markets can bring them to scale and replace 
outdated rivals. Developing countries cannot wait that long for the next generation of clean technologies to become competitive in their markets t o reach current climate goals . This is even more urgent in the context 
of the five target countries where the mainstream investment focus is tilted towards IT, fintech, and mobile 
industries, calling for the needs to source adequate climate technology to fill in the gaps with effectiveness.  
 
The programme,  therefore,  appeals to the global community to collaborate in order f or the countries to 
leapfrog over emission-heavy, inefficient, and polluting technologies, moving straight towards low -carbon, 
efficient, and clean technologies; they should not revisit the past industrialisation trajectories and


---
*Page 17*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
   
  
22 Jay Erstling . 1992. International Technology Transfer and Intellectual Property Rights: Some Essentials and 
Options for Technology Transfer Partners.  undesirable legacies – especially, the chief culprits of climate change – of the Industrial Revolution that 
have  swept through today’s developed countries for the last several decades.  
 
A Conclusion: Technology Leapfrogging via Technology Transfer. Technological leapfrogging is 
achievable with technology transfer from industrialised countries to late- comer economies. The l ow-carbon 
and climate-resilient capacity of the developing world can be promptly fostered by absorbing commercially proven frontier technologies, skipping the technological evolution process that can take decades of 
experiments and trials and errors to get to the maturity point. Therefore, the programme shall offer a 
window of leapfrogging opportunities for partner countries to opt for, customise, apply, deploy, and scale 
best-fit and innovative technologies under cross -border technology transfer mechanisms. 
 
Significance of Technology Transfer Globally Recognised but Gaps between Knowing and Doing. 
Achieving the objectives and goals of the Paris Agreement requires technological  innovation that inevitably 
entails a widespread transfer of mitigation and adaptation technologies addressing the needs of 
developing countries; innovation consumes significant time and energy so accelerated progress is 
necessary. Decades of global discourse have generated a consensus that technology transfer is a core 
enabling element to limit global average temperature rise to 1.5℃ .  Regardless of such global recognition 
and some trials, barriers have continued to affect a broad set of processes covering the flow of innovative 
climate technology solutions being transferred to emerging markets: surely those of the ASEAN region. 
 
(1) Addressing Supply-sided Controversy over Intellectual Property (IP) Rights. In actual ity, the 
programme theme ‘climate technology transfer’  has raised a fundamental and controversial 
question on IP rights on whether developed economies have a commanding position over patents 
in climate technologies  as apparent market trend reflects . Real cases have disclosed that patent 
holders are reluctant to engage or simply refuse to license their patented technologies to a third 
party , while expressing fears of unreasonable competition from the licensee that could weaken 
their competitive advantage. Several companies expressed concern as they have been reminded 
of real -world experience s of others in foreign countries whose bargaining power enforced 
technology transfer to local actors through mechanisms outside the patent based system . Such 
cases hav e become more prevalent and protective actions by innovators have hindered developing 
countries from gaining access to adequate technology solutions. 
 
The programme shall therefore catalyse the appropriate regime shift throughout relevant 
ecosystems, leveraging the bargaining power of the UNFCC C under which 197 Parties  have 
commit ted to climate technology transfer s. It particularly  proposes a compulsory licensing 
framework utilising  standard terms as a patent protection and safety tool , under which global 
players will voluntarily engage in technology transfer activities and local recipients will enjoy timely 
access to patent protected technologies without abusi ve practices sometimes committed by patent 
holders; i.e.,  breaking the vicious circle of distrust, secrecy, and patent abuse,  such as excessive 
pricing. “Technology transfer can rarely stand on its own; it gets its support from a framework of 
intellectual property rights and know -how protection (Erstling,1992, p.215) .
22” 
 
(2) Addressing Demand-sided Barriers via Ecosystem Building. Bringing climate technologies into 
transformative and scalable solutions in the five economies has been delayed due to barriers on 
the ground –  though at different levels of severity according to varying stages of development. 
They are associated with limited government initiatives and public policies in support of innovation; 
heavy bureaucracy that frustrates effective inter -ministerial coordination; institutional capacity on 
technology based R&D in terms of budget, physical facilities, and qualified staff; shortage of risk 
capital and dormant private sector engagement; insufficiency of market readiness; a small -scale


---
*Page 18*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
   
 technology business incubation community; and stagnant inequalities and insecure social groups, 
including disadvantaged women and girls with low  levels of literacy in science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics (STEM).  
 
With barriers found across different segments in shaping societies and market dynamics  of the five 
economies, it is remotely possible to single out definitive root causes of the continuing challenges 
that hinder climate technology leaps and innovation potentials. On that account, the programme 
shall proactively endorse the appropriate ecosystem which can cover multi -dimensional barriers 
that have long been locked in a vicious  interlinked circle.  
 
(3) Minimising Fragmentation and Inefficiency in Harmony with On-going Interventions. Since 
early stages of idea brainstorming and concept designing, KDB has taken a proactive approach to explore ways of harnessing complementarities amongst a scattered set of similar interventions at 
both national and regional levels across partner countries. M arket assessments  indicate support is 
available in small slices from several  different channels. A nota ble initiative is the Global Cleantech 
Innovation Programme (GCIP), supported by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and implemented by the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO). Knowledge 
exchange and conceptual discussions with the UNIDO team were conducted to avoid wasteful 
duplications of work and inefficient spending of funds so that the two initiatives can  operate in 
parallel and generate synergies to the fullest capacity possible.  
 
Besides, the programme plans to make potential synergy points with other global or regional 
initiatives such as UNDP Country Accelerator Labs, ADB Mekong Business Initiative (MBI), the Mekong Challenge Programme, and GGGI Global and Regional Greenpreneurs Program: e.g., 
sharing lists of key stakeholders and lessons learnt from completed consultations, introducing a 
pool of graduates from other incubation programmes, and discussing joint matchmaking or 
networking events. In a nutshell, this initiative aims t o avoid fragmentation between on-going, 
existing initiatives. Above all, it will build on existing infrastructures and resources on the ground –  
e.g., the five countries’ business acceleration entities –  for a true ownership and capacity 
enhancement of the five countries, thereby maximising complementarity and synergism with 
existing initiatives for technology business entrepreneurship.  
 
(4) Unprecedented Uncertainty and Unpredictability in the Time of COVID -19 and Beyond.  As 
the coronavirus has taken hold of the world and introduced a new level of uncertainty, the ASEAN 
bloc has been hit hard as much of the rest of the globe. An obvious downside is the adversity  most 
entrepreneurs face amid economic fluctuations ; in addition, it takes even longer to turn 
technologies into scalable market solutions during times of extreme stress. The Global Innovation 
Index (GII) 2021 (World Intellectual Property Organisation, 2021) indicates “a severe cutback in innovation investments (p.9)” throughout COVID -19, scoring the l owest innovation performance of 
economies over the course of the pandemic crisis.  The programme shall therefore provide ASEAN -centric acceleration services with U SD 200 million in patient capital amid the crisis like no 
other in modern times  
 
Complementarity and Coherence to Existing Projects/Interventions.  The programme aims to 
proactively endorse and create the appropriate ecosystem which can overcome multi -dimensional barriers 
that have collectively slowed progress. The R&DB Programme is the only equity -based platform that 
invests in SMEs in Southeast Asia to accelerate climate mitigation and adaptation entrepreneurship. Its 
targeted support for capacity building with institutions across the region, with active partnership and 
acceleration activities to match technology providers and entrepreneurs and facilitate market entry, and 
venture capital investing to move early -stage companies toward more stable financial foundations make 
the programme unique.


---
*Page 19*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
   
  
23 Supported by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and implemented by the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation 
(UNIDO)  
24 UNFCCC. 2018. Climate Technology Incubators and Accelerators. Bonn: United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change.  Since early stages of idea brainstorming and concept designing, KDB has taken a proactive approach to 
explore partnerships amongst a scattered set of similar interventions at both national and regional levels 
across partner countries. For example, project partners engaged the Global Cleantech Innovation 
Programme (GCIP),23 to exchange knowledge and avoid wasteful duplications of work and inefficient 
spending of funds. KDB plans to actively connect and find synergies with other global or regional initiatives such as UNDP Country Accelerator Labs, ADB Mekong Business Initiative (MBI), the Mekong Challenge 
Programme, and GGGI Global and Regional Greenpreneurs Program, and shar e lessons learned as well 
as synergies.  
 
Moreover, it will leverage the bargaining power of the UNFCCC under which 197 Parties have committed 
to climate technology transfers. It particularly proposes a compulsory licensing framework utilising 
standard terms as a patent protection and safety tool, under which global players will voluntarily engage in 
technology transfer activities and local recipients will enjoy timely access to patent protected technologies 
without abusive practices sometimes committed by patent holders; i.e., breaking the vicious  circle of 
distrust, secrecy, and patent abuse, such as excessive pricing.  
 
In sum, the programme will (i) address supply -sided controversy over intellectual property (IP) rights, (ii) 
address demand-side barriers via ecosystem building, (iii) improve supply -side opportunity through joint 
venture nurturing and critical growth financing, and (iv) minimise fragmentation and inefficiency in harmony 
with on-going interventions. 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
 
Key Concept beneath the Surface of a Paradigm Shift ing Transition.  The UNFCCC (2018)24 spotlights 
the importance of supporting developing countries to source, digest, and deploy climate technology 
solutions through technology development and transfer in advancing mitigation and adaptation actions 
amid rapidly exacerbating climate crisis. Against this backdrop, the programme has conceived  its key 
profound concept: ‘ technology transfer via a joint venture (JV) as a result of collaborative R&DB.’  
Technology innovation is all about massive collaboration; the range and types of required resources are so 
extensive that it is unlikely that those  wishing to innovate can  achieve it alone,  even if they are 
exceptionally strong i n their own areas. Therefore, the programme suggests a collaborative R&DB (‘B’ 
stands for business) module –  further advanced than the existing collaborative R&D or R&DD (‘D’ stands 
for demonstration) module, taking one step forward to embrace both business modelling and investing.  
 
Addressing Double Sided Barriers on the Part of Both the ‘Receiver’ and the ‘Provider .’ The 
programme shall serve the five ASEAN member states to achieve a genuine paradigm shift towards low -
emission and climate-resilient growth pathways, based on the premise that the right intervention 
addressing both demand and supply side barriers can ensure the realisation of technology transfer into 
emerging markets. In short, this transfer initiative pays  special attention to the hurdles that global 
innovators of the relevant supply chain in industrialised economies  face, in addition to those confronted by  
the five recipient countries . Recognising that motivation for  technology transfer need exists  on both sides –  
not only recipients but also providers , the programme will tackle the joint set of demand and supply 
barriers, which differentiates i t from previous trials to move disruptive technologies into developing 
countries. Under  the programme designed with four components, C omponents 1 and 4 address demand-
side barriers while the re maining two components manage supply -side obstacles as follows :


---
*Page 20*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
   
 (1) Component s 1 and 4 shall address demand -side barriers of the five different countries with varying 
forms and depths of intervention as the severity, facets, and dynamics of such barriers differ  
between countries: e.g.,  from a complete impasse and near -total lack of an ecosystem to a 
massive surge of the market with new -found popularity. In a nutshell, under the same  umbrella, all 
five partner countries will enjoy acceleration activities that best fit individual local contexts. In fact, 
the current, conventional model of acceleration is not suitab le to the emerging market context as it 
was borne over the course of supporting ICT start-ups in Silicon Valley. The two components will 
devise and deploy customised  acceleration modules  for the recipients, and will do its best to 
integrate it into the local ecosystem s once proven contextually workable.  
 
(2) Component s 2 and 3 shall address supply -side barriers  that have barred global technology 
providers, talented innovators, and private investors f rom carry ing out technology -intensive 
transactions in emerging markets. Besi des IP controversies  prescribed in B1, there exist a plethora 
of barriers in cluding,  but not limited to,  high upfront costs due to immature supply chains of a 
nascent market not integrated into the global trading system, difficulties in  team ing up with the right 
local business partners like buyers, agents, distributors, and licensees, regulatory restrictions 
discriminating against foreign entities, and commercially supposed country risk factors. 
 
Diversified Mitigation/Adaptation Potentials via Joint Venture (JV) Business Intervention that Leads 
Technological Leapfrogging in NOL Countries.  Fitfully trained JVs  will be supported throughout R&DB 
acceleration and patient capital injection to be able to d eploy their business solutions equipped with 
clima te responsive technologies. Over the course of the businesses being mature in market ecosystems  to 
be nurtured with the TA intervention, their low-carbon and climate-resilient businesses will  occupy a key 
space, be scaled, and eventually  replac e outdated rival businesses that feature emission-heavy, inefficient, 
and polluting technologies.  
 
By immediately  translating technology -based concepts and ideas into climate actions, JV businesses will 
accelerate a diffusion and stabilisation of the next generation of climate responsive technologies so that 
the transferred technologies will soon become competitive in individual markets , thereby moving straight 
towards reaching NDC and relevant climate goals. Meanwhile, the NOL countries will see a gender mainstreamed entrepreneurship ecosystem with a surging technologically skilled , capable, and passionate  
female entrepreneurs and women-led SMEs as the key innovation agency  that will propel bright climate 
solutions  after mainstreaming transferred technologies and applying them into locally customised 
businesses .  
 
 
Case-specific ToC  Scenarios on What Paradigm Shifting Changes to be Derived from JV Business 
Deployment and its Consequences.  The programme will see newly created JVs with investment 
readiness to implement climate-technology enabled projects (Output of ToC) that will bring about mitigation 
and adaptation outcomes in a society with an emergence of female talents (Outcomes with Co-benefits of 
ToC), which will lead to a paradigm shifting innovation in the climate responsive entrepreneurial ecosystem 
of the five countries (Impacts of ToC). Case-specific ToC scenarios assume exemplary cases as below.


---
*Page 21*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
   
 Theory of Change (ToC)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ToC Scenario 1: Post -harvest  Processing Agro -Tech for Cambodia’s Food Security 
 
Impacts Agro  processing tech innovation will empower Cambodia to obtain climate resilien cy in 
agriculture, leading the national leapfrogging in the global agricultural supply chain . 
▲  
Outcomes  & 
Co-benefits  Enhanced capacity of food security in climate vulnerable agricultural areas  
with engagement of female talents throughout the processing supply chain  
▲  
Outputs  JV’s agro-processing business deployment with local farmers ’ tech literacy  enhan cement  
▲  
Activities  Newly created agro -tech J V with investment  readiness  after acceleration services  
▲  
Barriers  [Demand side barriers ] 
Weak technology capacity of post -harvest 
processing , systemic barriers in  O&M, high [Supply side barriers ] 
High upfront capital  burden  and regulatory 
restrictions for foreign entities , lack of


---
*Page 22*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
   
 upfront costs for local farmers,  COVID -19 
impacts, etc.  qualified local partners , reluctance to invest 
in nascent agro -processing market  
▲  
Rationale for 
Intervention   JV intervention that addresses demand and supply side barriers will empower  Cambodia to 
self-combat low productivity and food insecurity caused by shifting climate and heat waves.   
 
 
ToC Scenario 2 : AI-based Epidemic Warning Tech for the Philippines’  Climate Resilient Healt hcare 
 
Impacts AI-applied tech innovation will empower the Philippines to timely control epidemic disasters 
and obtain climate -resilient heal thcare management  system.  
▲  
Outcomes  & 
Co-benefits  Enhanced capacity of tracking and managing infectious diseases  with remedy actions  in 
climate vulnerable areas with an emergence of female  technicians  and engineer s. 
▲  
Outputs  JV’s business deployment with localised big data analyses  and diseases tracking software  
▲  
Activities  Newly created AI-tech JV with investment  readiness  after acceleration services  
▲  
Barriers  [Demand side barriers ] 
Lack of  access to relevant technology  
sources , high upfront costs, COVID -19 
impacts  intertwined with climate effects , etc.  [Supply side barriers ] 
Regulatory  ownership  / investment  
restrictions for foreign entities, lack of 
qualified local partners,  IP controversy, etc.    
▲  
Rationale for 
Intervention   JV intervention that addresses demand and supply side barriers will empower  the Philippines  
to self -combat uncontrollable spread of infectious diseases deteriorated by climate impacts.  
  
ToC Scenario 3: Clean/E conomic Ocean Energy Technology for Vietnam’s Energy Transition 
 
Impacts  Clean ocean  energy  innovation will empower Vietnam  to initiate low -carbon energy transition . 
▲  
Outcomes  & 
Co-benefits  Reduced emissions  (ca. 2.9 kt ) with an increased access to electricity i n isolated areas  with 
engagement of female talents throughout  the energy  generation and transmission process  
▲  
Outputs  JV’s clean and economic wave energy deployment in isolated rural areas  
▲  
Activities  Newly created wave energy tech JV with investment  readiness  after acceleration services  
▲  
Barriers  [Demand side barriers ] 
Lack of awareness on technology amongst 
local stakeholders, high upfront costs  [Supply side barriers ] 
High upfront capital and commercial funding 
gap, lack of qualified local partners  
▲  
Rationale for 
Intervention  JV business intervention that addresses demand and supply side barriers will empower  
Vietnam to increase access to electricity in remote areas with energy transition .   
 
 
ToC Scenario 4: 4D Drone Control Platform for Laos’ Climate Resilient Land Management  
 
Impacts Land management innovation will lead Laos into a leapfrogging move towards climate 
resiliency of the forestry sector and its vulnerable communities.  
▲  
Outcomes  & 
Co-benefits  Systemic land management and agricultural livelihoods improvement with active participation 
of women in vulnerable mountainous areas


---
*Page 23*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
   
 ▲  
Outputs  JV’s cloud -based intelligent 4D ground control platform business that implements  the 
mapping, real -time monitoring  operation of drones in climate -dama ged land areas  
▲  
Activities  Newly created 4D tech JV with investment  readiness  after acceleration services  
▲  
Barriers  [Demand side barriers ] 
Lack of  qualified local entities for technology 
uptake, high upfront costs  for the vulnerable  [Supply side barriers ] 
Lack of qualified local partners , nascent 
relevant innovation ecosystem  
▲  
Rationale for 
Intervention  JV intervention that addresses demand and supply side barriers will empower Laos  to self -
combat against agricultural losses , caused by climate induced extreme weather events , on 
which over 75% of the total population relies for livelihoods . 
 
 
ToC Scenario 5: Industrial Energy Efficiency for Indonesia’s Leap of Low -carbon Growth  
 
Impacts Energy efficiency innovation will empower Indonesia to make a leap of a low -carbon 
advancement, leading the national leapfrogging in the post -pandemic economic growth.  
▲  
Outcomes  & 
Co-benefits  Reduced emissions across industries equipped with energy efficient equipment and 
technologies with engagement of female engineers and technicians in the market  
▲  
Outputs  JV’s energy efficiency business deployment throughout the industrial manufacturing process  
▲  
Activities  Newly created agro -tech JV with investment  readiness  after acceleration services  
▲  
Barriers  [Demand side barriers ] 
Lack of willingness for local stakeholders 
under no incentive measures, lack of energy 
efficiency finance, high upfront costs, etc.  [Supply side barriers ] 
Reluctance to entre the nascent market, 
upfront capital burden and regulatory 
restrictions for foreign entities, etc.     
▲  
Rationale for 
Intervention   JV intervention that addresses demand and supply side barriers will empower  Indonesia to 
self-combat long delayed energy efficiency initiation without any successful precedents.  
 
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co- benefit categorization 
 
Outcome Mapping to GCF Result Areas with  the Investment Portfolio Scenario Equipped with 
Robust Investment Criteria in terms of Eligibility and Selection.  The CTF consider s investment 
opportunities in five (5 ) result areas under a programmatic approach taken with a strong set of investment 
criteria  at stages of eligibility screening and beneficiary selection.  In that technologies, companies, and sub 
projects  are not identified yet, all the five result areas are marked.  
 
Outcome  
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area  
(MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area  
(ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and 
access  
 MRA 2  
Low-
emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
cities , 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry 
and land 
use ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people 
and 
communiti
es ARA 2  
Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastruct
ure and 
built 
environme
nt ARA 4  
Ecosystem
s and 
ecosystem 
services


---
*Page 24*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
   
 High level Outcome 
(Strengthened climate 
innovation ecosystem 
with gender 
inclusiveness in 
countries powered at 
self-combating climate 
change ) ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Second level Outcome 1  
(Mitigation from low -
carbon energy with 
locally owned 
technologie s) ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Second level Outcome 2  
(Mitigation from low -
carbon transport 
businesses with locally 
owned  technologie s) ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Second level Outcome 3  
(Mitigation from energy 
efficiency with locally 
owned technologie s) ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Second level Outcome 4  
(Improved livelihoods of 
climate vulnerable 
groups from adaptation 
actions with locally 
owned technologie s) ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Second level Outcome 5  
(Enhanced resilience of 
climate impact ed groups 
from adaptation 
businesses with locally 
owned technologie s) ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
  
Ex-ante Prediction of Co-benefit s with Scenario -based Evidence.  The programme predicts that the 
five ASEAN members will enjoy variety  of co-benefits , apart from adaptation and mitigation outcomes . For 
instance, energy efficient industrial processing technologies may align with co-benefits in environmental 
(less air pollution) , gender sensitive (gender balance by employing female engineers and technicians)  and 
economic and industrial  (economic activation across climate and green growth sectors) areas.  
 
 
Co-benefit Number  Environm ’t Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Gender balanced economic 
activation in tech driven 
industries  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
The e mergence of tech 
entrepreneurs with e conomic 
activation boom in industries  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Environmental co- benefits  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
\


---
*Page 25*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
   
 B.3. Projec t/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages ) 
 
Designing the Programme that Addresses Both Demand and Supply Side Barriers to Empower the 
ASEAN Community  via Climate Technology Transfer and Innovation Acceleration. The programme 
shall address the systemic process of climate technology innovation that underpins a range of interacting 
actors with business accelerators anchored. It is structured with four different components using a two-
tiered approach: locally driven (related to demand side barriers) and globally inspired (related to supply 
side barriers) . Individual components and activities will closely function in order to reinforce synerg ies by 
bridging the gaps which have kept the five countries  from a much-needed innovation leap.   
 
Designing Barriers-based Activities 
 
Pressing Barriers  to be Addressed Activit ies as Solutions  
• Scattered small -scale international/national 
start-up support trials that are mostly grant 
based one-off events without an inter-ministerial  
level policy and regulatory engagement  • (Activity 1. 1)  
Set up a National Sustainability Management 
Unit (S MU) that hold the Steering Committee 
with the government level engagement  
• Limited awareness of clima te technology, 
entrepreneurship and business acceleration 
with an unbalanced access to existing market 
opportunities by gender  and others ( geography, 
socio -economic status, language , etc.)  • (Activity 1.2)  
Launch contextually fit sourcing strategies to 
identify qualified local JV candidates  with a 
gender focus  (e.g., recruiting female students 
via partnership with academic institutions)  
• Lack of qualified entrepreneurs  with climate 
responsive technology uptake capacity  (tech 
digestion capabilities , transparent IP trade 
concept, communication  skills ) • (Activity 1. 3) 
Offer tailor -made acceleration readiness 
services to nurture local JV candidates  ready  
to partner with g lobal  tech entrepreneurs  
• Lack of climate tech -supportive sophisticated 
acceleration infrastructure in a local space: esp. 
ASEAN -fit (emerging/developing market-fit) 
business accelerato rs versed in  climate  • (Activity 2. 1) 
Set up the Global Acceleration Advisory Secretariat in partnership with global 
acceler ators of various business areas  
• Few global tech companies willing to entre risky 
developing markets  
• Difficulties to identify qualified local partners  
under a fair standard competition format  • (Activity 2.2 ) 
Launch global sourcing strategies to attract 
global technology innovator s and match them 
with trained/qualified local entrepreneurs  
• Expensive foreign technologies  
• IP controversy  
• High upfront costs  in a nascent market 
• Lack of locally customised t ech-driven R&D and 
business acceleration opportunities  • (Activity 2. 3) 
Support JV teams’ technology transfer and 
business modelling in a legally permitted way  
through provision of  gender -mainstreamed 
collaborativ e R&DB acceleration services  
• Deficit of the g overnment budget assigned for 
climate actions  and tech entrepreneurship  
• Shrunk climate investments  amid economic 
slowdown, market fluctuations  • (Activity 3.1) 
Set up and execute an investment fund with 
attracting and raising investment capital on a 
global scale  
• Over saturated, scattered small -scale grant 
based early -stage support schemes without 
continuing later stage investments  
• Lack of risk -taking equity capital in ASEAN  • (Activity 3.2) 
Execute equity investments with strategic 
portfolio management as per investment 
criteria  incl. gender mainstreaming  
• Few NOL countries have experienced e xit 
achievements while their markets are nascent 
or almost non -existent.  • (Activity 3.3 ) 
Design detailed exit strategies and achieve 
exits with a reasonable rate of return  
• Scattered similar programmes have been 
completed, without any follow -up actions  
amongst local ecosystem stakeholders  • (Activity 4.1 ) 
Formulate the best workable local ecosystem 
network framework


---
*Page 26*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
   
 • Lack of enabling innovation ecosystem , 
including a weak  regulatory framework and 
skilled climate business accelerator s • (Activity 4.2 ) 
Build capacities to enable and strengthen the 
relevant ecosystem  stakeholders, including 
national climate tech -focused accelerators  
• Disregarded/discontinued  sustainability in one-
off grant trials  after international/national 
investment exits  • (Activity 4. 3) 
Promote sustainability via the locally -owned 
SMU  operation  
 
Programme Framework by Output, Component, Activity, and Sub -activity. Maintaining a structural 
cohesion of the general programme framework (below table), country -specific programme details are 
developed to meet country -specific needs and gaps identified by feasibility studies and a series of 
consultations during the designing stage. 
 
Output 1. Country Driven Shortlist of Local JV Candidates Ready for Climate  Technology  Uptake    
Component 1. Country Driven Acceleration Readiness  
• Activity 1.1. Set up a Regional and National Sustainability Management Unit (SMU)  
- Sub-Activity 1.1.1. Set up a Regional SMU in GGGI HQ  
- Sub-Activity 1.1.2. Set up a National SMU in each country  
• Activity 1.2. Launch sourcing strategies to identify qualified local JV candidates  
- Sub-Activity 1.2.1. Develop a robust sourcing strategy  
- Sub-Activity 1.2.2. Prepare necessary platforms and materials for sourcing JV candidates  
- Sub-Activity 1.2.3. Launch outreach activities  
- Sub-Activity 1.2.4. Narrow down the pool of local JV candidates for acceleration readiness  
• Activity 1.3. Offer tailor -made acceleration services to nurture local JV candidates  
- Sub-Activity 1.3.1. Design the National Climate Entrepreneur Accelerator Programme       
(N-CEAPs)  
- Sub-Activity 1.3.2. Train selected candidates for acceleration readiness  
- Sub-Activity 1.3.3. Organise a competition to shortlist JV candidates for global  
acceleration  
Output 2. Climate Technology Transfer between Global -ASEAN JVs with Investment Readiness  
Component 2. Global Acceleration for Collaborative R&DB (R&D + Business)  
• Activity 2.1. Set up the Global Acceleration Advisory Secretariat  
- Sub-Activity 2.1.1. Implement the global component with necessary logistics  
- Sub-Activity 2.1.2. Manage multi -dimensional stakeholder communication  
- Sub-Activity 2.1.3. Conduct regular M&E and reporting to KDB  
• Activity 2.2. Launch global sourcing strategies to attract global technology innovators  
- Sub-Activity 2.2.1. Establish a Global -ASEAN pool of global technology innovators  
- Sub-Activity 2.2.2. Assess the suitability and feasibility of global technology innovators  
- Sub-Activity 2.2.3. Select the finalists for Global -ASEAN technology transfer  
• Activity 2.3. Offer collaborative R&DB acceleration services for JVs  
- Sub-Activity 2.3.1. Perform diagnostic analyses on participating JV candidates  
- Sub-Activity 2.3.2. Offer tailor -made acceleration services for JV candidates  
- Sub-Activity 2.3.3. Achieve Global -ASEAN technology transfer with best fit mechanisms  
- Sub-Activity 2.3.4. Support investment attraction  
Output 3. Climate Technopreneurship Fund (CTF) with Private Capital Crowd -in 
Component 3. Climate Technopreneurship Fund (CTF)  
• Activity 3.1. Execute the CTF formation with raising investment capital


---
*Page 27*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
   
 - Sub-Activity 3.1.1. Establish the fund vehicle and related entities  
- Sub-Activity 3.1.2. Close the GCF into the CTF  
- Sub-Activity 3.1.3. Fundraise private investment capital  
• Activity 3.2. Execute investments with portfolio management as per investment criteria  
- Sub-Activity 3.2.1. Perform due diligence on proposed businesses  
- Sub-Activity 3.2.2. Build, revise, and manage investment portfolios  
- Sub-Activity 3.2.3. Monitor performance of portfolio companies with structured support  
- Sub-Activity 3.2.4. Conduct regular reporting to KDB  
• Activity 3.3. Achieve successful exits with a reasonable rate of return  
- Sub-Activity 3.3.1. Realise exits after assessment on appropriate exit methods  
- Sub-Activity 3.3.2. Distribute proceeds and returns  
- Sub-Activity 3.3.3. Terminate the CTF  
- Sub-Activity 3.3.4. Perform the fund’s post -exit obligations  
Output  4.  Climate Technopreneurship to be Powered at Scale under Strengthened Ecosystem  
Component 4. Technical Assistance (TA)  
• Activity 4.1. Formulate the best workable network framework  
- Sub-Activity 4.1.1. Promote national networks for climate technology innovation  
- Sub-Activity 4.1.2. Develop a communication hub with knowledge sharing activities  
• Activity 4.2. Build capacities to enable and strengthen the relevant ecosystem  
- Sub-Activity 4.2.1. Build capacities of national accelerators to sustain N -CEAPs (1.3.1)  
- Sub-Activity 4.2.2. Establish the national strategy on climate technopreneurship promotion  
- Sub-Activity 4.2.3. Offer regulatory and policy recommendations  
• Activity 4.3. Promote sustainability via the National SMUs  
- Sub-Activity 4.3.1. Develop a detailed M&E implementation plan  
- Sub-Activity 4.3.2. Conduct regular reporting to KDB  
- Sub-Activity 4.3.3. Support ex -post impact assessments  
- Sub-Activity 4.3.4. Coordinate with the Regional SMU and the Acceleration Secretariat  
 
Component 1 – A Starting Point for NOL Countries to be the Climate Tech Capacitated Agent. The 
first component is this climate technology transfer initiative’s starting point that sources promising local 
entrepreneurs and accelerate their capacity so that they could be equipped with the proper awareness and 
readiness to collaborate with global technology providers in Component 2. In particular, sourced and 
shortlisted local companies will be supported in order to satisfy the National Climate Entrepreneur 
Accelerator Programme (N -CEAP) Investment Criteria that requires qualifications NOL countries’ local 
entities are not able to be equipped.  
 
N-CEAP Investment Criteria for Local Entrepreneurs 
 
 Criteria  Description  
 Eligibility Criteria  
(Local Entrepreneurs to be Screened Out if not Relevant or Satisfied)  
1 Locally Owned 
Entities  • Entrepreneurs with valid business registration in NOL countries; or  
• Entrepreneurs with recommendation from the National SMU Project 
Steering Committee (composed by representatives from GCF NDAs 
and line ministries in NOL countries)  
 As a result of local consultation, in case that a vulnerable NOL country needs transfer of certain climate technologies but does not 
have qualified local entrepreneurs, the SMU Project Steering


---
*Page 28*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
   
 Committee may consider a setup of a local subsidiary of global 
technology firms which must be registered as a local company with 
local employees in NOL countries.  
2 Country Ow ned 
Tech Prioritisation  • Initial categorisation as per  Seven  (7) Technology Groups ; or 
• Country fitness of a proposed technology to be confirmed by the SMU 
Project Steering Committee (composed by representatives from GCF 
NDAs and line ministries in NOL countries)  
3 E&S Safeguards  
(ESS)  • [Initial Negative Screening on E&S Risk]  
Local entrepreneurs who consider a business defined in IFC Exclusion 
List and/or a business with adverse impacts on indigenous peoples are 
NOT eligible.  
4 IP Rights  
Protection  • Applicant entrepreneurs’ commitments to transparent technology 
uptake under the global level UNFCCC initiative that values IP rights 
shall be legally binding under confirmation of the National SMU Project 
Steering Committee (composed by representatives from GCF NDAs 
and line ministries in NOL countries)  
  Selection Criteria  
(Scoring -based Assessment for Admission to N -CEAP)  
5 Technology 
Uptake Capacity  • Local e ntrepreneurs deemed to have capacity for foreign technology  
uptake and digestion in terms of staffing expertise –  a minimum level 
of relevant technical/engineering expertise  
• (1st Round) To be assessed by the Technical Advisory  
• (2nd Round) To be assessed by the GP team via the Regional SMU  
6 Gender 
Mainstreaming • [Screening via Gender Profiling Form]  
Women-led SME candidates shall be prioritised for selection. 
 SMEs with at least 26% of the total capital owned by women; 
 SMEs with at least one woman participates in the Board of 
Directors  and/or different types of boards or internal 
committees such as ESG committees , among others (CEO, 
COO, CTO, etc.); and/or  
 SMEs with more than 30% of the total workforce are females. 
• To be consulted and assessed by gender experts of the SMU, based 
on Gender Profiling Form (Appendix 2 of Annex 8)  
7 Funding 
Contribution • [Co-investment Potential]  
Selection priority given to local entrepreneurs with investment capacity 
and/or willingness  
  
NOL Country-specific Business Acceleration Provision in Component 1. This first component 
distinctively optimises specific contents of the National Climate Entrepreneur Accelerator Programme (N -
CEAP) in each country while maintaining consistency in terms of an integrated goal and the overall 
structure. Under the general programme framework (above table), the detailed nature of sub-activities will 
vary across the five different countries: potentially even within a single country as per the needs and gaps 
of individual beneficiary firms. Consequently, all NOL countries will benefit from the N -CEAP, though the 
support structure may look like different across the different five countries. Assumed c ountry -specific 
uniqueness is as follows (further detailed in Annex 2) and such uniqueness will be mainstreamed in N -
CEAP elements.  
 
 Cambodia – Given its crowded local incubation landscape, the Cambodian leg of the programme 
will focus on later -stage acceleration and JV readiness. The Cambodian SMU will partner with 
existing local associations and partners, including Cambodia Investment Club, Camb odia Women 
Entrepreneurs Association, Platform Impact, Young Entrepreneurs Association, UNIDO, and


---
*Page 29*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
   
 others to identify a pipeline of investable entrepreneurs and provide Cambodia’s own N -CEAP 
courses to be climate tech-driven JV ready. In brief, Component 1 will pay particular attention to 
opportunities for technology transfer through subsidiaries and li censing, while Component 4 will 
strengthen the enabling environment for more local innovation. 
 
 Indonesia – The Indonesian SMU will be set up in collaboration with the relevant Government of 
Indonesia’s agency or ministry , consisting of the GGGI implementing team and representatives of 
the host ministry. The SMU will implement inclusive communication and outreach strategies that 
effectively attract qualified technology entrepreneurs with high changes to form JVs with global  
innovators. In particular, GGGI Indonesian team aims to shortlist at least five potential climate 
technopreneurs for global partnership.  
 Laos – Given a very nascent nature of the relevant ecosystem, the Lao leg of the programme 
seeks for establishing the ‘Lao National Climate Entrepreneurship Network’ under the aegis of the 
Young Entrepreneurs Association of Laos. Strongly supported by the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Environment, GCF NDA, in partnership with Lao National Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry (LNCCCI), the Lao SMU is expected to widely disseminate the calls for application 
and reach ca. 300 local firms in relevant industries . 
 
 Philippines – Given that the Philippines has a wide pool of a ctive local and international climate 
experts  in the market, those potential mentors  will be consulted for the N -CEAP design to ensure it 
necessary  for addressing climate related issues on the ground. The Philippines’ leg of the 
programme will mainly support both technology -based start- ups and social enterprises under 
Component 1, while strengthening local ecosystem stakeholders’ capacity centred around the 
Philippine Businesses for Climate Impact Network under Component 4. 
 
 Vietnam – Given quite a number of growing young entrepreneurs who recognise a desperate 
need of foreign technologies but cannot afford to buy due to realistic hurdles, which is different from situations of other participating countries in a severe vulnerability, the programme will 
proceed with competitive selection processes in order to identify qualified local players who could uptake transferred technologies from global peers after 3-6 months’ N -CEAP provision and an 
advanced round of investor pitch.  
 
Component 2 –  Best Available Business Acceleration from a Global Team with Multi-Expertise. The 
second component aims to source and train global innovators and technology providers as per Acceleration Investment Criteria (see below) , facilitate adequate partnership models to be established by 
matching between local entrepreneurs (N -CEAP graduates, i.e., domestically nominated as a result of N -
CEAP under Component 1) and sourced global innovators, and to eventually achieve climate-responsive 
technology transfer by translating fit technology solutions into shovel -ready businesses of the matched 
teams . 
Acceleration Investment Criteria for Global Entrepreneurs 
 
 Criteria  Description  
 Eligibility Criteria  
(Global Entrepreneurs to be Screened Out if not Relevant or Satisfied)  
1 Awareness of the 
Programme  
Mandate • Global innovators must be aware of the fundamental programme 
mandate that climate (responsive) technologies are to be applied for 
business deployment across the five (5) NOL countries, in alignment 
with the five (5) GCF Result Areas  
(1) M1. Energy generation and access  
(2) M2. Low -emission transport 
(3) M3. Buildings , cities, industries and appliances  
(4) A1. Most vulnerable people and communities


---
*Page 30*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
   
 (5) A2. Health and well -being, and food and water security  
2 Climate 
Technology  • A global entrepreneur must have an acknowledged qualification  (e.g., 
intellectual property [IP] on a proposed technology) to have and trade 
a climate (responsive) technology.  
3 Country Ow ned 
Tech Prioritisation  • To be screened by Seven  (7) Prioritised Technology Groups; or  
• NOL countries’ urgent need of a proposed technology should be 
proven, in case of a proposed technology not included in the 
Technology Groups – to be confirmed and approved by the National 
SMU Project Steering Committee (composed by representatives from 
GCF  NDAs and line ministries in NOL countries)  
4 Technology 
Transfer  • A proposal on t echnology transfer mechanism  to be submitted to the 
Acceleration Secretariat for Global Acceleration, with acceptance on climate (responsive) technology to be transferred in legally permitted 
manners under compliance with a standard IP trade format    
5 E&S Safeguards  
(ESS)  • [Secondary Negative Screening on E&S Risk]  
Global entrepreneurs who consider a business defined in IFC 
Exclusion List and/or a business with adverse impacts on indigenous peoples are NOT eligible. 
• Global entrepreneurs whose ESG policy and ESMS are  existent but 
not aligned with the CTF E&S Safeguard Pol icy are recommended to 
adopt a common approach on the ESMS for their JV entities that will 
carry out the CTF activities. If candidates are equipped with their own 
(or stricter) strategies, theirs would be evaluated as per ESS/Gender 
compliance.  
 Selection Criteria  
(Scoring Based Assessment for Admission to Global Acceleration)  
6 Local Partnership  • Partnership with N -CEAP graduates from Component 1;  
• Partnership with local entrepreneurs (non N -CEAP graduates) –  need 
to be approved by the National SMU Project Steering Committee (composed by representatives from GCF NDAs and line ministries in 
NOL countries); or  
• Commitment to partnership with local entrepreneurs (if technologies are urgently needed amid lack of local peers) –  need to be approved 
by the National SMU Project Steering Committee (composed by 
representatives from GCF NDAs and line ministries in NOL cou ntries)  
7 Gender 
Mainstreaming • [Gender Mainstreaming Readiness Check]  
Scoring -based assessment on a global applicant’s gender balanced 
appealing points, in addition to Gender Mainstreaming Commitment 
Plan (GMCP), upon request from international gender experts from 
Gaia Consult Inc. that includes, among others:  
 Set specific employment and esp. high-value skill training 
targets of women and girls with concrete timeline 
 Reflect gender inclusiveness in the design/business plans of the JV team (along through the process of climate technology 
R&DB acceleration): e.g., recruiting female talents intentionally 
with a certain target to be active agents of the enterprises 
and/or internationally targeting female population as major 
beneficiaries  
8 Funding 
Contribution  • [Co-investment Potential]


---
*Page 31*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
   
 Selection priority given to global entrepreneurs with investment 
capacity and/or willingness  
 
In order to support ASEAN -global teams to satisfy the Acceleration Investment Criteria above, th e 
programme will deliver on collaborative R&DB activities overall as below.  
 
(1) [Sourcing and Shortlisting of Global Technology Providers with Climate Responsive Solutions]  
 
By leveraging the global innovation network consisting of VCs, accelerators, and other start-up 
support intermediaries with global presence, NHIS  (as Executing Entity of Component 2) will 
launch a call for proposals to source tech-based businesses (start-ups, SMEs, etc.) in countries 
with advanced climate responsive ecosystems, including, but not limited to, Canada, Singapore, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, the US, and the UK. Gl obal tech innovators in climate space 
will be sourced to engage in the prog ramme to scale up their impactful technologies to flow into 
the five emerging ASEAN markets. The global JV candidates will be shortlisted upon a series of 
diagnostic assessment on the technological suitability, market viability and scalability potential (both in terms of technology fitness and climate outcomes) by the GP team.  
 
(2) [Tailor -made Consultation and Guidance on Business Strategy] 
 With shortlisted global teams on board, a series of tailor -made consultation sessions will take 
place, to gauge and further assess the feasibility of technologies by closely examining risk factors, business projections and technology transfer capacity. Suc h baseline analysis will provide a solid 
ground for the GP to consistently keep track of back -to-back support provided to the companies. 
 
Such consultation will also aim to help shape the go-to-market strategies of global tech providers 
by offering deep-dive sessions on respective local markets of the five NOL countries, including on -
site, preliminary proof of concept (PoC) activities, local  network building and setting up milestones 
on business expansion. Through this process, each team will have strategised measures to secure local business licenses and patents as well as plans on potential JV creation and entailed 
actions, while their busi ness models with identified viable technologies will be confirmed, primed 
for proposing to local companies with technology needs subject to the JV establishment. 
 
(3) [ASEAN Market Entry Readiness Training & PoC Support] 
 Based on previous consultation sessions validating core climate (responsive) technology as well 
as touching upon business strategies for scaling up, the global climate tech innovators will be 
provided with a series of activities enhancing their readiness f or the ASEAN market. Training on 
prerequisites and associated procedural measures will be given, in conjunction with reviewing the general business ecosystem of the target NOL countries. Furthermore, similar practices that 
involve overseas market entry via technology transfer scheme will be analysed and reviewed as a 
benchmark, allowing the teams to examine potential issues in business expansion.  
 Upon formulating tailor -made market entry strategies, the programme aims to leverage local 
networks of extensive relevant stakeholders and partners, particularly state agencies, to facilitate substantial discussions on local business licenses and cooperati on with local business 
ecosystems, in a close partnership and intensive discussions with the Regional SMU under KDB guidance.  
 
(4) [Technology Transfer Modalities and Business Development] 
 
With the global climate tech innovators identified, accelerated and ready to expand into the target 
NOL countries, a series of business matching consultations will take place, to undertake a genuine 
technology transfer through bespoke schemes: i.e., JV par tnership (onshore target set -up as a


---
*Page 32*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
   
 locally registered JV between a local company and a global climate technology company 
contributing its technology transfer or asset including both cash and in-kind); and/or technology 
licensing agreement (late-stage, onshore target licensing climate technology from a global firm 
upon investment). In addition to aforementioned schemes, consulting sessions for enabling a 
genuine technology transfer through other likely recommended business models are to be offered 
as well in a close communication and intensiv e discussions with the Regional SMU under KDB 
guidance, following similar procedures involving feasibility studies on business and technology: e.g., local company under the concept of South-South Cooperation (onshore business with climate 
technology on its  own, with no need for additional technology sourcing/licensing; rather, capable of 
enabling potential technology transfer as the transmitter amongst NOL countries).  
 
In order to assess compatibility between the two partners, the matching arrangements between 
global and local entities will first entail feasibility studies covering business plan, profitability, financial projection and exit strategy. Furthermore, aside from a business perspective, technical 
aspects will be looked into, which an aim to review the potential commercialisation of respective 
climate tech -driven solutions.  
 
(5) [Consultation on Climate Advisory and E&S/Gender Safeguards ]  
 
In order to align each business model with viable climate outcomes, a professional climate 
advisory firm will be engaged to provide businesses with adequate guidance and framework on 
capturing climate outcomes via Project Selection Tool based on GCF Additi onality and Innovation 
Tool (AIT). Moreover, analysis on the environmental and social (E&S) impacts borne out of such technology transfer models will also be conducted to allow the businesses to better incorporate 
E&S/Gender related factors into their oper ation and monitoring of supply chains.  
 
(6) [Investment Attraction and Facilitation Support] 
 Upon the set-up of technology transfer in local -global partnership formats, the programme will offer 
dedicated support to the selected businesses on attracting investment by not only sharpening their 
IR resources but also providing consultation to rebuild business strategies considering the 
investor -oriented approach. Moreover, aiming for a seamless integration into respective local 
markets, if necessary, the teams will further be mentored by global and local accelerators and 
venture capitals to strengthen the market linkage and build relationships for potential investment in 
the future.  
 In parallel with such support given to the businesses, the GP and local partner entities of 
Component 2 will host a periodic VC/investors’ roundtable and networking session to highlight the 
accelerated teams’ potential and expand the network of climate tec h-driven investment space. As 
part of support, a regional demo day to a targeted audience of investors and industry stakeholders 
at both global and regional levels will take place to showcase the innovations and discuss the way 
forward. 
 
Component 2 as the Channel of Global Innovators’ Joining Climate Action. The kernel of the second 
component is to invite global companies that have not paid attention to the UNFCCC/GCF strategic goals 
that much, reframe their technology capacity as per above listed business acceleration services, and 
support them to be ready to contribute to climate action as per Acceleration and CTF Investment Criteria, 
including but not limited to strict E&S, gender, IP risk resolution requirements, thereby unlocking their climate responsive tech expertise fit to the target NOL countries. For this, the NHIS centred at the Team 
NH (see Section B for NH Financial Group’s group-wide commitment for the programme success) will tap 
investment opportunities in partnership with more than 100 global VC/PE/AC partners in Singapore, the 
US, Switzerland, J apan, Australia, Thailand, and so on. Once proper global innovators identified, the 
second component will support them to be ready to satisfy the Acceleration Investment Criteria below and 
eventually CTF Investment Criteria.


---
*Page 33*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
   
  
ASEAN -fit Global Acceleration Teams to be Optimised with Kernel Professionals in Component 2. 
A global acceleration team with a diverse array of expertise, including IP and patent, accounting, tax, law, 
financial modelling, technology valuation, marketing, fundraising, investment, business mentoring, E&S 
risk management, and gender mainstreaming, will be organised to offer collaborative R&DB consulting 
services that are customised as per partnership and nature of technology. In a nutshell, agile and project-
based acceleration teams will be optimised with kernel professionals who have the expertise each 
business needs –  i.e., Collaborative R&DB acceleration services to be co -designed and/or operated with 
chartered patent agents, professional accelerators, uni versity -based R&D centres, and consulting firms –  
to validate the sustainability of each team’s core business model pertaining to climate outcomes, and to 
deliver on its mission.  
 
In order to build its expansive relationship with global stakeholders nurturing and advancing innovation 
ecosystems, the programme, specifically NHIS , as Executing Entity of Component 2, shall make proactive 
collaborations with global acceleration partners with different expertise and focus areas that are proven capable of fostering acceleration in the climate technology space, for instance (see below) , under 
engagement partnership. With the multi -disciplinary team on board, Component 2 shall proceed with 
sourcing talented global innovations, match-making with technology deployable local companies, training 
JVs to devise technology -enabled climate solutions, enabling selected forward-looking businesses to 
advance their scalable capabilities in five emerging markets, and finally reaching a commercialisation 
milestone, leading up to the investment phase of Component 3. This would allow the businesses to finalise 
their mid- to long-term business plans tailored to the local settings.  
 
 
Component 3 – Climate Technopreneurship Fund (CTF)  with GCF Catalytic First -loss Equity Capital 
under the Risk-Adjusted Investment Framework.  Component 3 is the very core of this programme that 
establishes  an investment fund of USD 200 million, CTF, with the GCF anchor investment, and financ es 
graduates from Component 2 that have proven climate technology  applied businesses most suitable to 
individual local contexts.  Th CTF shall support JVs or other forms of entities that execute relevant 
technology transfer into NOL countries to grow as small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) to expand 
climate responsive businesses while addressing a missing middle corporate structure caused by a wide 
gap between large and micro, mostly informal, enterprises in the five countries.  
 
The CTF adopts a risk -adjusted investment framework to cover varying risks that arise from diverse 
portfolio companies in multiple NOL countries. Direct capital injection is the default mode of investment but, if needed, additional layer of a special purpo se vehicle (SPV) may be structured to accommodate 
categorised risks such as tax/regulatory restrictions on foreign direct investment and entry/exist convenience. The SPV differentiates itself from a BAU Fund of Funds (FoF) that is an expensive vehicle 
investing in other hedge funds. Given that the programme pays attention to a challenging reality that levels 
of acceptable risk and capital configuration ratio differ country by country, even amongst industries within a 
single country, thereby necessitating deal -by-deal adjustments via navigating, calculating, and managing 
associated risks. Additionally, the configuration of debt and equity within a project can vary; setting full -
equity investments as a default, a project with a higher risk  may be structured wi th an 80/20 debt-equity 
configuration, while a lower -risk project may require a 50/50 debt-equity configuration. 
 
It shall deal with the problematic finding of existing and/or similar initiatives that most graduates from 
initiatives with one-off seed grants have failed to attract further investment capital and progress to more 
advanced stages. In recognition of the finding, the fund shall invest in JVs or other forms of entities that 
execute relevant technology transfer into NOL countries  as per  CTF Investment Criteria  (see below)  in 
case barriers bar the JV model and prevent from achieving the programme objectives . Only applicants


---
*Page 34*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
   
 whose readiness and business fitness have been validated by the GP as per investment criteria below can 
benefit from the CTF’s capital.  
 
CTF Investment Criteria 
 
 Criteria  Description  
 Eligibility Criteria  
(Local -Global Partnership to be Screened Out if not Relevant or Satisfied)  
1 GCF Mandate • [Alignment with the GCF Result Areas]  
An applicant must propose a business that is  classified into (at least) 
one of the chosen GCF’s five (5) result areas.  
(1) M1. Energy generation and access  
(2) M2. Low -emission transport 
(3) M3. Buildings , cities, industries and appliances  
(4) A1. Most vulnerable people and communities  
(5) A2. Health and well -being, and food and water security  
• Applicants must demonstrate their level of climate impact within the 
GCF result areas  
2 NOL Countri es’  
Technology Needs  • A proposed climate responsive tech -driven business must respond to 
NOL countries’  technology needs in response to climate change.  
• To be screened by Priority Technologies by Result Areas with 
Specific Level of Needs in Section B1   
• Other climate responsive technologies recommended by NOL 
countries’ Project Steering Committee can be considered.  
3 Technology 
Transfer    • An applicant must prove its technology transfer mechanism  from 
global to NOL countries . 
• Joint Venture (JV) partnership is the default investment model with 
flexibility that is triggered by  NOL countries’ request. Such flexible 
cases  will be confirmed by NOL countries’ Project Steering Committee 
under Sustainability Management Unit (SMU) . 
 Example 1: In case that NOL countries request 100% local 
ownership, technology licencing agreement can be considered 
as an alternative technology transfer case .   
 Example 2: In case of a lack of local entrepreneurs who can 
digest a needed technology, NOL countries may consider a 
subsidiary of a foreign technology firm.  
 Example 3: In case of a huge tech capacity gap between local 
and global side, NOL countries may consider South-South 
technology transfer modality, seeking for a l ocal company with 
potential to execute South-South transfer/cooperation on climate responsive technology . In such case, the proposed local 
business should be able to demonstrate its pertinence to further establish potential South -South technology partnerships.  
 Example 4: In case of little interest from global tech companies  
– e.g., due to lack of market opportunities –  amid an urgent 
need of such technologies in NOL countries, NDAs via SMU’s 
Project Steering Committee may  suggest alternative investment 
options such as investments directed at such innovative 
companies with technologies in urgent need and/or 
debt/mezzanine for the NDA’s proposed investments under a 
condition to  achieve technology transfer via relevant tech


---
*Page 35*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
   
  
25 “Cultural heritage includes but is not limited to natural areas with cultural and/or spiritual value, such as 
sacred groves, sacred bodies of water and waterways, sacred mountains, sacred trees, sacred rocks, burial 
grounds and sites, as well as the non- physical expression of culture, such as traditions, language, identity, 
ceremonial, or spiritual aspects of the affected indigenous peoples’ lives.” (GCF IPP, Para 63)  licensing agreement  or an investment vehicle  set-up in NOL 
countries  for local job creation , among other s. 
4 Local Ownership 
of Innovation  • Clear evidence must prove that a proposed technology -enabled 
climate solution is not owned by NOL countries, being triggered by 
at least one of the followings, so that the innovation intervention is 
additional to NOL countries.  
 A proposed technology -enabled climate transaction is a first of 
its kind in NOL countries; 
 No technically feasible and more cost-effective alternatives to 
the solution exist; 
 Similar technologies and/or viable alternatives are not available in the domestic market of a target NOL country; 
 Similar technologies and/or alternatives should be necessarily supported by concessional finance and/or other public support 
mechanisms (e.g., tax incentives, subsidies)  to be viable, while 
the support does  not distort the market;  
 The target market and available finance are insufficient to 
deploy a proposed technology -enabled climate solution so that 
scale -up and replication potential is highly low ; or 
 Similar technologies and/or viable alternatives are not locally 
owned, so that NOL countries cannot afford to be self-equipped 
with the solution to self- combat relevant adverse climate change 
impacts . 
5 Additionality  • Clear evidence must be provided to demonstrate that a proposed 
solution overcomes existing barriers, contributes to market 
development and transformation and to strengthening knowledge 
and capacity, and applies best technology(ies).  
• To be screened by Project Selection Tool (Annex 21)  
6 E&S Safeguards  
(ESS)  • Negative screening  
 Businesses defined in IFC Exclusion List NOT eligible for 
investment  
 Businesses with adverse impacts on indigenous peoples NOT 
eligible for investment, by falling under one of the categories 
below: 
(1) Business/enterprises with negative impacts on lands and 
natural resources subject to traditional ownership or customary 
use or occupation;  
(2) Business/enterprises that results in relocation of indigenous 
people from lands and natural resources subject to traditional 
ownership or under customary use or occupation, or; 
(3) Business/enterprises that may potentially impact cultural 
heritage25,  and where the commercial use of the cultural 
heritage of indigenous peoples would need FPIC) . 
• E&S risk categorisation  
 High risk businesses (Category A) are NOT eligible for 
investment


---
*Page 36*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
   
  
26 Condition 1- 1) and 1 -2) constitutes the IFC’s definition of women- owned SMEs. It is reported that most of the 
Southeast Asian countries are using the IFC’s definitions, including Cambodia, Indonesia, Philippines and 
  A proposed business must be classified as Category B or C  
• Post-investment commitment through Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) for medium risk businesses (Category B)  
 All the supported JVs with medium risk level (Category B) must 
comply with required duties and responsibilities regarding ESS 
compliance: e.g., E&S risk mitigation plan deployment, regular 
reporting.  
 Selection Criteria – Scoring Priority  
(Applicants are encouraged to strengthen their proposal to meet the selection criteria via 
acceleration)  
7 Business 
Feasibility  • [JV dimension] Team capacity  
 The founding team must be able to operate the business.  
(e.g., human resources in terms of size and expertise)  
•  [Transaction dimension] Commercial viability  
 Local market fit  
 Technical feasibility with potential to scale  
 Financial sustainability; bankability  
• CTF may finance a transaction that does not prove business 
feasibility, in c ase NOL countries need the business  urgently . 
8 Co-benefits  
& Sustainability  • Applicants are encouraged to fully deliver following co -benefits:  
 Economic co-benefits, such as the creation of jobs, poverty 
alleviation and enhancement of income and financial inclusion, 
esp. amongst women; 
 Social co-benefits, such as improvements in health and safety, access to education, cultural preservation, improved access to 
energy, social inclusion, improved sanitation facilities and 
improved quality of and access to other public utilities such as 
water supply;  
 Environmental co-benefits, including increased air, water and 
soils quality, conservation and biodiversity  
 Gender empowerment co-benefits outlining how the project wil l 
reduce gender inequalities (* Further gender component is also 
included in C riteria #9  below.)  
 Promoting and empowering “indigenous -led/owned SMEs” to 
ensure indigenous climate technology and knowledge are fully 
tapped for the climate technology innovation in the five countries 
as shown in Criteria #10 below. 
• Where appropriate, proposals should present the ability of the projects to enable the achievement of one or more of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
9 Gender  
mainstreaming • [JV formation dimension]  
 At least 5 0% of the CTF-invested JVs are w omen-led JVs that 
are defined in Condition below; or alternatively , 
 JVs are requested to present a gender mainstreaming 
commitment plan against the CTF. 
[Condition – “Women-led JV” Definition]  It constitutes the 
following conditions26. Conditions below will be screened from


---
*Page 37*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
   
  
Vietnam. See “Women -owned Small and Medium -sized Enterprises in Viet Nam: Situation Analysis and Policy 
Recommendations” (2017) A study requested by the Mekong Business Initiative (MBI) and conducted by a  
joint advisory facility of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Government of  
Australia, and the Hanoi Women’s Association of Small and Medium Enterprises  
(HAWASME)/ Full text at: http://www.mekongbiz.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/04/WBAs -Position -
Paper_English.pdf  the selection process of  entrepreneurs. The women -led SME  
candidates shall be prioritised for selection.  
 SMEs with at least 26% of the total capital owned by 
women;  
 SMEs with at least one woman participates in the Board of Directors  and/or different types of boar ds or internal 
committees such as ESG committees , among others 
(CEO, COO, CTO, etc.) ; and/or   
 SMEs with more than 30% of the total workforce are females .   
• [Enterprise dimension] 
 All proposed business proposals must be gender mainstreamed 
as per its agreed minimum gender mainstreaming requirements 
that are, among others:  
 gender -disaggregated impacts to be presented, 
monitored, and evaluated;  and 
 a simplified gender assessment (GA) and gender action 
plan (GAP) (see a standard format in Appendix 3 of 
Annex 8)  to be developed and submitted as part of the 
CTF application package.  
• Overall gender performance shall be monitored and evaluated 
throughout the JV implementation (Component 3) against the 
submitted GMCP and GAP ; in case that 50% target is not achieved 
due to any reasonable circumstances – e.g., failure to reach the target 
with a slight gap due to unexpected investments at the 5
th year of the 
investment period, this will be consulted to KDB/GCF.  
• Prioritisation scoring system for a winning gender -balanced portfolio  
 Higher gender scores will be weighted higher in selection and 
investment in cases where scores are identical in other criteria  
10 Indigenous -Led 
Entrepreneurship  • [Prioritisation of the indigenous -led enterprises/businesses ]  
 CTF will prioritise the applicant enterprises and activities that 
meet the following conditions : 
 application/combination of indigenous technology for 
climate tech RD&B; and/or  
 participatory and inclusive approach in the proposed 
enterprises/businesses in the design level  
• [Enterprise dimension]  
 In case the nexus to indigenous people is confirmed, the 
JVs/activities may need to develop a n indigenous peoples plan 
(IPP), as a stand-alone plan or as an integrated part of the 
environmental and social management plan (ES MP) of the 
proposed activities.  
 The CTF will support, as appropriate, m onitoring, 
evacuation , and any other due diligence including


---
*Page 38*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
   
 response/remedial/corrective measures in case of 
occurrence of unintended adverse impacts as per Para 
19 of the GCF IPP Guidelines (2019).  
11 Balanced Portfolio  • CTF minimum investment threshold: at least 15%  of the CTF 
investment proceeds to be allocated for Cambodia and/or Lao PDR  
 If the NOL countries cannot be performed due to any force 
majeure events, it includes but not limited to (a) acts of God; (b)  
war, invasion, hostilities (whether war is declared or not); (c)  
action by any governmental authority; and (d)  other similar 
events beyond the reasonable control of the e xecuting entities, 
the threshold exemption in part or in whole shall be consulted 
with the GCF for the restructure approval . 
• At least 50% of the CTF investment proceeds to be allocated for the 
GCF adaptation result areas   
 
Component  4 (Technical Assistance, TA) –  Ecosystem Building in Pursuit of a Genuine Country 
Ownership and Sustainability.  Component 4 will offer the country -specific TA activities to contribute to 
the relevant ecosystem development for the programme’s smooth roll -out, while avoiding overlaps with 
similar grant funding policymaking or capacity -building projects of other international d evelopment 
agencies.  
 
This TA component aims to create or develop each country’s proper sourcing and acceleration training 
organism and ecosystem to nurture top talents on the ground, and build on existing local platforms and 
initiatives for the sake of the programme’s harmony with the local governance. Almost every programme country has a national body or relevant mechanism for promoting entrepreneurship, though they 
demonstrate different forms, levels, governance, and maturity. The programme will team up with such 
bodies to maximise the use of the contextually settled system and infrastructure, ensuring timely and 
efficient operationalisation and staying on track even after the GCF-KDB exit; i.e., it shall minimise 
expenses for a new office set-up with newly purchased office supplies, electronics, and furniture. This 
satisfies a broader governmental demand to minimise the creation of new mechanisms that typically 
fragment, duplicate, or overlap the efforts of local governments.  
 
In particular, each country has its own unique Intellectual Property (IP) related regulatory framework, 
though all of them are relatively vulnerable and require improvement with international support. Targeted 
five countries can be divided into two groups on the basis of what KDB has researched (see Annex 9 for 
country -specific IP relevant regulatory status).  
 
• 1
st group comprises Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, all of which are at the initial stage of IP 
framework development, reflecting aspects such as technology license valuation and IP enforcement. Although there is a long way to go before the countries hav e sufficiently advanced 
IP framework to provide comfort for global tech providers, these governments’ continued efforts to improve the IP environment deserve appreciation. It is expected that the countries developing IP 
regulatory framework will advance thanks to the governments’ strong willingness, though their 
policy enforcement, such as penalties, are generally weak in the middle of existing barriers to 
licensing and commercialised IP assets: e.g., compulsory licenses to override IP rights have been 
issued by the governments. The programme shall support their direction of development, while 
addressing such local barriers on the ground.  
• 2nd group consists of Cambodia and Laos, generally classified as the least developed countries. 
Due to a relatively smaller size of economies and trade volume, there seems comparatively less 
information and assessment references available on their IP framewor ks. Therefore, the 
programme’s PPF outcome will serve as a starting point for a long regulatory development 
journey towards a more advanced IP framework in this highly vulnerable group. While there are


---
*Page 39*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
   
 basic level of laws on IP and in -kind contributions like technology, copyrights, and patents can be 
registered for the issuance and consideration of shares for private companies, the evaluation 
method of value of each technology and enforcement process are not clear. The two countries are 
strongly recommended to refer to cases from other countries; i.e., TA activities are strongly 
needed.  
  
Based on the basic understanding of each country’s IP regulatory framework ecosystem, the programme 
will develop a detailed and customised TA plan in pursuit of a more advanced IP protection ecosystem 
building. Meanwhile, lessons learnt by other target countries would be able to provide significant benefits 
amongst each other. It is anticipated that countries would go through a certain learning process via a case 
by case experience that they would perceive the concept of the IP rights and technical procedur es in a 
practical fashion, and see the merits of how the IP protection scheme brings advanced technology 
providers and enhances their access to needed technologies. Most importantly, local JVs will deploy their 
own customised technologies with comfort that theirs could be protected under the newly framed or 
strengthened policies, laws, and regulations. This will lead countries to seriously consider the regulatory 
recommendations delivered on from Component 4, and to materialise TA deliverables on the ground – 
which is not common  in a harsh reality of ODA or grant-funded TA areas. The programme admits a  
restraint that the whole legal  framework  of the five countries  cannot be perfected in  a few years  under  
unlimited resources; but  revision such  as strengthening the existing references  can be a practical  and 
easier  scenario  with consideration of their individual country uniqueness .   
 
Country Ownership Built Sustainability Management Unit (SMU), as the Core Decision-making 
Authority in Components 1 and 4. GGGI will organise in-house project teams named “Sustainability 
Management Unit (SMU)  with an aim to strengthen country ownership in executing optimised and well -
coordinated on-the-ground activities fit to individual NOL countries, and to concentrate allocated resources 
on the programme over the course of the implementation. Six (6) SMUs wi ll be established as follows: (i) 
Regional SMU at the GGGI Seoul HQ; and (ii) National SMU at each NOL country’s  GGGI Country Office, 
thereby five National SMUs in total. In brief, the objectives of the SMU (GGGI’s in -house team, not a 
separate legal entity) are as follow in brief: (i) country ownership; and (ii) effective programme 
management. 
 
• The strengthening of c ountry ownership: This creation of mechanism through which NDA and line 
ministries can make the decision-making intervention due to reasons (e.g., the technology needs 
evolve, considering the late implementation after board approval and FAA signing), which led to the 
SMU designi ng in different forms and composition by country. The National SMUs will be operational 
based on such feedback from the PSC under the principle of country ownership.   
 
• The channel of the effective programme management: Given the multi -country targeting and the 
programme theme tech transfer per se leading to engagement of various stakeholders , the SMU will 
act as a core channel of the effective planning, resource management, communication, and coordination between various stakeholders in four components for the sake of the optimal investment 
outcomes and climate impacts.


---
*Page 40*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
   
 Regional SMU  – KDB Advisory Management & NH Engagement for Investment Linkages . The core 
decision-making of the two components will be advised, guided, 
and determined by the Regional SMU meetings on an as -needed 
basis. In capacity of Accredited Entity and Executing Entity, sitting 
at the Regional SMU meetings, KDB shall advise and approve the 
main agendas –  i.e., National SMU team building, each country 
team’s partner local entities (local bodies in the relevant 
acceleration  and entrepreneurship realm s in order to maximise 
the use of existing platforms and the eventual integration of the 
relevant resources into the ecosystem of the NOL countries in 
pursuit of a genuine post programme sustainability), procurement 
of properly qualified service providers –  e.g., service provider with 
IP regulatory framework advisory capacity , budgeting, finalist 
company selection, and synergetic strategy amongst every 
component, as the control tower of the Regional SMU that gives 
guidance to the National SMUs .  
 The Regional SMU will invite NH affiliates in the decision-making process as for local private sector 
partnership, company sourcing, and acceleration activities (Activities 1.2 and 1.3) that require a close 
linkage with other subsequent components. At the Regional SMU meeting chaired by KDB, NH 
representatives will (i) recommend top-tier local VC/AC/PE partners that obtain abundant portfolio 
companies and local market expertise with established resources; (ii) will participate in the procurement 
and/or contracting process between GGGI and such recommended local top-tiers by supporting the ToR 
description with qualifications wanted from an investor’s perspective, evaluating candidates’ qualifications, 
along with the final selection. In addition to the selecti on of ASEAN -based local top-tiers, NH will directly 
engage discuss promising pipeline/portfolio company sharing with that selected local top-tiers, and 
approve the final selection of local JV candidates at demo days that eventually determine the finalists in 
Component 1. This NH engagement will support GGGI to identify and source qualified local entrepreneurs 
in Component 1, in addition to its own list of companies introduced by the NDAs and line ministries and its 
own private sector partners. All the procedures will be proceeded in accordance with the GGGI’s 
established institutional system; but NH has the prior decision-making authority and veto rights in case 
such procedures and outcomes are not fit into investments planned afterwards in Components 2 and 3, 
thereby not repeating trials and errors having been found in most of one-off seed grant provision events 
without any follow -up investment at scale.  
 GGGI will set up different forms of the in -house National SMU fitting into each NOL Country’ unique 
circumstances and the five National SMUs will lead operations of the locally driven activities of 
Components 1 and 4 in each country as a core implementation unit under the direction of the Regional 
SMU under KDB supervision and advisory guidance. The rationale of the five National SMUs is the 
different needs on the basis of the following general structure to enable effective delivery of the “National 
Climate Entrepreneur Accelerator Programme (N -CEAP).” As differentiated N -CEAPs should be designed 
and offered according to varying country needs and contexts, the GGGI will design and operate the locally 
customised N -CEAP provision with the support of both local  governments and technical experts, thereby 
necessitating the Project Steering Committee (PSC) and Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) under the National SMU structure.  
 
• Project Steering Committee (PSC) : As a high-level decision- making body, the PSC will be composed 
by representatives from the local government (e.g., NDA), GGGI, academia, and relevant public and 
private sectors; the composition varies as per NDA instructions as below. The duties of the P SC


---
*Page 41*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
   
 include high -level ministerial coordination, overall policy guidance, and need -based institutional 
arrangements for timely and effective implementation.  
• Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) : An ad-hoc technical advisory body will be established with 
working-level government officials, relevant sectoral/thematic experts, technicians, and/or private 
sector representatives to address technical and operational issues that arise during project 
implementation in a timely manner, if necessary.  
 
See below the tentative five National SMUs that have been formulated as a result of consultation with 
NDAs and their recommended local ecosystem players who consider country ownership significantly important for climate technology -enabled business acceleration activ ities. All the participating local partner 
entities were recommended or confirmed by the respective NDAs, line ministries, and their private sector 
partners as a result of extensive stakeholder consultation and feasibility studies, though it may be subject 
to change due to local ecosystem dynamics including the ministerial reshuffling.  
 
In Components 1 & 4, the SMU aims at local companies' compliance with the N -CEAP investment criteria 
in Component 1 and readiness for collaboration with global companies in Component 2; only local 
graduates screened as per the investment criteria in Component 1 can enjoy collaboration with global companies in Component 2. Please see the N -CEAP investment criteria that include E&S safeguards 
screening and gender mainstreaming awareness - i.e., qualifications which local companies  are rarely 
equipped with. The main roles and responsibilities of SMU are to: (i) strategise and develop operational 
work; (ii) undertake and oversee delivery of all outputs in a timely and cost-effective way; (iii) coordinate consultation with key governm ents, ministries, businesses, and vulnerable communities; (iv) communicate 
with NH in charge of Components 2 and 3 activities; among others . NH will approach and communicate 
with SMU on  a regular and on -the-ground need-basis. Often, SMU will contribute its resources and in-kind 
supports such as venues and data sets) where needed.  
 
Cross -Functional & Multi-Directional Collaboration between Components. The programme’s  success 
requires immense flexibility between components and agility in intuitive decision-making because the 
complete acceleration work -flow cycle is tremendously complex. In principle, the programme pursues  the 
Joint Venture (JV) model as the mainstream technology transfer partnership modalit y, as prescribed in 
investment criteria: a default deal flow from Component 1 (locally driven readiness) and Component 2 
(global collaboration) to Component 3 (risk -adjusted investment) .   
 Nevertheless, a scenario may spin out of the lack of available local partner entities in certain industrial 
sectors and/or unpredictable barriers that bar investment approval and execution despite the strong needs. 
In such cases, the technology provider may be eligible for investment through setting a local subsidiary with ownership restriction and local employment condition. Another example is a local company that has 
already partnered with a foreign technology prov ider, in search of other methods of earni ng risk capital to 
address the second Death Valley. If deemed fit as per investment criteria, the local entrepreneur could be considered. Furthermore, if the investee’s gender capacity is proven insufficient due to a lack of 
understanding of the GCF IRMF by the Investment Committee (Component 3), the company may be 
recommended to consult with related experts (Component 2) for impact assessment and gender 
mainstreaming trainings, a prerequisite for fund capital injections  as shown below deal flow chart.


---
*Page 42*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
   
 Deal Flow with Synergy between Components  
 
 
 
Below  are case scenarios  that illustrate and convey the spirit of the progr amme for ease of understanding.  
 
Scenario 1. Climate-resilient Agriculture Strengthened with AI Technology 
Global Tech 
Provider  
(Company A ) Climate -resilient Agriculture system for infectious diseases based on Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) technology, gathering data from over 100 different geographical 
dataset sources that can be utilised to quickly perform quantified risk 
assessments and identify potential high -risk areas and migration patterns  
Local Entrepreneur  
(Company B ) Farming management company with needs on reducing the negative agricultural 
impacts primarily caused by climate-related disasters (e.g., recurring floods, 
typhoons, droughts) to improve harvesting management . 
Programme  Actions per Component  
Component 1 • Company B is selected for the programme by the national SMU in 
coordination with the regional SMU, based on the eligibility criteria  
• Company B undergoes a rapid needs assessment to then participate in a 
tailored N-CEAP programme primarily consisting of: a) the programme’s 
pursuit and climat e sensitisation; b) business and/or product development 
brainstorming; b) marketing and communications ; c) significance of a 
transparent financial management; d) E&S/gender/IP requirements; and e) 
reporting and monitoring duties . 
Component 2 • Matchmaking opportunities for Companies A and B in a hybrid format 
considering the ongoing pandemic context  
• Diagnostic analyses and training provided the NH Investment & Securities  
arranged team of accelerators and experts, to determine the best option for technology transfer between companies  
• Advisory, consulting, and due diligence services provided to better understand the legal, tax, E&S and practical implications of the different 
technology transfer options  
• Joint Venture model with in-kind technology contribution by Company A and 
local infrastructure by Company B → Company C created 
• Additional acceleration services for Company C focused on the technical 
training of personnel on utilising the AI-based predictive modelling tech  
• Legal resources to aid in negotiating the agreement terms and conditions 
between the two companies.


---
*Page 43*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
   
 Component 3 • Company C goes under review by the CTF Investment Committee  
• Multi -faceted (reputational, legal, and financial) due diligence procedure  
• Shareholder’s agreement is signed, and funds are provided along with the 
business development and execution support by the GP.  
Component 4 • The SMU partners with the government agencies in the areas of e.g., public 
health and the local private sector on telecommunications to align with the 
Company C’s actions, along with policy recommendation to be delivered on 
• Regular monitoring and evaluations are executed to ensure the climate 
impact created by the programme and Company C are being upheld.  
 
Scenario 2. Bringing an Economic Wave Technology Solution to Remote and/or Small Islands 
Global Tech 
Provider  
(Company A) Onshore wave technology that collects wave power nearshore by multi -
directional floating buoys with the power generation unit installed on land, enabling the provision of affordable yet clean and sustainable energy to remote 
islands, coastal areas.  
Onshore Wave Technology 
 
Local Entrepreneur  
(Company B)  Energy infrastructure company committed to responding to energy/water scarcity 
with valuable understanding of the local energy environment  
Programme  Actions per Component 
Component 1  • Company B is selected for the programme by the national SMU in 
coordination with the regional SMU, based on the eligibility criteria  
• Company B undergoes a rapid needs assessment to join a tailored N-CEAP  
Component 2  • Matchmaking opportunities for Companies A and B in a hybrid format to 
discuss areas of potential collaboration on local sustainably energy 
resources advancement 
• Diagnostic  analyses and training provided, to determine the best option for 
technology transfer between companies through collaborative R&DB activities for PoC (e.g., wave energy -backed desalination) with gap analyses  
and financial modelling  
• Advisory, consulting, and due diligence services provided to better understand the legal, tax, E&S and practical implications of the different technology transfer options  
• Joint Venture model with in-kind technology contribution by Company A and 
local infrastructure by Company B) → Company C created 
• Further extensive acceleration assistance on legal/business development/ 
technical capacity building provided to Company C, while legal resources to 
aid in negotiating the terms and conditions between the two companies  
Component 3  • Company C goes under review by the Investment Committee for the CTF.  
• Multi -faceted (reputational, legal, and financial) due diligence procedure  
• Shareholder’s agreement is signed, and funds are provided along with the 
business development and execution support by the GP.


---
*Page 44*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
   
 Component 4  • The SMU offers country -specific TA activities considering the nascent nature 
of wave technology, namely knowledge-sharing events to deepen the 
understanding of policymakers, industry stakeholders, and end-users.  
• Policy -level intervention for incentivisation (e.g., Feed-in -Tariff) takes place 
backed by the national SMU in partnership with the local gov’t  
• Regular monitoring and evaluations are executed to ensure the climate 
impact created by the programme and Company C are being upheld.  
 
Scenario 3. Automatic Weat her System  for Disaster Risk Reduction 
Global Player  
(Company A)  Meteorological technology with an Automatic Weather System enabling real -
time, automatic measurement, recording and transmission of weather data  
Local Entrepreneur  
(Company B)  Local company recommended by the local meteorological and hydrological 
administration with needs on strengthening human resources to operate AWS 
equipment on the ground  
Programme  Actions per Component  
Component 1 • Company B is recommended by  the local meteorological and hydrological 
administration,  and selected for the programme by the national SMU in 
coordination with the regional SMU upon assessment.  
Component 2 • Matchmaking opportunities for Companies A and B in a hybrid format to 
discuss areas of potential collaboration on advancing weather forecasting 
and data management system  
• Diagnostic analyses and consultation provided the NH Investment & 
Securities  arranged team  of accelerators and experts, to determine the best 
option for technology transfer. As part of the global acceleration support, the 
Meteorological Administration and Meteorological Institute assess and verify  
the quality of meteorological instruments of Company A. 
• Technology licensing through a subs cription-based model  
• Additional acceleration assistance is provided to Company B, including 
technical training on equipment installation, maintenance,  and operation, as 
well as  data processing and management, while l egal resources to aid in 
negotiating the terms and conditions between the two companies.  
Component 3 • Company B, now armed with the technology of Company A, goes under 
review by the Investment Committee for the CTF. 
• Multi -faceted (reputational, legal, and financial) due diligence procedure  
• Shareholder’s agreement is signed, and funds are provided along with the 
business development and execution support by the GP.  
Component 4 • With the SMU support, the relevant national meteorologi cal agencies take 
part in knowledge exchanges to facil itate adequate information flow  
• Regular monitoring and evaluations are executed to ensure the climate 
impact created by the programme and Company B are being upheld.


---
*Page 45*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
   
 B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams ) 
 
Partnership with Executing Entities with a Proven Capacity in Each Component. KDB partners with 
various entities to efficiently carry out activities in the five vulnerable NOL countries: as for Components 1 
and 4, the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI) which boasts a strong track record in climate and green 
growth initiatives across the five countries via professional government consultation, to broadly reach the 
best suited entrepreneurs and audiences on the ground; as for Component 2, NH Investment & Securities  
(NHIS)  which is to execute collaborati ve R&DB acceleration activities on the basis of  partnership with both 
local and global accelerators with different technology expertise and strategies; and a s for Component 3, 
NH Absolute Return Partners Pte. Ltd. (NH  ARP, General Partner, “GP”) which is undoubtedly a proven 
financier with impressive investment track record and performance globally.  
 
Component -wise Executing Entities and their Proven Capacity 
 
Component  Activity Executing Entity 
Component 1  
 
Country Driven 
Acceleration 
Readiness 1.1. Set up a Regional and 
National Sustainability 
Management Unit (SMU)  
1.2. Launch sourcing strategies to identify 
qualified local JV 
candidates  
1.3. Offer tailor -made 
acceleration services to 
nurture local JV 
candidates  KDB  
 Start -up/VC investment platform 
systemised (in-house) with ecosystem 
building experience and know -how  
 Global VC network incl. affiliates in 
Singapore, Silicon Valley, and London 
GGGI  
 Local presence and network across the 
5 NOL countr ies, thereby  enabling 
outreach to key local  stakeholders  
 Track record on entrepreneurship by 
working with climate vulnerable start-ups and MSMEs  as a Greenpreneurs  
initiator  
Component 2  
 
Global 
Acceleration for 
Collaborative 
R&DB  2.1. Set up the Global 
Acceleration Advisory 
Secretariat (Secretariat)  
2.2. Launch global sourcing 
strategies to attract global 
technology innovators  
2.3. Offer collaborative R&DB 
acceleration services for 
JVs NH Investment & Securities (NHIS)  
 A wide, strong business partnership 
with Southeast Asian top-tier VC/PEs  
 Global business networks incl. NH 
affiliates in various geographies  
 One of top-tiers, equipped with in-house VC investment wing and relevant 
resources and infrastructure to be 
leveraged for Team NH composition  
Component 3  
 
Climate 
Technopreneurship 
Fund ( CTF)  3.1. Execute the CTF 
formation with raising investment capital  
3.2. Execute investments with 
portfolio management as 
per investment criteria  
3.3. Achieve successful exits with a reasonable rate of 
return  NH Absolute Return Partners (NH ARP)  
 GP, c omposed with investment experts 
with track record in fund investment and portfolio management across A sia 
 A strong, large-scale NH Financial 
Group-wide support as a subsidiary 
100% owned by NHIS  
 Singapore-based presence with a wide 
pool of ASEAN -oriented investors  
Component 4  
 
Technical 
Assistance (TA)  4.1. Formulate the best 
workable network 
framework  
4.2. Build capacities to enable and strengthen the 
relevant ecosystem  GGGI  
 Specialised in capacity building and knowledge sharing ac tivities with a 
climate lens 
 Key arranger, advisor for government 
consultations  incl. NDAs, line ministries


---
*Page 46*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
   
 4.3. Promote sustainability via 
the National SMUs per 
country   Obtained with a set of policies for 
executing and managing on-the-ground procurement, contracts, logistics, etc.  
 The Korea Development Bank (KDB), Accredited Entity. As an accredited entity, KDB shall run and 
supervise the programme overall during the implementation period –  each component to be separately 
implemented but closely associated by working hand in hand with partner entities. KDB will lead, oversee, and supervise the programme by leveraging the bank’s institutional capacity and resources that have 
fostered the economic growth and industrial advancement of Korea over the last seven decades. In 
particular, KDB has advanced the As ian venture capital market along with venture and technology banking 
services for promising start-ups and SMEs with technological prowess since the market began to take a shape during the late 1990s. Meanwhile, as a leading policy financing bank, KDB has set up an internal 
infrastructure to cultivate, sophisticate, and grow an enabling ecosystem that discovers small giants and 
supports them in growing into global unicorns for the country’s sake of innovative growth through new 
industrial engines.  
KDB Infrastructure for Start -up Ecosystem Building 
 
 
 
Above all things, the bank’s flagship venture investment platform called ‘KDB Next Round’ is an example 
of KDB’s actions towards developing a start-up ecosystem. IR rounds are held three days a week in the 
auditorium on the ground floor of the bank’s headquarters in Seoul, classified by the development stage of 
start-ups – (1) IR rounds for Seed and Pre-Series A on Tuesdays; (2) IR rounds for Series A and B on 
Wednesdays; and (3) IR rounds  for Series C to Pre-IPO on Fridays –  hence, covering the complete 
lifecycle of start-ups. The start-up and venture investment inducement platform has continued even in the midst of COVID -19 with live streaming services. It has so far arranged around USD 4  billion in total funding 
through more than 636 rounds since August 2018, as of 2020 4Q . 
 Such supervision and guidance as an accredited entity will be primarily provided by Climate Business 
Team of KDB HQ, while leveraging its in-house three-tier venture investment platform and global start-
up/VC acceleration and investment networks: i.e., Singapore Venture Desk, London Venture Desk, and 
KDB Silicon Valley LLC (VC subsidiary in the US). Such KDB start-up/VC networks at the global financial 
centres will support the HQ to be equipped with information on timely trends about global acceleration and 
global technology company and/or climate transaction sourcing, which is critical for the bank’s HQ to serve 
as the control tower that aims at seamless interlinked management amongst the four (4) different 
components across five (5) NOL countries.  
 
Executing Entities of Components 1 & 4: KDB, Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI)  
 
Garnering GGGI’s Local Presence, a Noticeable Track Record as a “ Greenpreneurs Program” 
Initiator, and Experience t o Manage Non-reimbursable GCF Grant Proceeds. KDB developed a 
strategic partnership with GGGI amidst the wake of the pandemic crisis in appreciation of its in- country 
presence embedded in local governments and its prominent role as a trusted advisor for green growth promotion and NDC fulfilment. Garnering GGGI’s established local presence, KDB -GGGI partnership has 
eventually resulted in a great success of obtaining NOLs from all the five NOL countries, while several 
NDAs had stopped their administrative function in the middle of COVID -19-caused national lockdown. In a 
nutshell, the programme has been able to minimise the impacts of COVID -19-imposed international travel 
restrictions, and build constructive sta keholder relationships with the NDAs and potential implementing


---
*Page 47*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
   
 partners, taking advantage of the five countries’ GGGI membership. Such a strategic partnership with 
GGGI will strengthen the programme’s alignment with the country ownership principle, through close 
communication with NDAs, line ministries, and influential market players across the five partner countries.  
 Above all things, GGGI  Greenpreneurs Program is an incubator supporting young people to devise social 
enterprise solutions that address sustainability and climate change issues in the communi ties of GGGI 
member countries. It consists of web-based training modules, connecting with mentors and subject matter 
experts, business competition and provision of seed funding for  winners. Since 2018, the initiative has 
engaged, on average, 200 youth green entrepreneurs every year, approximately 800 in total over four 
years, and has supported 57 teams from 20 different countries, including Indonesia and Cambodia. GGGI 
has extensive experience in working with the private sector particularly with start-ups and MSMEs in 
diverse sectors in GGGI member countries with various interventions.  
 In addition, GGGI has been closely working with various NDAs for the GCF Readiness Programmes as a 
Delivery Partner under “GCF- GGGI Framework Readiness and Preparatory Support Grant Agreement”, 
which proves GGGI’s requisite capacity to implement the GCF gr ant funds. With increased technical 
capacity in green and climate finance and strong relationship with public and private stakeholders  in both 
donor countries as well as the developing world including the NOL countries, GGGI has mobilised over USD 8.6 billion in green investment commitments for its members and partners over the course of 2015–
2022. In 2023, GGGI has contributed to green investment mobilisation valued at USD 1.8 billion, and has 
delivered 120 investment advisory outputs.  
 Executing Entity of Component 2:  NH Investment & Securities (NHIS) 
 
Strengthening a Linkage between Components 2 (Grant Component for Acceleration) and 3 (Equity 
Component for Investment). The programme pursues a close link between Components 2 and 3 
because seamless operations between acceleration (Component 2) and investment (Component 3) are of 
great significance for the sake of achieving desirable climate impacts . Feasibility studies including situation 
assessment, gap analysis, and stakeholder consultations identified a key problematic issue that most of 
the graduates (local entrepreneurs) from scattered one-off seed grant initiatives have not obtained the next 
phase of investment capital needed for scale-up, market entry, and commercialisation. In consideration 
with such failed precedents learnt, the programme shall devise an implementation structure where later -
stage accelerators and investment advisors are involved in the designing and programming of climate technology business acceleration serv ices customised to individual JVs with different technology needs 
since the initial stage.  
 In order to achieve this pur suit, NHIS , to be invited into the CTF Investment Committee (IC)  as an active 
advisor under Component 3, will function as  Executing Entity of Component 2. As an Executing Entity of 
Component 2, NHIS will minimise undesirable cases that seed grant-supported entrepreneurs cannot 
approach the investment phase, are ineligible for component 3, and get stuck. This will  enable a close 
linkage between multi -stakeholder engagement acceleration (Component 2) and investment portfolio 
management (Component 3) , which will foster the programme’s effectiveness in terms of resource 
management.   
 
In order to allow accelerated high-potential JVs with measurable climate impacts to successfully grasp 
investment opportunities, NH Investment & Securities  will serve as a control tower and focal point to take 
on the responsibilities of a smooth roll -out and the overall management of Component 2, including but not 
limited to creating acceleration work plans, facilitating partnership arrangements with local/global 
accelerators while coordinating the roles and responsibilities amongst business consulting advi sors and 
accelerators under optimised communication and resource management, and tracking and reporting 
performance to KDB in accordance with the GCF principles.


---
*Page 48*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
   
 Once the GCF Board Approval, existing service providers of NHIS and NHARP , composed by key expert s 
in global level sourcing , business modelling, due diligence  (legal, tax , tech valuation, IP trade, etc.),  tech-
enabled business localisation, E&S/gender/IP  safeguards , and R&DB  accelerati on of climate tech ventures  
in partnership with various service providers . 
 
Executing Entity of Component 3: NH Absolute Return Partner s (NH  ARP)  
 Strong GP Team of  NH Investment & Securities under the NH Financial Group. NH Absolute Return 
Partners (NH  ARP) is the Executing Entity of Component 3 to be the G eneral Partner (GP) entity for a 
Singapore-domiciled Climate Technopreneurship Fund (CTF).  
 NH ARP is  a Singapore-based subsidiary 100% owned by NH Investment & Securities  (NHIS ) equipped 
with 3,136 investment experts, total assets of ca. USD 50 billion, and a stable credit rating of A3 (Moody’s) 
and A -(S&P) (as of 2022),  under the NH Financial Group with AUM -included total assets of ca. USD 600 
billion . NH ARP is to establish and manage the CTF by fully leveraging the NH Financial Group and its NH 
Investment & Securities’ competitiveness in diverse  investment sectors , the Southeast Asian network with 
a strong local presence in Singapore, Indonesia, Vietnam, and Cambodia, and aggressive investment 
partnership with global peers (e.g., NH -Amundi Asset Management as the full -service asset management 
firm with more than ca. USD 47 billion in AUM ).  
 
NH targets ESG and green investments of ca. USD 13 billion (KRW15 trillion) in total by 2025, and boasts 
proactive sustainable business pursuits as a participant in various global initiatives such as the Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF), SBTi (Science Based Targets initiative), Net-Zero Banking 
Alliance (NZBA), Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), UNEP FI, UN Global Compact, Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), and Equator Principles (EP).  
 
NH Ambition: ESG Investment Expansion by 2025 
 
 
NH-wise Expertise in Financing the Climate Technology Needs of NOL Countries. GP team under the NH brand name that affiliates the National Agricultural Cooperative Federation (NACF) has shown a 
strong performance in agricultural finance. NH has financed the agricultural industry with diverse financial 
instruments and products – e.g., instalment financing products with an aim to expand the supply of 
renewable-fuelled agricultural machinery, farmers’ insurance schemes, and agricultural and rural 
development f und set -up and management, while reinforcing internal and external collaboration (e.g.,


---
*Page 49*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
 Foundation of Agricultural Technology Commercialisation & Transfer). Considering an obvious need in 
climate resilient and sustainable agricultural technologies from all the five countries, NH ARP’s 
engagement as the GP entity will be able to garner the NH -wide stakeholders’ demonstrated track record 
and accumulated experiences as the best-in -class player in financing the agricultural industry globally.  
 NH business strategy further reaches out to financing many other sectors in which the five NOL countries 
expressed their keen interest, including but not limited to renewable energy such as agricultural solar 
power deployment using reclaimed farmland and s alt farms, floating solar power projects, and offshore 
wind power projects, which has contributed to increasing farmers’ income as well as the expansion of 
renewable resources in climate vulnerable rural areas across countries. On the other hands, NH Venture 
Investment has created a virtuous circle that creates funds, invests in innovation-proven venture firms, increases their value, and finally maximise the returns. In addition, its investment in tech driven logistics 
companies via the ASEAN Technology Fund 2 in April 2022 proves NH’s continued portfolio diversification 
efforts in innovative companies and promising industries with growth potential. Recently, it intends to 
expand green finance and investments in 100% carbon-neutral and green bio technologies  and AI -based 
technologies. 
 
It is also noticeable that climate finance professionals of NH Investment & Security (Carbon Finance 
Team -centred investors’ team -up at NH IS Headquarters) are ready to contribute to enhancing climate 
investment speciality of the CTF. As a global climate financial service provider, NH IS has shown a brilliant 
track record in GHG reduction and removal projects globally, investment of climate technologies such as 
DAC and CCUS, investment in climate tech firms, and carbon investment platforms development. The 
programme anticipates effective delivery of climate outcomes, on the back of the GP’s best-in -industry 
investment capabilities in terms of climate/carbon/green finance.   
 
NH Financial Group Organisation Chart: Garnering NH -wise Capacity 
 
 
  
The core person of the CTF key man group (Managing Director, CIO of NH ARP) has been leading all 
private equity and debt investments of NH Investment & Securities with a geographic focus on Singapore and its neighbouring Southeast Asian countries, in order to expand strategic business partnership 
opportunities with the ASEAN region’s growing innovators, and secure reasonable investment returns in 
underexplored sectors across emerging markets. Under his leadership, NH ARP currently obtains  a 
diversified investment portfolio as shown below with noticeable returns and performance. Before a move to 
NH ARP, the core key person had served as an investment professional and/or analyst in various global


---
*Page 50*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 investment firms such as Merrill Lynch International, Macquarie Securities, Royal Bank of Scotland Asian 
Securities, and National Pension Service. The person’s broad networking power and deep expertise in 
fund operations, fundraising, and investor relations, among others, will be fully leveraged to successfully 
operate and manage the CTF in Component 3 in pursuit of the intended programme objectives. In addition 
to the core person, the CTF GP, NHARP, plans to hire an additional key fund manager within the f irst 
anniversary of the FAA signing date to support and supplement the expertise of the core person and NHARP as a whole. The additional key fund manager will bring related expertise in sourcing and investing 
into climate tech companies to supplement the existing investment expertise of the core person and 
NHARP, in order to accelerate growth in climate tech investments and achieve both impact and fund 
returns.  
 
 
 
As the CTF GP (fund manager), NHARP bears all authorities and responsibilities pertaining to the CTF 
general operations. The authorities related to investment is managed by NH  ARP, and the CTF Investment 
Committee ( IC) will initially consist of two (2) member s appointed by the GP. The GP will actively search 
for appropriate advisors or consulting firms , and may from time to time appoint additional key professionals 
to serve as relevant personnel to ensure the perfection of the CTF IC decision-making process .  
 The authorities related to investment is managed by NHARP under which NH ARP appoints and invites 
members of the CTF Investment Committee (IC) . The CTF IC, to be composed by two (2) seats along with 
Climate Impact and Compliance Managers as IC Observers with veto rights, is to be called. The CTF IC’s investment decision is to be made by affirmative votes from the two representative professionals, along 
with climate impact and compliance managers with veto rights. While the role of the Climate Impact 
Managers is mainly to review, advise, monitor, and sustain (report) the climate impact of the investment deals, the managers will be given veto right during both preliminary review committees and investment committees, if the proposed investment deal severely lacks the representation of climate impact viability.  
 In addition, KDB  is to sit in the CTF Advisory Committee (AC)  in order to ensure the CTF’s  investment 
activitie s properly aligned with the GCF/KDB objectives which  have been aimed at since the programme 
conceptualisation, approving matters including but not limited to any departures from or changes to pre-
agreed investment objectives, policy , and/or restrictions .


---
*Page 51*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
 CTF Investment Decision Making Process  
 
Pre-Investment  
(6-8 weeks)  Deal 
Assessment  
(2 weeks)   All potential  deal pipeline (from inbound/outbound) to 
be reviewed by investment managers  
 Deal log to be presented in weekly investment review 
meetings  
 Pre-due diligence: macro, industry and company 
specific attributes to be reviewed  
Preliminary  
Review 
Committee (IC)   Preliminary Review Committee to be called, 
composed of compliance and a respective climate 
impact manager  (mitigation or adaptation)  in addition 
to investment professionals  
Due Diligence 
(6-8 weeks)   Deal selection key metrics: business model, growth 
potential, sector, competition, founders, existing 
shareholders, etc.  
 Rigorous modelling of projected financials to be added  
 On-site visit or virtual meeting with top management 
 NH-wise research capability in Southeast Asian countries  
 Review terms and conditions that relate to KDB/GCF standards – e.g., E&S risk assessment, gender 
mainstreaming, and climate impact measurement  
Execution 
(2 weeks)  Investment 
Approval – 
Investment 
Committee (IC) 
(2 weeks)   Each IC member receives a pack of reports on the 
deal, prepared by investment managers. 
 IC called when investment managers come to a firm decision  
 IC responsible for investment decision making 
outcomes (performance)  
Risk 
management  Monitoring  Quarterly review on financial, commercial, and 
operational (including safeguards such as E&S, 
gender, and climate impact outcomes) performance 
 In cases of underperforming portfolio companies, investment managers to consider disposal in 
secondary market, among others  
 
To strengthen the organic connectivity of the programme's four components and ensure more effective execution, NH Investment & Securities along with NHARP plan to establish "Team NH". This team will 
form an execution Task Force for Components 2 and 3, clearly defining the roles and responsibilities of 
participating personnel. Subsequently, Team NH aims to further leverage NH Financial Group's internal 
network and capitali se on professional resources  for the programme success including a success of the 
fund close . 
 
Implementation Structure with Capital Flow  and Legal and Contractual Arrangements. Under KDB 
oversight and supervision in compliance with two bilateral agreements with the GCF –  i.e., the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA), t he programme’s four 
components will be operational with different legal and contractual arrangements . Due to such varying 
engagement structures with different executing entities  and local and global partner  entities, the capital 
flow varies by component accordingly . 
 Deal 
AssessmentPreliminary  
Review 
CommitteeDue DiligenceInvestment 
CommitteeMonitoring


---
*Page 52*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 Component -wise Implementation Structure  
 
Component s 1 & 4 Component 2  Component 3


---
*Page 53*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
  
27 PwC. 2023. The State of Climate Tech 2023: How can the world reverse the fall in climate tech investment? 
28 PwC. 2020. The State of Climate Tech 2020: The next frontier for venture capital.  
29 World Bank. 2022. Global Economic Prospects, June 2022. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi: 10.1596/978-
1-4648 -1843- 1. B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
 
Make it Work for NOL Countries across ASEAN  in Dire Need of Investment in Climate Responsive 
Technology and a Funding Shortfall.  PwC’s fourth State of Climate Tech report (PwC, 202327) reveals a 
drop of investments in climate technology start-ups and ventures back to the level of five (5) years ago. 
The report emphasises that much larger amount of innovation funding is critical for the needed 
technologies with abatement and adaptation challenges to reach scale in constrained surrounding 
circumstances. 
Climate Technology Investment Trends (Yearly)  
 
 
It is amply recognised by  sources that investments in climate technol ogies are heavily concentrated i n 
some developed markets and China (PwC, 2020) .28 In reality , such disproportionate capital distribution is 
not a surpris ing discovery. The ASEAN bloc has  definitely remained the neediest in relation to capital 
inflow s and investments in climate responsive technologies , and the gap is  being further exacerbated by 
the unexpectedly prolonged post-p andemic emergence.  
 Such unfavourable situation is further compounded by the global economic slowdown coupled with the 
geopolitical unrest, inflation and interest rate hikes. According to the World Bank, in its recent Global 
Economic Prospects report (2022), a prolonged period of soaring inflation and frail growth is expected, 
potentially leading up to severe repercussion on low - and middle-income economies.
29 Investors and 
enterprises are hesitant to enter into markets that have yet to recover from the utterly catastrophic 
pandemics, halting the planning of investments into developing and emerging markets . All in all, while 
developing and emerging markets are disproportionately severely impacted by the economic hardship, the recent downward trajectory of venture funding deals is evident across the globe.


---
*Page 54*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 A Geographical Split of Climate Technology Start -up Investments  
 
The programme, in particular Climate Technopreneurship Fund ( CTF), also faces challenges in attracting 
co-financiers in times of such turbulence in addition to delays in the GCF board approval which would not 
have hindered potential co-investors to allocate investment proceeds as per their business strategy and 
outlook otherwise. In light of such imperative investment needs, the GCF engagement as an anchor 
investor with a first loss risk capital is well -aligned with its mission of assisting developing countries  in 
leapfrogging climate challenges. Such support from the GCF could not have come at a more opportune 
period, where climate technology acceleration in the emerging economies would call for catalytic, patient 
capital that would work as a de-risking mechanism to accelerate private investment i n decarbonisation and 
climate resiliency. KDB will join forc es with the GCF to catalyse capital for the five ASEAN countries in dire 
need. 
Slowdown of Venture Investment at All Stages (Q4 ’21- Q2 ’22)  
  
 
                                                                     * Source: PwC (2020  p 33)


---
*Page 55*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
  
30 Pigato, Miria A., Simon J. Black, Damien Dussaux, Zhimin Mao, Miles McKenna, Ryan Rafaty, and Simon 
Touboul. 2020. Technology Transfer and Innovation for Low -Carbon Development . International Development 
in Focus. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978- 1-4648 -1500- 3. 
31 Wang and Yee. Climate Tech’s Four Valleys of Death and Why We Must Build a Bridge. Third Derivative, 
accessed on June 17, 2020.  Financing Barrier s Holding Back Climate Technology -enabled Solutions from Flourishing across 
the ASEAN Bloc. F inance poses  a strong barrier  in keeping technology -enabled climate solutions from 
reaching commercialisation. L ow-carbon and climate responsive technologies is in need of not only longer 
investment horizons but also a more holistic cost -benefit approach justifying enhanced resilience, health-
related benefits, prospective energy savings, and evaded ecological harm (Pigato et al., 2020).30 
Obviously, d edicated long-term and sufficient patient  funding is necessary for entrepreneurs over the 
course of the early stages  of development. Unfortunately, s uch funding needs become more acute, chronic 
in fact, when it comes to entrepreneurs with little to no track record in the developing world with a 
perceived higher risk. A more severe funding gap is identified with entrepreneurs with innovative – in other 
words, not c ommercially proven –  technology -driven climate solutions , and the level of acuity has 
increasingly risen as the climate change phenomenon intensifies in frequency and magnitude.  
 The programme extends over the three challengeable facets that drive entrepreneurs forced into a corner: 
i.e. newly set up JVs or partnerships with little t o no track record (facet 1) in emerging markets (facet 2) for 
technology -intensive actions (facet 3). At this juncture, GCF has an inevitable role as the world’s largest 
climate financier to perform for the sake of great strides in developing and em erging markets where 
technology -driven climate solutions are highly insufficient, but so desperately needed.  The programme, by 
enabling the development of low -carbon, environmentally -friendly businesses, could in turn contribute to 
the economic stabilisation of the ASEAN region and beyond in the long run.
 
 
The Programme Shall Invite Long-Standing, Patient  Funding Needed to Bridge Four Valleys of 
Death in Accelerating Climate Responsive Technology Business Deployment. The programme will 
bridge four valleys of death that under -resourced entrepreneurs are predestined to cross as their climate 
technology business blossoms: (1) start-up formation; (2) product development; (3) market validation; and 
(4) track record establi shment (Wang and Yee, 2020) .31 Components  1 and 2 plan to address the first and 
second valleys of death with grant proceeds via which entrepreneurs benefit from start-up JV formation 
and market-fit product invention under a collaborative R&DB growth platform.  
 
Climate Technology’s Four  Valleys of Death 
(Source: Wang and Yee, 2020 )


---
*Page 56*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
  
Rendering and Invigorating ASEAN Venture Capital Financing with Catalytic First -Loss Capital.  A 
catalytic  first-loss instrument is a must to render  venture capital  investments appealing and crowd in 
private capital  in a nascent but growing climate technology -themed investment market. In actual, real -world  
experiences  reveal  a common ly practiced  venture capital market trajectory that private parties , such as  
venture capitalists , would absorb the first loss  up to a pre -negotiated threshold – as a matter of fact, pre -
ordered by  institutional investors of a stronger bargaining power  – prior to the commencement of risk  
sharing, which has led to skewed capital  flows towards stable and low-risk safe markets. In this regard, 
GCF’s catalytic role is vital  as the world’s largest climate financier ; under the global climate finance 
architecture, no alternative distinguishes  itself with catalytic finance at scale.  The programme anticipates 
that GCF’s catalytic role be distinctive beyond the above-mentioned default approach so that it can 
eventually render the ASEAN -centric investments in the first -ever climate technology transfer initiative.  
 
As an investment vehicle of Component 3, the Climate Technopreneurship Fund ( CTF) of USD 200 million 
will be structured with a catalytic first -loss instrument that is funded by the GCF equity proceeds . The 
GCF’s first-loss equity funding as a junior tranche will be a strong signal for  the ASEAN -wide VC market by 
enhancing the fund’s credit worthiness, thereby  resulting in successful private capital m obilisation under a 
challenging theme of the programme: i.e.,  ‘climate technology ’, ‘start-up  JVs’, and ‘emerging markets .’ The 
unprecedented first-loss protection mechanism  will leverage much  larger  volumes of co-financing capital 
than the fund could mobilise on its own in the absence of the GCF’s catalytic first -loss capital , laying the 
foundation for investment flows into underserved  or untouched climate technology -driven markets.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max . 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Evidence-based Exit Strategy. The GP shall discern the most viable strategy  for exiting each business . 
While exit strategies are necessarily specific to each investment, the GP expects around 10% of its fund 
portfolio to achieve one of three forms of exit, generating varying amounts of proceeds relative to the 
investment: i.e., trade sale, secondary sale, and IPO, according to the GP’s analyses on start-up exit data collected on its  own, as shown below . 
 
Historical Exit Trends in Southeast Asia (2013-2020 Cumulative)  and Liquidity Events 
                                                                                                                                             (Source:  CB Insight)  
 
The most l ikely scenario for exit is via  trade sale to a strategic acquir er, consistent with historical trends for 
the region. It is deemed that a “local -to-local in -industry sale, ” where a local company in the same industry 
acquires the portfolio company, will be the most likely outcome of the fund’s investments. Alternatively, but 
less commonly, the  fund may realis e its investments through secondary share sales  to investors coming


---
*Page 57*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 into investment rounds s ubsequent to the establishment of the fund. Despite the dea rth of IPO exits to date 
for Southeast Asian companies, w herever feasible, the fund will work with its investment portfolio to guide 
these com panies toward becoming publicly listed on a capital market exchange. The GP will consider the 
following key factors when deciding on an exit strategy: the extent of the fund’s investment control, 
additional capital required by the portfolio company, suitability of acquisition by a strategic third party, 
public market appetite, and urgency for liquidity.  
 
Post -Exit Sustainability in Pursuit of a Genuine Paradigm Shift . An answer  to post-exit sustainability 
lies in the programme’s core concept itself – JV (or partnership) formation. Most of the conventional 
international development cooperation projects used to subcontract global technology companies and/or 
suppliers so that a substantial amount of aid proceeds from donors have been given to foreign entities  in 
the form of service fees . In particular, one-time basis grant-funded initiatives  are quite often demanding to 
sustain when initial funding is over with personnel turnover  and an exit of foreign entities , like global 
consulting firms and technology  advisory  providers . The programme therefore devises a proposal of 
replacing the conventional trajectory with locally owned JVs as the enabler s that ensure sustainability  at 
the local level . As a core instrument of sustainable business es, ASEAN -Global JVs (or partnerships) with 
strong local ownership will run the marathon, not sprints, beyond the life of funding so as to be 
instrumental in bringing about the impacts and benefits of innovation even after the GCF and KDB exit. 
 
The programme’s sole private investment component, i.e., Climate Technopreneurship Fund (CTF) under 
component 3, will bolster  the confidence of A SEAN -Global JV s (or partnerships ) in ensur ing sustainability  
from contextual adjustments of technology  solutions  to replication of climate businesses at scale.  
Sustainability of the programme participants and their businesses will be  architected through the long-term 
structure of the CTF,  under which the  GP will orchestrate components to optimise support measures for 
building the skillset and resilience  of JVs (or partnerships)  and bring them in a formal reporting and 
auditing mechanism . The JVs will undergo additional  due diligence by the GP at a transaction level to 
ensure that the partnership has been established on a sound legal, reputational, and financial foundation 
and, adheres  to the necessary anti-money  laundering, anti-terrorism,  anti-bribery, and anti-corruption, and 
FCPA  laws,  among other  compliance requirements. In addition to actively  engaging with each of the 
developed partnership, the GP will make  continuing efforts  to attract new investors  and create networking 
opportunities  for the programme's  ASEAN  participants  and potential  investors  and stakeholders. With this, 
the fund-backed climate responsive ventures  will pro ve the ingenui ty of the JV model centred on a  
fundamental proposition that bankability is key to post-exit sustainability.  
 
Beyond Conventional Model: JV as a Local Sustainable Enabler


---
*Page 58*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
104.471 million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  83.75  11 years  3 years of extension 
possible  13.9% IRR  
(indicative)  
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  20.721    
(vii) Results -
based payments  Enter a mount     
(b) Co -
financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
 116,743,900 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
GP Equity  2 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % junior  
(Subordinate 
to GCF)  
LPs Equity  114.25 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % senior  
KDB In kind  0.1 million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
GGGI  In kind  0.3939  million USD 
($)  Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
221.2149  million USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page)  Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from 
any type of guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
N/A. The programme does not benefit from any type of guarantee mechanism. 
 
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax 
exemptions and contributions of assets.  
In addition to the indicative financing plan above, the programme additionally 
anticipates cash and/or in-kind contributions from participating global and local 
enterprises in buying the JV (or partnership) ownership interests: e.g., capital, 
physical asse ts, and IP rights.  
 
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme 
(refer to the co-financing policy).  
The programme anticipates potential parallel financing from various sources, including but not limited to Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA), the 
Korean Ministry of SMEs and Startups (MSS),  Food and Agriculture Organisation


---
*Page 59*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 (FAO) of the United Nations,  and Korea Meteorological Institute (KMI ). Each 
entity that expressed interest with a supportive willingness has been operating 
under different timelines and procedures for budgeting and disbursement 
approval with differential funding windows and implementation tracks (e.g.,  fast-
track aligned with the GCF processing for the Funded Activities). In pursuit of 
investment at scale, a series of practical discussions on parallel finances 
between KDB and these potential partners have been in progress.  
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative cost  
million USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing**  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrume
nt Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1  Output 1 6.171  6.071 Grants  0.1 Grants  KDB (in -kind)  
Component 2  Output 2 9.5 9.5 Grants     
Component 3  Output 3 200 83.75  Equity  114.25 Equity  LPs 
  2 Equity  GP  
Component 4  Output 4 4.5531 4.5531 Grants     
PMC  0.9908  0.5969  Grants  0.3939  GGGI (in-kind)  
Indicative total cost  
(USD)  221.2149 
million  104.471 million 116.7439 million  
 
* Above figures are indicative  with being rounded.  
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
The main purpose of the programme is to support the five ASEAN countries in building capacity in 
order to be able to uptake climate responsive technologies from the global supply chain, self-
deploy, and sustain the technologies at scale in pursuit of a genuine technology transfer. In other 
words, the kernel of this proposal is technology development (customisation) and transfer. In 
particular, the programme takes a market-dr iven approach in the belief that success –  i.e., self-
sustainability – can be achiev ed only through impact investing -oriented acceleration and consulting 
services.  
 
In fact, the local markets have witnessed an oversaturated supply of early -stage start -up support 
services with the generosity of international donors, but graduates from such one-off grant 
provisions have not led to incoming investments at scale; a problematic status quo. With that in 
mind, the programme requests grant and equity proceeds of the GCF to deploy the funds 
appropriately throughout the whole systemic process of technology innovation amongst a range of 
interacting actors; above all things, devised business models to materialise in the nascent markets. 
Below is an indicative list of prospective activities, in that R&DB acceleration consulting services 
are personalised for individual JV teams. Additional detail is provided in both the Demand-driven 
and Supply -driven Feasibility Studies of Annex 2.


---
*Page 60*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in 
the GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Outcome Estimation via Vi rtual Demand-Supply Technology Matchmaking. As specific 
technologie s, project proponents , and their product specifications are to  be identified after JV (or 
partnership) matching – i.e. little information available on  technical specifications, performance, 
costs, and baseline, the proposal  estimates  climate impacts  with an investment portfolio scenario of 
the CTF with the total capitalisation of USD 200 million plus the additional programme costs that 
support the delivery of the mitigation and adaptation outcomes . The forward-looking scenario 
results from ex -ante technology match between demand and supply assessments and adjusted 
allocation of investment volumes to virtually matched technologies . See Annex  17, 22, 23, and 24 
for detail ed description on chosen methodologies for calculation, additionality of assessed 
technologies against individually set baselines, assessment of common practices, and indicative 
estimation on potential outcomes  by country .  
 
The programme will support new ventures and their technology transfer activities over 39 individual 
technologies across seven technology groups in five countries. The CTF aims for equal funding 
distribution across the five countries, but there is still considerable uncertainty about how the 
funding will be distributed across the technology groups and individual technologies. At the same 
time, insufficient information –  e.g., venture growth and sales data –  is available at this programme 
designing and development stage to evaluate a specific portfolio of investments and technology 
interventions within the technology groups. 
 
The dimensions of the sectors, measures, and ventures will not be known until R&DB acceleration 
services and investments are fully implemented ; the value of these mitigation and adaptation 
impacts is extremely difficult to predict at this juncture. As a result, the calculated ex -ante mitigation 
and adaptation impacts are considered conservative at this stage. However, the mitigation impacts 
and adaptation beneficiaries will be closely monitored and managed on an annual basis in 
accordance with the MRV protocol and implementation plan (to be developed as Component 4.3.1 
deliver able).  
  
Ex-ante Impact Estimates –  Mitigation. Benchmarks were identified from publicly available 
information. Where available, benchmarks specific to the five countries represented in the funding 
proposal or specific to Southeast Asia were selected. In some cases, only global average or project-
specific benchmarks were available. An effort was made to find the most recent benchmark data 
available.  
 
Sources of benchmark data include, in order of preference:  
1. Benchmarks based on aggregated cost and emission impact data from multiple projects. 
Examples include data from IRENA, IEA, and other trade and technology associations 
and NGOs.  
2. Marginal emissions abatement cost curves from NGOs, trade and technology 
associations, and similar organizations  
3. Peer -reviewed academic publications  
4. Documents from the implementation of individual projects or programs, including GCF 
funding proposals, case studies, CDM project design documents, and other similar 
sources  
  
For each technology group, two individual technologies were selected. Where possible, technologies 
with the broadest applicability across the five countries were selected. For each individual technology, 
two benchmarks were identified using the criteria described above.


---
*Page 61*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
   
 Selected Individual Technologies for Benchmarking  
 
Technology Group  Selected Individual Technology  Applicability  
C I L P V 
Renewable Energy Generation  Solar energy  X X X  X 
Wind energy    X  X 
Transmission, Distribution, and Electricity 
Storage Systems Off-grid Energy Systems  X  X X  
Battery Storage  X   X  
Low-emission transport  Electric Vehicle infrast ructure  X  X X   
Electric Vehicles  X X X X X 
Residential and Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Technologies  Lighting  X  X X X 
HVAC  X  X X X 
Waste Management and Treatment  Composting  X X   X 
Mechanical -Biological Treatment  X X X X X 
 
In some cases, additional calculations and assumptions were required to transform the available 
benchmark data into the appropriate units. In other cases, additional data, such as the grid 
emission factors for the five countries, were needed to complete the calculations. In all cases, the 
assumptions are documented in the model and the source of data is identified and linked (if 
available online). Wherever benchmark development required the selection from multiple values or 
a range of values, values resulting in conservative impact estimates ( i.e., a higher USD per tCO2e 
of mitigated emission) were selected.  
 
For each technology group, an average of the benchmarks representing the selected individual 
technologies was calculated. The total mitigation impact was then estimated by applying a series of 
assumptions from the Funding Proposal about the distribution of the total funding amount in the 
proposal.  
• It was assumed that 50% of the total funding would be distributed to mitigation technologies, 
with 50% being distributed to adaptation technologies ; especially, at least 50% (or more) of 
the CTF funding would be allocated to the GCF adaptation result areas . This resulted in an 
estimate of approximately $100M in funding distributed to mitigation.  
• It was assumed that the funding would be distributed equally among the five countries (20% 
each). 
• An impact multiplier of 2.2 x was applied to the mitigation funding allocation to account for the 
fact that the fund will take only a partial stake in the ventures and that their capitalization will 
grow during the fund life.  
Ex-ante Mitigation Impact Estimate Model Results (Mitigation)  
 
Model Results  Total  Per Country  
Funding allocated for mitigation (USD)  $100,000,000    $20,000,000  
Fund -Level Mitigation Efficiency Benchmark (USD/tCO2e)  $134.17  
Expected Mitigation Impact (tCO2e)  1,639,681  327,936


---
*Page 62*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
   
  
The ex -ante impact estimates generated by this model are likely to be highly conservative due to 
the nature of the programme relative to the benchmarks used. Rather than investing in individual 
mitigation projects, the programme, through its venture acceleration and capital investments, is 
seeking to build enterprises that will persist in the market following the fund’s exit, and that will help 
create a market ecosystem for the technologies and a multiplier effect for their deployment and 
implementation. It presents a conservative measure of 1,639 ,681. 
 
RESULT AREAS  lifespan  
GHG emission reduction  Implementation period  
GHG  emission reduction  
m1 521,717  tCO2eq  191,296  tCO2eq  
m2 1,043,433  tCO2eq  382,592  tCO2eq  
m3 74,531  tCO2eq  27,328  tCO2eq  
total  1,639,681  tCO2eq  601,216  tCO2eq  
 
Ex-ante Impact Estimates –  Adaptation. The methodology developed for the ex -ante estimates is 
a bottom -up approach based on a benchmark study of approved project examples (full proposals 
approved by the GCF, as well as from the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank). The 
methodology includes some examples of mitigation technologies that explicitly generate adaptation 
benefits or co-benefits, as clarified in full proposals or other benchmark sources used for the 
mitigation ex -ante impact estimate. From reviewing actual financed projects, it w as possible to 
identify the efficiency figure (US dollars invested  per beneficiary) from each example and then find 
the average efficiency figure across multiple projects to settle on a programme-level benchmark 
figure. The figure was  used as the denominator for dividing the total programme capital for 
adaptation (technical/venture accelerator assistance and plus the venture fund capital, multiplied by 
2.2. – the venture capital model multiplier, as explained in annex 22) . 
 
This resulted in the estimated impact –  the number of direct and indirect program beneficiaries, 
disaggregated by gender. The estimated number of beneficiaries should be seen as a reference 
point rather than a minimum target or projected ceiling, given project specific intervention and 
contextualisation are essential to assess adaptation impacts. 
The steps used to implement this method are as follows:  
1. Identify a representative sample of project examples for project technologies (refer to 
Section B1 of the Funding Proposal and Annex 23 for details on technology groups and 
individual technologies).  
2. Calculate each project example's efficiency figures (for direct and indirect beneficiaries). 
3. Calculate the average efficiency figures (direct and indirect beneficiaries) for each 
adaptation technology group (or mitigation technology group with adaptation co-benefits) 
included in the KDB funding proposal. 
4. Calculate the average efficiency figures (direct and indirect beneficiaries) for all technology 
groups considered in the steps above (aggregate figure from steps 1-3 above).  
5. Divide the total amount of programmatic and investment adaptation capital of the R&DB 
Programme (based on a targeted programme and capital allocation of 5 0% to adaptation 
and 50% to mitigation) by the efficiency figures found in step four to obtain the final ex -ante 
impact estimate –  the number of direct and indirect beneficiaries - at the programme level.  
6. Apply figures from country statistics on the percentage of female population to identify the 
number of female direct and indirect beneficiaries.


---
*Page 63*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
   
 The detailed modelling is presented in the Annex 22 spreadsheet. The model’s characteristics and 
boundaries, assumptions, and limitations are shown below.   
Model Boundaries  
• The adaptation outputs are delivered through financed climate technology -led interventions 
(ventures applying and bringing to market equipment, tools, services) with related capacity 
building to deploy and maintain the technologies. Therefore, TA/capacity building and 
investment capital figures are both utilised for total adaptation spend. Project management, 
supervision, monitoring, and reporting expenses are also included, as these are intrinsic to 
the venture capital fund's implementation and compliance with GCF requirements. 
• Projects from all four adaptation and cross -cutting technology groups included in the 
Funding Proposal (Agricultural Technologies & Practices, Water Management & Treatment, 
and Waste Management & Treatment) are benchmarked.  In addition, as mentioned above, 
benchmarks and project examples from mitigation technology groups that provide 
adaptation co-benefits were also included in the model. 
Model Assumptions  
• Total fund investment - USD 220 ,000,000 - the total investment size (programmatic and 
investment capital) multiplied by the venture capital financial multiplier of 2.2. The amount 
from this step is then multiplied by the correspondent percentage allocation to adaptation 
(50%)  and by the percentage allocation to mitigation (50%).    
• Country -by-country allocation –  equal distribution between the five programme countries.  
• Female population: 49.9% (average from the population of the five countries, according to 
the World Bank Data)  
• Indirect beneficiaries: for project examples that did not disclose the number of indirect 
beneficiaries, we applied the average difference ( 2.1) between direct and indirect 
beneficiaries found across the project examples that disclose such information. Such 
average calculation discounts the outliers. Further, this average was not applied to the 
mitigation technologies examples with adaptation co-benefits, as the examples from this 
group did not provide data on indirect beneficiaries. 
• Seven adaptation project technologies have been captured – as representative technologies, 
i.e., those with significant demand according to the country Demand Analysis (detailed in 
Annex 2).  As for the mitigation technology groups, data was found for six i ndividual 
technologies with adaptation co-benefits.  
• In some cases, a single project example offered interventions targeting more than one 
adaptation or mitigation technology group. In those cases, the total beneficiaries and project 
amount were equally divided between the individual technologies to find the efficiency figure 
for their respective technology groups. 
• Project examples for benchmarking were drawn from Southeast Asia whenever possible.  
List of Representative Adaptation Technologies for Benchmarking 
 
Technology Group  Individual adaptation technologies  
Agricultural Technologies & practices  Climate Resilient Agriculture (precision farming, integrated farming, 
conservation agriculture, sustainable rice cultivation, agro -forestry, crop -
diversification, adapted plants and animal genetics/breeding, pest 
management, water harvesting, retention, and efficient irrigation RE -
powered equipment (i.e., pre- and post -harvesting processing)


---
*Page 64*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 Aqua/mariculture development (Mapping changes in the range of fish 
species, monitoring of fish stocks, Improved allocation of areas for fishing, 
Changes to fishing gear and fleet, Adjusting fishing fleet composition, RE -
powered equipment, i.e., for storage, and processing)  
Water Management & Treatment  Water treatment (small scale)  
Water treatment (large scale)  
Waste management & treatment 
(adaptation)  Large-scale waste collection and treatment (i.e., mechanical -biological 
treatment, aerobic/semi -aerobic digestion, composting), including or not the 
conversion of gases to energy  
Large-scale waste collection and treatment (i.e., mechanical -biological 
treatment, aerobic/semi -aerobic digestion, composting), including or not the 
conversion of gases to energy  
 
List of Mitigation Technologies with Adaptation Co-Benefits 
 
Mitigation tech group with adaptation 
benefits  Individual Technology  
Renewable Energy Generation Solar  
Transmission, distribution and 
Electricity Storage  Off-grid energy systems  
Battery storage  
Residential and Industrial EE 
Technologies  Lighting  
Waste management & treatment (cross-
cutting)  Composting  
Mechanical Biological Treatment  
 
Ex-ante Adaptation Impact Estimate Results  
 
Direct beneficiaries (total)  Direct beneficiaries 
(female)  Indirect beneficiaries (total)  Indirect beneficiaries 
(female)  
1,180,881  589,260  1,132,408  565,071  
 
 
“Innovation  and Additionality Tool (IAT) Scoring Methodology” with  a Robust Project 
Selection Investment Tool (Annex 21 ). As per the adjusted ex-ante simulation, the best impact 
scenarios  are 1,138,106  tCO 2eq and 1,180, 881 direct beneficiaries  (ca. 50 % of female ratio). By 
programme nature, estimated impacts expect backward-looking discrepancies , depending on 
unexpected demand-supply technology match, the fund’s  real-time risk tolerance, and investing 
time horizon.  While paying heed to such potential discrepancies, the programme shall take three-
layered actions to achieve intended, or higher, mitigation and adaptation targets: ( i) readiness and 
acceleration support for JV candidates to extract measurable impacts; ( ii) CTF Investment 
Committee’s robust Project Selection Tool; and ( iii) third -party independent verification on submitted 
impacts. Once a technology -enabled climate project is determined, the CTF will monitor invested 
JV’s self -reporting on impacts throughout the fund lifespan, and will annually report outcomes to 
KDB, which will be verified by periodic site visits of KDB, both in communication with the GCF and 
in collaboration with executing entities and other engaging partners .


---
*Page 65*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
 D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Paradigm Shifting Fundamental Transition Sought . The programme shall initiate, support, and 
drive the five countries to grapple with innovation-triggered transformation towards low -carbon and 
climate-resilient development pathways, completely away from climate-damaging and highly 
inefficient technologies. In order to achieve this, it does intend to go beyond one-off action, ensuring 
a fundamental change in perception, structural adjustment for innovation, and new market 
segments, through customisation, scaling, and replication of transferred technologies.  
 
It is believed  that the programme will contribute to a genuine paradigm shift in three fashions. The 
first and foremost contribution is to introduce a term, climate technology , to local entrepreneurs and 
line ministries –  what it refers to, why it is important and how both public and private sectors can 
shape the relevant ecosystems together. In fact, consultations during the PPF implementation have 
already initiated such deliberations amongst local stakeholders  as they seized the concept within 
individual national contexts. Second, such heightened awareness will allow the emergence and 
growth of essential ecosystems  such as regulators , policies, agencies , committees, innovation 
clusters, and VCs with contextual expertise, in the medium to long term  phase. Further, the process 
may give rise  to the ASEAN -unique ecosystem culture on the ground of shared values amongst 
ASEAN innovators , akin to that observed in Silicon Valley. Lastly, the programme will prove the 
workable innovation investment model which will serve as a standard financing model t o encourage 
the community, including those not participating in the initiative, to move together . 
 
(1) Cambodia. There are barriers to education and access to information, particularly for 
women, due to prevailing social norms related to gender, and there is limited education in 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). This results in a limited 
under standing of climate technology and its economic, social, and environmental benefits. 
To foster access to markets and an enabling environment for the innovation of climate 
mitigation and adaptation technologies, greater support is needed in the form of technology 
transfer, education, and finance –  exactly what the proposed project aims to offer.  
(2) As for Indonesia, the programme will kick start  the advancement of traditionally  under -
tapped equity investment mechanisms  in the country’s  start-up incubation and acceleration 
landscape. This  truly remains a niche area,  and thus has not garnered much attention from 
major investors. Thus, the programme’s investment vehicle, CTF, will revamp  already 
attractive st art-up ecosystems of the country with great potential for a higher leap, shifting 
away from the current business -as-usual carbon lock -in pathway while replacing climate-
damaging industries –  e.g., mining, deforestation- linked commodity production –  with 
alternative solutions enhanced by transferred technologies.  
(3) Laos-centred activities  are to be implemented under the national -level  strategic  direction 
towards innovative, sustainable, and climate-resilient economy, w ith a strong emphasis on 
enabling entrepreneurial ecosystem formulation.  Deploying risk tolerance capital, the 
programme shall create successful climate business cases of JVs (or partnerships) which 
should function as unprecedented best practices, trigger the green and climate market 
creation, and inspire policy makers to brainstorm contextually workable solutions for a true 
paradigm shift.  
(4) As for the Philippines, ‘m uch-needed interventions ’ will be carried out, considering that the 
country has relevant institutions  and passionate groups of players in the market but limited 
awareness of climate responsive technology hinder s a more-sophis ticated climate 
innovation leap.  The programme’s packaged interventions will gather young and fast 
learning entrepreneurs to uptake and sponge transferred technologies, delivering on a 
holistic approach on what parts of the climate technology customisation value chain should 
be further filled and strengthened.   
(5) Vietnam . Even for the emerging economy with vibrant moves amongst pioneering peers , 
the climate technology ecosystem still remains quite small and scattered with only a handful


---
*Page 66*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
   
 of key stakeholders . The programme shall  support the nascent yet vibrant ecosystem to 
awaken innovation potentials  at a para digm -shifting scale, through business acceleration 
services with a climate lens and substantial capital . This will provide a solid basis for 
enhanced regulatory frameworks with attractive policy incentives to attract global innovators  
beyond the lifetime of the programme.  
 
Along with overcoming similar and/or different barriers  by country , the programme ensures the 
following potentials  – e.g., scaling up and replication, knowledge sharing and learning, formulation 
of enabling ecosystem including the regulatory framework and policies, and a comprehensive 
contribution to a low -carbon and climate-resilient growth pathway at a national and regional levels –  
that are instrumental to achieving a paradigm shifting transitio n across the NOL countries . 
 
 Potential for scaling up and replication:  The program me’s basic  concept is expected to 
have significant scaling and replication potential. The proposed intervention with GCF grant 
and first loss equity funding will pilot acceleration plus customised JV/technology transfer 
model. Through a  successful rollout and lessons learnt  from this intervention, the 
program me can be up-scaled in other developing and emerging countries while leveraging 
funding from various sources including the governments, MDBs, climate funds, bilateral 
donors, also private sector including impact investor s and foundations. The market-driven 
platform for venture incubation/acceleration and VC investment as well as multi -country 
aggregation and programmatic approach demonstrated though this program me will be key 
in devising and implementing similar program mes in Africa and Latin America.  
 
 Potential for knowledge sharing and learning: Introducing brand new term s and 
concepts , climate technology  and acceleration, to the key local  ecosystem builders is 
important. The m arket-driven intervention also embraces TA activities  that will contribute to 
national -level and ASEAN -wide knowledge sharing and learning under Activity 4.1. and 4.3, 
for example. This grant- based supportive intervention aims to enhance the awareness of 
the relevant space, and promote and strengthen national/regional networks for climate 
technology innovation in the middle of developed  communication channels.  
 
 Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment : Component 4, a grant-
supported TA element, will contribute to strengthening entrepreneurial ecosystems for 
climate technology and innovation in  the five NOL countries by formulating the relevant 
network framework  that is key to acceleration, building capacities of national accelerators 
and startup/ business support entities, establishing national strategies , and offering policy 
and regulatory recomm endations. These activities will allow the emergence and growth of 
essential enabling ecosystems such as regulators, policies, agencies, committees, 
innovation clusters, and VCs with contextual expertise, in the medium to the long-term 
phase. Eventually, all the activities and their outputs are anticipated to give rise to the 
ASEAN -unique ecosystem culture on the ground of shared values amongst ASEAN rooted 
innovators.  
 
 Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies: The TA component will provide 
policy and regulatory recomm endations which are fitting into  each country under Sub-
Activity 4.2.3. This will contribute to creating an enabling environment and business 
ecosystem which will ensure a genuine sustainability of the program me beyond the 
programme lifespan. Government officials and policy makers will actively involve 
throughout the programme implementation, contributing to coordinating a high-level inter -
ministerial discussion and drafting policy  recommendations.  
 
 Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with 
relevant national climate change adaptation strategies and plans: A successful roll out 
of the programme will accelerate a genuine transition towards climate-resilient development 
pathways by strengthening national climate entrepreneurial ecosystems and by transferring


---
*Page 67*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
   
 of technology -enabled climate solutions into five  NOL countries. Climate technologies for 
transfer , localisation,  and investment will be selected in line with national climate change 
adaptation strategies and plans of each country.  NDAs and their line ministries of all the 
NOL countries will actively engage with the programme activities as a member of the 
Project Steering Committee at each SMU.  
  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Gender  Co-benefits through the Emergence of Gender Mainstreamed Innovation Ecosystem 
with Talented Female Entrepreneurs. Besides the primary climate responsive impacts, the 
programme anticipates wide-ranging co-benefits  that will contribute to the sustainable development 
of the five partner countries. As becom ing sustainable does not happen overnight, this ASEAN 
region-wide climate technopreneurship initiative shall trigger the tuning of the entire ecosystem and 
market. Therefore, ensu ring positive externalities are so comprehensive that it is actually 
demanding to single out certain co-benefits. Co-benefits may vary and differ by transferred 
technology and applied industry , and a technology generally brings about different kinds of benefits 
and impacts  across  the ecosystem value chain. As an example, climate- resilient agricultural 
technologies are prioritised by all the five countries as shown in Table 2 . Such advanced 
technology -enabled agricultural projects can improve efficiency in agricultural land use by applying 
sustainable agricultural techniques into degraded areas (environmental), guarantee food security in 
climate-affected vulnerable communities (social), increase income generation of climate vulnerable 
farmers with better productivity (economic), and build women’s capacity at higher level of supply 
chain such as processing and distributing benefits to women equally (gender co-benefits). 
Considering such uncertainty, the programme only concentrates on gender co-benefits that ar e 
crystal clear at present.  
 
Alignment  with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In that the overall ecosystem 
is to be covered under the programme, the  technology transfer trial expects alignment with all of the 
17 SDGs, in both direct and indirect ways. R eal dynamics reveal that associations between or 
within SDGs and co-benefits are collectively exhaustive and not mutually exclusive. Nevertheless, 
the proposal shall anticipate and sort the directly linked alignment of 10  SDGs by gender co-benefit 
potential as below ; e.g.,  SDG 1 0 (Reduced Inequalities) is excluded below , but the programme’s 
endeavours to promote economic inclusion of all regardless of sex and ethnicity will contribute to 
eradicating inequality.  
 
Alignment with SDGs and Potential Co-benefits 
 
Alignment with 11 SDGs Gender Co -benefits  
(Environmental  Co-benefits – TBD per Tech)  
SDG  2. Zero hunger with food security & nutrition  • Emergence of women -led/owned SMEs under 
gendered ownership and management structure  
• Girls and women’s enhanced access to 
healthcare services , clean water and sanitation 
facilities, etc.  
• Women’s active participation in climate 
technology relevant industries  
• Increased incomes amon gst girls and women in 
agricultural areas vulnerable to climate change 
impacts  
• Women’s advancement in skilled technology and 
engineering jobs     SDG 3. Good health and well -being  
SDG 5. Gender  equality  
SDG 6.  Clean water and sanitation  
SDG 7. Affordable and clean energy  
SDG 9.  Industry, innovation and infrastructure  
SDG 11. Sustainable cities and communities  
SDG 13. Climate action  
SDG 15. Protect and restore forests, biodiversity  
SDG 17. Partnerships for the SDGs


---
*Page 68*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
   
 In Pursuit of Market -oriented Sustainability  – JV as a Key Agent . The programme has a desire 
for JVs with full financial and intellectual supports to grow them as pioneers with a mission of 
greening the ASEAN emerging market. Contextually adjusted long- standing business operation of 
technology -transferred JVs (or partner ships) will function as the key market -driving agent for 
sustainable development, activating a number of co- benefits such as local job creation, expanded 
role for women in enterprise ownership and leadership roles, decent work with fair and safe working 
conditions, and local resource development –  e.g., in terms of human resources, raising potential for 
under -resourced grassroots innovators to acknowledge what must be done and how the problem can 
be resolved, a vibrant gender -balanced society with talented women and girls’ aspirations, and social 
inclusion of vulnerable communities with enhanced access to energy. Proactive interplay of the 
motivated and technology -transferred entrepreneurs will be central to the market’s development and 
advancement, driving the national uplift in various fields of development.  Furthermore, additional 
sustainability co- benefits include the incapacitation of the local JVs on climate technology innovation 
in the five countries to equip themselves with and be able to operationalise a proper environmental 
and social management system  (ESMS) in accordance with the international safeguard standards for 
future climate technology innovation even after the CTF exit.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Outcomes of studies and analyses (see Annex 2)  conclude that needs of the five participating 
countries are classified into three overall  categories , though the needs vary  by country, in both 
depth and feature:  (i) weak regulatory framework; (ii ) limited access to financ e; and (iii) nascent or 
immature climate technology and innovation ecosystem. The programme  shall embark on needs -
specific technology transfer activities for five different countries, concentrating on (i ) the establishing  
of a regulatory  and policy  framework , tailored to climate technopreneu rs; (ii) addressing the 
financing gap through private sector capital crowd-in and equity investments at large; and (iii) 
nurturing a robust innovation ecosystem by awareness enhancement and capacity building 
assistance.  
 
• Cambodia’s  corporate structure and business ecosystem  is orientated around SMEs, 
accounting for circa 70% of employment,  99.8% of companies, and 58% of GDP. 
Surrounded by weak  institutional environments for te chnology innovation, SMEs with a  
significant footprint have faced challenges, some  of which include lack of skilled human 
resources and poor access to finance as most of them lack the necessary assets to secure 
credit. The missing middle backbone group, which are too high-risk to be attractive to global 
investors , will be s erved by the p rogramme in various manners such as  training local talents 
to be equipped with technology .  
 
• Indonesia.  Aligned with unprecedented challenges posed by COVID -19 and reallocation of 
climate priorities and budgets , in 2020, only 13% of the financing needs outlined in the NDC 
Mitigation Roadmap w ere addressed. With that, a vibrant private sector engagement with 
investment crowd -in into climate technology deployment is essential for Indonesia to meet 
its NDC commitments. In recognition of a harsh reality that the most marginalised group is 
more likely to experience loss and damage by shifting climate, the fastest adoption of 
climate technology  solutions is urgent. There is no time to wait for the right technologies to 
mature through traditional cycles of tri als and errors . 
 
• Laos is seek ing to improve overall sustainable management of national resources . 
Challenges  in doing so have undermined the country’s  long-term development, 
exacerbated by double disasters of climate change and the pandemic crisis . The Lao PDR 
government is committed to enhancing access to finance for local entrepreneurs as well as 
strengthening regulatory and institutional arrangements. The programme will assist the 
government’s novel mission by unlocking the role of under -resourced private sectors via 
technology trade  at a corporate level,  devising an innovation -intervened management


---
*Page 69*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
   
 framework for the country’s previous resources  at an institutional level, and accompanying  
both public and private to run a race towards 2050 Net Zero emissions  at last.  
 
• The Philippines’ needs arise due to (i) absence of a centralized repository of information 
and indicators  and data on SMEs  regarding climate change adaptation and mitigation; (ii) 
investment gap; (iii) limited availability of capacity building initiatives for climate technology 
firms; (iv) impact of the pandemic , community quarantine,  and the resulting disruption in the 
supply chain and distribution channels; (v) low accessibility of public services designed to 
support entrepreneurs; and (vi) limited support on climate innovation activities. Filipin o 
entrepreneurs will take advantage of the investment opportunities and incentives  
throughout the programme, witnessing improving market conditions and other enabling 
circumstances for the climate technology innovation leap.  
 
• Vietnam  is in need of responding to climate-relevant natural hazards like heat waves, 
drought, and floods that accelerate over-exploitation of non-substitutable natural resources , 
like water , at an alarming pace.  Meanwhile, bottom of the pyramid groups is  
disproportionately exposed to risks: primarily  residing in the Mekong River Delta, the Red 
River, and the Central Coast. Although i nvestment in climate actions  is urgent to minimise 
adverse climate impacts, limited availability of climate responsive technologies  along with 
the funding gap for technology entrepreneurs has constructed institutional bottlenecks for 
climate business deployment. The initiative shall therefore stimulate innovation to trickle 
benefits down to all, including the most vulnerable, in the economy. 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Country Ownership at the Heart  of the Climate Technopreneurship Initiative. Ensuring 
ownership of the five countries is  at the centre of the innovation proposal  which cannot materialise 
unless it is  driven  and sustained by the countries themselves. Since the ideation stage, two courses 
of action have been adopted to strengthen the principle of country ownership and accountability  as 
follows ; (i) national strategy and policy  review; and (ii) stakeholder consultation and local 
ownership-centred SMU  governance  structure.  
 
(1) Country Planning and Strategies Review : An extensive literature review was conducted 
over the course of extracting a prospective list of priority technologies  by country  (Table 2). 
In addition to the five countries’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC)  and Technology  
Needs Assessment (TNA) , comprehensive studies on primary policy documents were 
explored to be aligned with each country’s directions and priorities , including but not limited 
to the following list. For more, see the Demand-d riven FS  of Annex  2. 
 
Cambodia  Rectangular Strategy IV 2018 -2023, National Strategic Development Plan 2019 -
2023, National Green Growth Roadmap (2010), National Policy on Green Growth 
(2013), National Green Growth  Strategic Plan 2013- 2030, Cambodian Climate 
Change Strategic  Plan 2014- 2023, and National Science, Technology and 
Innovation Policy 2020 -2030  
Indonesia  2020 -2024 National Medium -Term Development Plan (RPJMN), the GCF Country 
Programme Document (CPD, 2020), a National Adaptation Planning – Executive 
Summary  (2019), NDC Adaptation Roadmap (202 1), NDC Mitigation Roadmap 
(2020), 2020- 2024 Climate Resilience Development Policy (2021), 3rd Biennial 
Update Report (2022), and a review on climate change references throughout  
sectoral strategic plans  such as forestry, energy, industry, waste, agriculture  
Laos  9th National Socio -Economic Development Plan 2021 -2025 (NSEDP), National 
Strategy on Climate Change, National Green Growth Strategy (2018), and 
National Adaption  Programme of Action to Climate Change (NAPA)


---
*Page 70*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
   
 Philippines  Republic Act 10771: Philippine Green Jobs Act of 2016, Republic Act 9729: 
Climate Change Act of 2009, Republic Act 9501: Magna Carta for Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises of 2007, Republic Act No. 10644: Go Negosyo Act of 
2014, Republic Act No. 11337: Innovative Start -up Act, and Republic Act 
No.11293: Philippine Innovation Act (PIA) , Republic Act 10174: Sustainable 
Finance Framework  
Vietnam  National Strategy on Climate Change (2011), National Green Growth Strategy for 
the period 2021- 2030, with a vision to 2050, National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (NAPCC) for the period 2012 to 2020, Plan for the Implementation of the 
Paris Agreement on Cl imate Change (PIPA), National Action Plan for the 
Implementation of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,  Viet Nam's National 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan (NAP)  
 
(2) Local Ownership-centred Governance Structure as a Result of Wide-Ranging 
Stakeholder Consultations : KDB has closely engaged with multiple stakeholders  from 
governments , ministries, relevant public entities, state-owned enterprises, VCs, investors, 
start-up assisting services firms , and international donors present on the ground to CSOs , 
in partnership with the GGGI equipped with a firm local presence, since the concept 
designing stage (see Demand-driven FS of Annex 2 for consultation methods and a f ull list 
of tapped stakeholders ).  
 
Such wide-ranging stakeholder consultations resulted in the SMU governance structure that 
ensures strong country ownership. The NDAs of the five countries  will function as member s 
of the SMU Steering Committee t o offer high-level policy guidance and strategic advice over 
the course of executing country -specific activities , while supporting partnership coordination 
with entities attached to ministries , enterprises, VCs, CSOs,  academia, etc. Undoubtedly, 
this governance structure will ensure throughout the implementation phase of the 
programme (see Demand-driven FS of Annex 2 for SMU governance details  with 
information on engaging entities  by country ). 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
GCF  First -loss Funding as the Catalyst for the Scale-up of Capital in the ASEAN Market. First-
loss equity capacity of the GCF is critical in enabling the CTF to meet expected results directed at 
catalysing innovation-driving venture capital at scale across ASEAN, home to the five attractive 
markets . In the absence of the GCF’s first-loss equity capital, the CTF will face difficulty in 
mobilising private sector -led investment capital  in the middle of the regional post-pandemic 
recession when investment flows have been exceptionally  low. With the GCF, the world’s  largest 
climate financier, on board as the anchor investor , funding sources from the pr ivate sector can be 
secured, complementing the GCF mandate on financing climate action.  
 
A successful mobilisation with unprecedented volumes of resources will incite keen attention to the 
initial closing trial throughout the region with few precedents. Leveraging the initial achievement, the 
CTF shall arrange the second round of co-investment post-initial closing towards USD 200 million, 
where KDB shall be a catalytic financier who will re-direct investors’ interest in this move to spur 
additional private sector capital as one of Asia’s leading financiers. The multi -closing method is the 
most viable avenue for catalysing the largest volumes of private-oriented VC finance, thereby 
achieving the scale needed to fill the innovation funding gap present in ASEAN countries. Besides 
KDB’s investment leveraging power, the GCF will remain significant throughout the fund’s lifespan. 
Such significant GCF commitment will strengthen the fund’s credit worthiness in the region-wide 
venture investment market especially in volatile time of economic downturn and stagnation.


---
*Page 71*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
   
 Co-financing Efforts for the Optimal Efficiency and Effectiveness.  Institutional, c orporate , and 
private investors are being sought to participate in the programme as limited partners. The 
consortium, and the GP in particular, is utilising its network and credibility as a successful general 
manager to initiate conversations and gauge interest and achieve the objectives and goals of the 
Climate Technopreneurship Fund (CTF). Potential co-investors for the CTF can be 
comprehensively mapped into following categories  once attractive commercial terms and conditions 
are confirmed and fixed:  (i) global  investors with previous experience in committing to funds of 
similar nature, scale, or magnitude (e.g., Temasek  and its subsidiaries );(ii) local financial institutions 
across the five NOL countries; (iii) global and local  enterprises that are currently operating (or 
planning to do so) in at least one of the five NOL countries; (vi) public or private institutions and 
investors committed to addressing ESG -related issues (e.g., investors and proponents  developing 
technology on Carbon Capture Utilization and Stor age); and (v) financial investors , impact 
investors,  or fund of funds that could complement the programme, aligning with the GCF’s  
objectives . It is anticipated that the programme will attract the majority of limited party investors 
after the technology providers have been identified so that the potential industries of the CTF can 
be better marketed.  
 
As part of the ongoing investment attraction efforts, KDB  plans to organis e a series of GCF -themed 
climate technology showcases  and networking events (KDB NextRound), targeting potential 
investors globally and corporate venture capital firms  equipped with a presentation of exemplary 
technology solutions for climate resilience and other potential investors.  
 
Counterfactual Baseline Comparison. At the outset, it should be emphasised that, w ithout the 
GCF’s participation, the baseline is zero because private financiers, not to mention global 
technology providers, would have low level s of incentive s to strengthen budding innovation 
ecosystems on climate: i.e. far from easy . The preliminary climate technology market assessment 
(see Demand-driven FS of Annex 2 for details)  has observed that, in spite of the region’s growth of 
digital innovation and technology start-ups, bottlenecks and gaps in the climate innovation 
ecosystem exist –  e.g., lack of climate-focused start-up support intermediaries, absence of legal 
incentives for start-ups  and SMEs on climate technology. In light of this, the GP of the CTF, with the 
GCF’s funding support, targets to execute investments tailored to individual country -specific 
contexts  and structured into specific stages , spanning seed, early (Series A), and growth (Series B  
and above) stage opportunities , in order to achieve an economic rate of return. See below. 
 
Investment Stage Analytics by Country  
(Source: CB Insight, customised analytics  by GP )


---
*Page 72*
---

C 
 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
   
   
Anticipated Investment Stage Focus by Country 
 
 
CTF Anticipated Deal Breakdown by Investment Stage  
CTF Anticipated Investment Stage Focus by Technology Transfer Model 
 
 
CTF Anticipated Deal Count by Technology Transfer Model 
   
While these are to be adjusted for investment complexity, shifting market trends, and exit 
considerations, in the long run, the CTF is expected to attain a 7-13.9% rate of return (subject to 
success rate and returns accordingly as per Annex 3) , backed by that ambitious GCF-KDB 
partnership which will be at the core of cultivating prime, innovative climate technology solutions for 
the ASEAN region and beyond. See Supply -driven FS of Annex 2 for more.


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1- 2 pages)  
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the parad igm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point -scale rating ( low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note.  Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2(a)  (theory of 
change).         
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  Workable  innovative 
technology -enabled 
climate solutions rarely  
exist.  A few p recedents 
are mostly small -scale 
trials , not qualified to be 
a scalable business 
model  for go-to-market . Low A genuine paradigm shift will be achieved 
by benefiting from economies of scale,  in 
that catalysed VC funds at scale will spur  
emergence and implementation of likely 
scalable climate businesses  which would 
otherwise have been the left -behind 
areas or beneath the surface in the five 
emerging markets  where small -sized  
proceeds  cannot afford expensive tech-
driven projects  at scale.  The programme will scale the VC fund 
(CTF) to achieve economies of scale by 
catalysing private investment  crowd -in, 
anchored by GCF de- risk financing.  This 
intervention is projected to enable the 
selected forward -looking businesses to 
advance their scalable capabilities  and 
reach a full -blown commercialisation 
point  in the five countries .


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
  
  
 Replicability  No climate technology -
transferred business 
model has been proven 
to deserve replicability, 
so that there is a remote 
yet distinct possibility of  
replication.  Low Once a role model climate technology 
transferred business is identified to work 
contextually, the model with context ual 
and technological  adjustments will be 
replicated on a nation- wide and  further  
ASEAN region- wide basis.  The intervention – climate technology 
transfer  model and VC fund risk -sharing 
structure  – is a first of its kind initiative  
with an ambition to create replicable best 
practices , so that lessons l earnt  will guide 
followers in driving replication across the 
ASEAN market  beyond the programme’s 
target geography . 
Sustainability  Climate -responsive 
innovation ecosystem , 
key to sustainability, is  
immature , even t hough 
the vulnerability and the 
type of gaps differ  
across target countries . Low Strengthened innovation ecosystems will 
foster fast and fit deployment of climate 
technolog y solution s, which will lead up 
to technological leapfrogging of the five 
countries with inspir ation of  a genuine 
ASEAN -wide paradigm shi ft. The programme will propel market -driven 
ecosystem formulation  with bankability -
centred incentives , in order  to encourage  
key local players  with ownership interests 
to be accountable for continued impacts 
and benefits  after the programme exit.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators) .  
Below figures are all indicative based on lots of assumption layers and virtual scenarios: f or detailed assumptions  and scenario, please see Annex 22 and 23.  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final32 
All result Areas – 
MRA 1,2,3  
(1,639,681 tCO2eq ) Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis on 
the annual basis  0 - Implementatio
n period GHG 
emission reduction (11 years): 601,216 
tCO2eq  
 Zero baseline is assumed 
because there exist no JVs (outcome producers) in the absence of the acceleration programme.  
 
GHG mitigation estimates 
are presented in detail in 
 
32 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emiss ion reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number  of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 Implementatio
n period GHG 
emission reduction by country: 
120,243
tCO2eq  
 
Lifespan GHG emission reduction 
(30yrs): 1,  
639,681 
tCO2eq  
 
Lifespan GHG 
emission reduction by country: 
327,936 
tCO2eq  Annex 22  – (4) Mitigation 
Spreadsheet .  
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis on 
the annual basis  0 - Implementation 
period (11yrs): 
191,296 
tCO2eq  
 
Total lifespan (30yrs): 521,717 
tCO2eq  Zero baseline is assumed 
because there exist no JVs 
(outcome producers) in the 
absence of the acceleration 
programme.  
 GHG mitigation estimates 
are presented in detail in 
Annex 22.  
 
Mid-term target is assumed 
zero in regards to 5- year 
investment period.  Supplementary  1.2: 
Installed energy 
stoarage capacity  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
 Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable 
energy capacity  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD  
- Implementation Period 
GHG emission reduction: 417,306 
tCO2eq  
 
- Annual GHG emission 
reduction: 37,936 
tCO2eq  
 
- Lifespan GHG emission 
reduction (30 years): 1,138,106 
tCO2eq  
 
TBD – Once sub -project 
selection is to be done, 
specific mid -term/final 
targets will be provided.  Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD 
MRA2 Low -emission 
transport  Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 - Implementation 
period (11yrs): 
382,592  
tCO2eq  
 
Total lifespan (30yrs): 1,043,433 
tCO2eq  
Supplementary 1.5 
Improved low -emission 
vehicle fuel economy  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances  Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 - Implementation period (11yrs): 27,328
 tCO2eq  
 
Total lifespan 
(30yrs):  
74,531 tCO2eq 
Supplementary 1.1: 
Annual energy savings  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 All result Areas – 
ARA 1, 2  
(1,180,881, female 
50%) Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 - Expected 
adaptation 
outcome in total: [Direct beneficiary] 
1,180,881 
(female, 50%)  
 
Country breakdown: 
236,176 for 
each country  
 
[Indirect beneficiary] 1,132,408 
(female, 50%)  
 
Country 
breakdown: 
226,481 for 
each country  Zero baseline is assumed 
because there exist no JVs 
(outcome producers) in the absence of the acceleration programme.  
 Adaptation estimates are 
presented in detail in Annex 22 - (5) Adaptation 
Spreadsheet .  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 - [Direct 
beneficiary] 
224,367  
(women 50%)  
 
[Indirect 
beneficiary] 215,157  
(women 50%)
 Zero baseline is assumed 
because there exist no JVs 
(outcome producers) in the 
absence of the acceleration 
programme.  
 
Detailed assumptions 
(linkages amongst hazards, 
risks, and envisioned 
activities) prescribed in 
Annex 23.  Mid-term target is 
assumed zero in regards to 
5-year investment period.  
 Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 climate -resilient 
livelihood options  TBD – Once sub -project 
selection is to be done, 
specific mid -term/final 
targets will be provided.  
Supplementary 2.5: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
innovations that 
stregthen climate 
change resilience  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 - [Direct beneficiary] 
224,367  
(women 50%)  
 
[Indirect 
beneficiary] 
215,157  
(women 50%)  
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 - [Direct 
beneficiary] 
956,514  
(women 50%)  
 
[Indirect 
beneficiary] 917,250  
(women 50%)
 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD 
Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with more 
climate -resilient water 
security  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 TBD TBD 
Supplementary 2.5: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
innovations that 
stregthen climate 
change resilience  CTF reporting to KDB  
with third-party 
independent verification 
on the annual basis  0 - [Direct 
beneficiary] 956,514  
(women 50%)  
 
[Indirect 
beneficiary] 917,250  
(women 50%)  
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5- 8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.  
Core Indicator Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate -
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  Instituti onal and 
regulatory frameworks 
as well as government initiatives are weak , and 
highly insufficient  for 
promoting innovation 
and entrepreneurship 
with climate solutions.  low Relevant institutional and regulatory frameworks will be established and 
strengthened in NOL 
countries by adoption of proposed policy and regulatory recommendations.  The programme will 
assess gaps, barriers, and opportunities of the existing policy and regulations to foster 
innovative climate 
actions, and develop recommendable policy and regulatory for NOL countries to consider 
and adopt.  Multi- countries  
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF Apt technologies to 
combat climate change low Access to transferred 
disruptive technologies The programme will 
facilitate global -ASEAN  Multi- countries


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
 investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  are scarce or insufficient 
for the demand in local 
markets which cannot afford high costs of technology imports from 
wealthy countries.  will empower and uplift 
local capacity to self -
devise and deploy context -specific climate 
solutions.  exchange for local 
entrepreneurs to purchase and digest 
technologies not yet on 
the ASEAN market.  
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  Climate tech-specific  
acceleration and VC markets  are nascent or 
in need of innovation 
shifts, to be ready for 
taking up and absorbing 
climate tech -enabled 
solutions.  low Market -driven entry 
point, i.e.  acceleration, 
will contribute to market 
formation and/or sophistication, instrumental to paradigm 
shifting transformation 
across ASEAN beyond 
the nation -wide basis.  Its market -focused 
intervention in both 
financing and ecosystem building will open or mature climate tech-specific acceleration and 
VC markets on an 
economically viable 
scale.  Multi- countries  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  Infant/emerging local VC 
markets lack awareness 
on climate tech  theme, 
in-depth understanding 
on structured equity 
financing, and best practices.  low Growing awareness and obtained track record of the five markets will be instrumental in bringing 
about a true technology 
innovation nation- wide 
and ASEAN -wide.  The programme will spur proactive exchange of expertise, ideas, and experiences amongst 
Global -ASEAN partners, 
via knowledge sharing 
platforms.  Multi- countries  
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators  (project outcomes and outputs)


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
 This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (out comes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co -benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).  
Below country breakdown of the mid-  and final -targets are indicative. During the implementation period, it will be revised according to country context.  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Output 1. Country -
driven shortlist of local 
JV candidates ready for 
climate technology 
uptake (i.e., NOL 
countries will shortlist 
their own champion 
entrepreneurs with 
climate technology 
capacity)  # of local 
entrepreneurs ( JV 
candidates ) supported 
by N-CEAP of 
Component 1 Quarterly SMU reporting 
to KDB on N -CEAP 0 50 in the 
Philippines; 40 
in Cambodia, 
Indonesia, and 
Viet Nam; 15 in 
Laos  50 in the 
Philippines; 40 
in Cambodia, 
Indonesia, and 
Viet Nam; 15 in 
Laos  Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, as 
activities of Component 1 
will be done before the 
mid-term schedule.  
# of local 
entrepreneurs ( JV 
candidates ) 
shortlisted for  Global 
Acceleration of 
Component 2 N-CEAP Innovation 
challenge d emo day 
event , in addition to 
Quarterly SMU reporting 
to KDB on shortlist 
information  (with a 
possible KDB /GCF  visit)  0 20 in 
Indonesia, the 
Philippines, 
and Viet Nam; 
12 in 
Cambodia; 6 in 
Laos  20 in 
Indonesia, the 
Philippines, 
and Viet Nam; 
12 in 
Cambodia; 6 in 
Laos  Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, as 
activities of Component 1 
will be done before the 
mid-term schedule.  
Output 2. Climate tech 
transfer between Global  
-ASEAN JVs with 
investment readiness 
(i.e. JVs with climate 
tech-driven solutions 
are ready for 
investment)  # of global technology 
entrepreneurs 
equipped with tech-
enabled climate 
solutions  Global Acceleration that 
entails JV match -making  
with N -CEAP graduates 
from Component 1, in 
addition to the 
Acceleration Secretariat’s  
reporting to KDB  0 5-10 in 
Indonesia, the 
Philippines , 
and Vietnam; 
4-5 in 
Cambodia and 
Lao PDR  5-10 in 
Indonesia, the 
Philippines , 
and Vietnam; 
4-5 in 
Cambodia and 
Lao PDR  Conservative estimation, 
as several technologies 
may be transferred for a 
single JV or partnership 
entity.  
# of gender 
mainstreamed or 
committed Global -
ASEAN JVs (or Global acceleration 
adviso ry Secretariat’s 
reporting to KDB on JV 
(or partnership) selection 
based on Global 0 5-10 in 
Indonesia, the 
Philippines , 
and Vietnam; 
4-5 in 5-10 in 
Indonesia, the 
Philippines , 
and Vietnam; 
4-5 in Approx.6 -8 expected per 
country but certain cases 
may not go through 
Component 2.


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 partnerships) with 
investment readiness  Acceleration / CTF 
Investment criteria  Cambodia and 
Lao PDR  Cambodia and 
Lao PDR  
Output 3. Climate 
Technopreneurship 
Fund with private 
capital crowd -in Volume of catalysed 
capital  from private 
(by result area of 
MRA1 -3, ARA1 -2) GP’s quarterly reporting 
to KDB on initial, 
subsequent, and final 
commitments for the CTF  0 (USD million)  
MRA1:  18.6, 
MRA2: 37.2, 
MRA3: 2.325, 
ARA1: 11.625 , 
ARA2: 46.5 (USD million)  
MRA1:  18.6, 
MRA2: 37.2, 
MRA3: 2.325, 
ARA1: 11.625 , 
ARA2: 46.5 USD 116.25 million in 
total, based on first loss 
equity of USD 83. 75 
million  (Result area 
breakdown is indicative, 
based on ex -ante 
assumptions for an 
indicative climate 
outcome estimation)  
 
Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, due to a 
final close before the mid -
term schedule  
Volume of catalysed 
capital  from private 
(by NOL country)  GP’s quarterly reporting 
to KDB on initial, 
subsequent, and final 
commitments for the CTF  0 USD 23.25 
million per NOL 
country  USD 23.25 
million per NOL 
country  USD 116.25 million in 
total (Country breakdown 
is indicative, based on an 
ex-ante assumption of 
equal distribution by 
country)  
 
Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, due to a 
final close before the mid -
term schedule  
# of investments  GP’s quarterly reporting 
to KDB on CTF 
Investment Committee 
(IC) approval  0 40 (ca. 8 per 
NOL country)  40 (ca. 8 per 
NOL country)  Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, due to all 
investments to be done 
before the mid- term: 5 -
year investment period  
# of gender -sensitive 
investments  GP’s quarterly reporting 
to KDB on CTF 
Investment Committee 
(IC) approval based on 0 20 (ca. 4 per 
NOL country)  20 (ca. 4 per 
NOL country)  50% gender -sensitive  
investment rule applies 
as per GAP (Annex 8).


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
  
  
 CTF investment criteria, 
in addition to gender M&E  Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, due to all 
investments to be done 
before the mid- term: 5 -
year investment period  
CTF’s expected rate 
of return  GP’s quarterly reporting 
to KDB & LPs on CTF 
financial and investment 
information  0 n/a 7-13.9%  An indicative figure a t the 
fund termination timeline  
as per Annex 3 modelled 
based on two scenarios 
(best/BAU)  
Output 4. Climate 
technopreneurship to 
be powered as scale 
under strengthened 
relevant ecosystem  Level of relevant tech 
innovation ecosystem 
improvement  AE scorecard  
(0= status quo, 1= little 
improvement, 2=mid -level 
improvement, 3=high-
level advancement)  0 2 3 AE scorecard sets the 
status quo at zero, 
regardless of varying 
status quo and degree of 
improvement  
Detailed M& E 
implementation plan 
report  M&E report submission to 
KDB after Steering 
Committee  confirmation  0 1 1 Detailed M&E must entail 
country -specific details 
with endorse ment from  
the National SMU 
Steering Committee 
under quality control of 
the Regional SMU  
 
Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, as it will be 
submitted before the mid -
term schedule.  
Annual M&E Report  Annual reporting to KDB 
to ensure a success of N -
CEAPs, with ex -post 
impact assessment   0 5 annual M&E  
reports  5 annual M&E  
reports  Impact includes progress 
on N -CEAPs and co -
benefits.  
# of local experts and 
trainers trained 
(female ratio, too)  Periodic SMU reporting to 
KDB on TA activities   200 in total  (ca. 
40 per country 
– 40(C), 100(I), 
16(L), 100(P), 
60(V))  200 in total  (ca. 
40 per country  
– 40(C), 100(I) , 
16(L), 100(P), 
60(V))  Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, as TA 
activities will be carried 
out before the mid- term 
schedule.


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
  
  
  
Women 30%   
Women 30%  
Recommendations 
on national strategy 
or policy e ndorsed by 
the government  of 
NOL countries  Submission of endorsed 
national strategies and 
policy proposal to KDB  0 1 1 Every submission to be 
done by individual NOL 
countries, with country fit 
recommendations.  
 
Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, as it will be 
submitted before the mid -
term schedule.  
Project/programme co- benefit indicators  (cannot be identified unless a target technology is chosen)  
Outcomes/outputs   Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Co-benefit  1 (Gender):  
 
Gender inclusive and 
gender empowering 
innovation deployment 
across NOL countries 
under the programme 
that promotes women 
and girls become 
central agents and 
major beneficiaries – 
i.e., selected women-
led entrepreneurs 
under the programme, 
in accordance wi th 
Gender Action Plan 
(GAP).  # of locally hired 
gender expert in each 
National SMU, which 
promotes gender 
expertise on the 
ground  Annual SMU reporting to 
KDB on co -benefits with 
submission of duties 
randomly requested by 
the GCF  0 At least 5 
locally hired 
gender experts 
in NOL 
countries  At least 5 
locally hired 
gender experts 
in NOL 
countries  Compliance to Gender 
Action Plan ( GAP)  
# of local women -led 
SMEs to be selected 
as the programme 
beneficiary  Annual SMU reporting to 
KDB on co -benefits with 
submission of duties 
randomly requested by 
the GCF  0 At least 39 in 
total (30% 
representation per country)  
 At least 39 in 
total (30% representation per country)  Compliance to Gender 
Action Plan ( GAP)  
Responsible GAP  
implementation  Annual SMU reporting to 
KDB on co -benefits with 
submission of duties in 
addition to M&E on GAP 
implementation  0 5 (Annual 
reporting to 
KDB)  5 (Annual 
reporting to 
KDB)  Compliance to Gender 
Action Plan ( GAP) with 
gender responsive TA 
activities rolled out 
nationally  
Co-benefit 2 
(Environment): Varying 
environmental co -TDB Annual SMU reporting to 
KDB on co -benefits with 
submission of duties 0 TBD  TBD  Co-benefits to be 
specified as per project – 
e.g., water, disaster risk


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
 benefits to NOL 
countries, as per JV 
business  randomly requested by 
the GCF  management, clean 
energy, and so on.  
Co-benefit 3 
(Economic): 
Emergency of climate 
technology driven 
entrepreneurs as 
pioneer industry 
players  # of locally 
owned/registered 
climate technology 
driven entrepreneurs  Annual SMU reporting to 
KDB on co -benefits with 
submission of duties 
randomly requested by 
the GCF  0 40 40 Mid-term and final targets 
are the same, as 
activities will be carried 
out before the mid- term 
schedule.  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub- activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed.  
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub- activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity.  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1. Set up a Regional and 
National Sustainability Management 
Unit (SMU)   With a Regional SMU at the GGGI Seoul HQ, each country will establish a customised National SMU to lead 
implementation and enable effective 
delivery of outputs in consultation with 
NDAs and key local stakeholders.  Sub-activity 1.1 .1. Set up a Regional 
SMU in GGGI Seoul HQ  
Sub-activity 1.1.2 . Set up a National 
SMU in each country  Regional SMU governance structure  
 
National SMU(s) governance structure  
(Gender expertise secured through at 
least 1 recruitment or  partnership)  
 
Partnership agreement with local implementing partner(s)  
Activity 1.2. Launch sourcing 
strategies to identify qualified local JV candidates  As a country’s top- class sourcing unit, 
SMUs will undertake promotional 
communication and outreach activities to build a pool of qualified talents in priority industries and technologies 
with a gender investing focus.  Sub-activity 1 .2.1. Develop a robust 
communication and sourcing strategy  
Sub-activity 1.2.2. Prepare necessary 
platforms and materials for sourcing 
JV candidates  
Sub-activity 1.2.3. Launch outreach 
activities  Documented communication and  
sourcing strategy submitted to the 
Global Acceleration Advisory Secretariat   
 
Offline/online promotional channels/ 
materials/events/platforms  per country 
to be shared with the Global


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
  
  
 Sub-activity 1.2.4. Narrow down the 
pool of local JV candidates for 
acceleration readiness  Acceleration Advisory  Secretariat and 
NDAs  
 
List of selected candidates of local entrepreneurs, to be selected for N -
CEAPs  (30% female- founded, female-
headed, or more than 50% women -
employed)  
Activity 1.3. Offer tailor -made 
acceleration readiness services to nurture local JV candidates  SMUs will design the fittest N -CEAPs 
in partnership with local / regional 
mentors. Under the N -CEAPs, cohorts 
of shortlisted entrepreneurs will be 
trained and top talents will be finally 
selected as JV candidates through a competitive mechanism.  Sub-activity 1.3.1. Design the National 
Climate Entrepreneur Programme (N -
CEAPs)  
Sub-activity 1.3.2. Train selected 
candidates for acceleration readiness  
Sub-activity 1.3.3. Organise a 
competition to shortlist JV candidates 
for global acceleration  N-CEAP design document including  
list of mentors/trainers/experts, activity 
outlines and gender mainstreaming manual  
 N-CEAP progress reporting to the 
Global Acceleration Advisory Secretariat  
 
Selected finalists ready to digest 
global level JV matching and business acceleration approved by the Global 
Acceleration Advisory Secretariat  
Activity 2.1. Set up the Global 
Acceleration Advisory Secretariat  The Global Acceleration Advisory 
Secretariat will be set up to manage 
the implementation of the global 
component and coordinate  
communication between consortium partners and relevant stakeholders.  Sub-activity 2.1.1. Implement the 
global component with necessary 
logistics  
Sub-activity 2.1.2. Manage multi -
dimensional stakeholder 
communication  
Sub-activity 2.1.3. Conduct regular 
M&E and reporting to KDB  Operational manual including 
E&S/gender components (gender 
expertise secured through the partnership with G aia Consult Inc. ) 
submitted to KDB  
  
Annual programme execution  plans 
including budget allocation, timelines, and logistical details established  
 
Annual performance reporting on the 
progress of acceleration activities to 
KDB


---
*Page 87*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
  
  
 Activity 2.2. Launch global sourcing 
strategies to attract global technology innovators  By leveraging the global innovation network, the  Secretariat will source 
and shortlist global technology businesses with climate- related 
solutions viable for Global -ASEAN 
technology transfer.  Sub-activity 2.2. 1. Establish a Global -
ASEAN pool of global technology innovators  
Sub-activity 2.2.2. Assess the 
suitability and feasibility of global 
technology innovators  
Sub-activity 2.2.3. Select the finalists 
for Global -ASEAN technology transfer  Diagnostic assessment on the 
technological suitability and feasibility 
results shared with the Investment Committee (IC)  
 
List of q ualified global technology 
providers shortlisted upon rounds of 
reviews and interviews  
Activity 2.3. Offer collaborative R&DB acceleration services for JVs  With selected teams on board,  a 
series of tailor -made consult ing 
sessions will take place, to enhance 
their technical capacity and sharpen 
go-to-market strategies, leading up to 
JV/partnership creation between 
global technology providers and local 
entrepreneurs.  Sub-activity 2.3.1. Perform diagnostic 
analyses on participating JV candidates  
Sub-activity 2.3.2. Offer tailor -made 
acceleration services for JV candidates  
Sub-activity 2.3.3. Achieve Global -
ASEAN technology transfer with best fit mechanisms  
Sub-activity 2.3.4. Support investment 
attraction  Diagnostic assessment results and 
acceleration consulting plan for JVs   
 
List of JVs (or partnerships) enabling 
and accelerating climate technology 
transfer  
 
Regional event composed of demo 
day/networking/investment attraction 
event  
Activity 3.1. Execute the CTF 
formation with raising investment 
capital  With necessary documentation 
including term sheets, t he investment 
fund vehicle and related entities will 
be established, accompanied by closing the GCF into the CTF and 
securing private investment capital  Sub-activity 3.1.1. Establish the fund 
vehicle and related entities  
Sub-activity 3.1.2. Close the GCF into 
the CTF  
Sub-activity 3.1.3. Fundraise private 
investment capital  In-depth legal DD results  
 LPAs with Side Letters  
 
Potential investors identified and LP 
commitments endorsed  
Activity 3.2. Execute investments with 
portfolio management as per 
investment criteria  Through the process of building up the 
investment pipeline and performing 
due diligence respectively, the GP will 
execute investment , offer structured 
support and guidance to portfolio 
companies in areas ranging from 
capital planning to business modelling 
for their performance enhancement, 
and conduct reporting to KDB (semi -
annual reporting on GCF relevant Sub-activity 3.2.1. Perform due 
diligence on pr oposed businesses  
Sub-activity 3.2.2. Build, revise, and 
manage investment portfolios  
Sub-activity 3.2.3. Monitor 
performance of portfolio companies with structured support  
Sub-activity 3.2.4. Conduct regular 
reporting to KDB  Legal, financial, technology , and E&S 
due diligence on target companies  
 Investment memo presented to the IC 
 
Fund -level performance report and 
analytic documentation  
 
Quarterly reporting to KDB and LPs


---
*Page 88*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
  
  
 obligations) and investors (quarterly 
fund-level performance).  
Activity 3.3. Achieve successful exits 
with a reasonable rate of return  With mid - and long- term exit 
strategies calculated, the GP will 
perform exits (e.g., trade sale, M&A, IPOs, etc.), distribute proceeds and returns, and subsequently execute the fund’s post -exit obligations backed by 
legal counsel, terminating the CTF.  Sub-activity 3.3.1. Realise exits with a 
reasonable rate of return  
Sub-activity 3.3.2. Distribute proceeds 
and returns  
Sub-activity 3.3.3. Terminate the CTF  
Sub-activity 3.3.4. Perform the fund’s 
port-exit obligations  Quarterly reporting on exit 
performance to KDB and LPs  
 Transfer  / purchaser details  
 
Documentation on necessary 
disclosure to regulatory parties  
 
CTF termination reporting to KDB on 
completion of post -exit obligations  
Activity 4.1. Formulate the best 
workable network framework  SMU s will set up national networks 
and a communication hub to connect 
local green preneurs  and start -up 
assistance organisations nationwide 
and disseminate knowledge products.  Sub-activity 4.1.1. Promote national 
networks for climate technology 
innovation  
Sub-activity 4.1.2. Develop a 
communication hub with knowledge 
sharing activities  Online/offline communication channel 
for networking/k nowledge sharing 
(with at least 30% of women and other 
vulnerable group representation)  
Activity 4.2. Build capacities to enable 
and strengthen the relevant ecosystem  SMU s will build capacities of national 
accelerators by training experts and 
trainers for the N -CEAPs while making 
recommendations on national strategies and regulatory policies to strengthen climate technopreneurship 
ecosystem.  Sub-activity 4.2.1. Build capacities of 
national accelerators to sustain N -
CEAPs (1.3.1)  
Sub-activity 4.2.2. Establish the 
national strategy on climate 
technopreneurship promotion  
Sub-activity 4.2.3. Offer regulatory 
and policy recommendations  Documentation with a list of national 
trainers/experts trained for N -CEAP 
(including gender responsive TA activities)  
 
Documentation on national strategies and policy recommendations 
submitted to NDAs and KDB


---
*Page 89*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
  
  
 Activity 4. 3. Promote sustainability via 
the National SMUs  SMUs will undertake M&E, support 
ex-post impact assessments, and 
regularly report to KDB to ensure the 
successful management of the N -
CEAPs and regional initiatives.  Sub-activity 4. 3.1. Develop a detailed 
M&E implementation plan  
Sub-activity 4.3.2. Conduct regular 
reporting to KDB  
Sub-activity 4.3.3. Support ex-post 
impact assessments  
Sub-activity 4.3.4. Coordinate with the 
Regional SMU and the Global 
Acceleration Advisory Secretariat  Detailed M&E plans submitted to the Global Acceleration Advisory Secretariat and KDB  
 
Regular country -by-country M&E 
reporting including co- benefits to KDB 
 Reporting on need -based assistance 
for impact assessment to the Regional SMU and the Global Acceleration 
Advisory  Secretariat  
E.7. Monitoring,  reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
Reporting to the GCF.  As an accredited entity ,                                Two-track Monitoring, Reporting, and Evaluation Governance System  
KDB shall carry out monitoring, reporting, and evaluation 
duties to the GCF in the forms of the initial annual performance 
report (APR), interim independent evaluation report, 
programme completion report (final APR), final independent 
evaluation report, fi nancial information report on a semi -annual 
basis and audited financial statements in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of the AMA and FAA. Information 
reported to the GCF will be prompt, reliable, precise, and 
transparent, since all the funded acti vities will be monitored 
and KPI associated data and evidence will be collected 
through a strategic two-track governance system of Executing 
Entities (GGGI for Components 1 and 4, NHIS  for Component 
2, and NH ARP for Component 3) under KDB  oversight and 
supervision, along with independent third party audits to 
ensure quality management over the course of a committed 
period as shown in the “Two-track Monitoring, Reporting, and 
Evaluation Governance System” under which GGGI HQ and its


---
*Page 90*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
  
  
 local offices across NOL countries and NHIS  are to function as important partner entities accountable for reporting necessary information to KDB. 
The programme shall utilise its Executing Entities’ strong local and global presence and capacity to undertake monitoring, reporting, and evaluation 
arrangements in compliance with GCF standards. KDB’s site visits, if possible with the GCF Secretariat (i.e., Portfolio Management Division), will 
be carried out on both an annual and a random basis, to verify reported information and confirm alleged alignment with key indicators and three-
point scale rating.  
 
Financial Reporting to Investors. Reporting to KDB, the CTF is to monitor performance of invested portfolio companies and offer financial 
information to limited partners on a quarterly basis during the fund’s lifespan. At the JV corporate level, portfolio compani es are to submit reporting 
on business performance, climate impacts, and E&S/gender safeguards compliance as committed. Based on expertise of investment trends and 
insights, the GP and partnering investment advisors shall verify the submitted reporting contents through both routine and random manners to 
achieve proper monitoring, evaluating, and reporting milestones as planned under the programme.  
 
Transparent Information Disclosure of Invested Sub-Projects for GCF Stakeholders via a Systemic Reporting.  For more specific details on 
the CTF-related reporting, the GP will aim to send to each LP (a) Annual reports within ninety ( 90) business days of 31 December, the annual 
audited accounts prepared based on applicable financial standards (including certain information on Related Party Transactions); and (b) Quarterly 
reports within sixty (60) business days of each quarterly date a report comprising (i) details of investments purchased and of investments disposed 
of; and (ii) a statement of the investments and other property and assets of the CTF together with a brief commentary on the progress of 
investments. With the importance of proper reporting acknowledged as an essential responsibility on sub-projects to be financed and managed in a 
sense of accountable manner to all the GCF stakeholders including LPs and the wider beneficiaries that do include NDAs and line ministries, the 
programme is committed to provide multi -functional reports if deemed necessary in compliance with the GCF standards.


---
*Page 91*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
 
The risks outlined below are the primary risks and associated mitigations identified at a programme level 
for the programme’s  implementation. At an investment level, each of the JV (or other partnership) 
candidates for the CTF will undergo a stringent risk assessment and management review, as well as 
technology, legal, financial, and other due diligence procedures prior to investment as parts of components 
2 and 3 of the programme. The JV (or partnership) candidates will review the results of assessed risk and 
enact appropriate mitigation measures prior to being submitted to the Investment Committee for review . 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Medium  
Description  
 
The programme may face planning,  implementation, and execution delays due to the on-going COVID -19 
pandemic, associated waves of high numbers of infections, and related travel restrictions and delays  in 
communication and coordination.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The three mitigation measures below will bring the impact from medium to medium -low.  
 
1. To reduce the delay and lost time in its communication with local stakeholders, KDB has early on 
established a strategic partnership with the GGGI, to not only mobilise each of its local offices and 
native staff in each of the five countries with the respective language skills and cultural backgr ound, 
but also utilise its expansive network within each of the countries’ regional and national governments and ministries. 
 
2. KDB has also converted many of its meetings with the programm e’s various stakeholders (e.g., 
local country stakeholders  including NDAs , consortium members, GP, consultants,  etc.) to virtual 
platforms (e.g., Zoom, WebEx, Google Meet, etc.) to leverage the resources available to 
encourage timely communication and efficiency within and across country borders and time zones. 
Preparations to accommodate virtual acceleration servi ces and consulting services as parts of 
component 1 and 2 are also being made to not delay any of the JV candidates in receiving the 
needed services in becoming investment-ready businesses.  
3. As the pandemic continues through 2022, the programme plans to incorporate more local 
consultants who are already on the ground in the respective countries to conduct additional 
stakeholder consultations and the JV (or other partnership) candidate due dili gence services for the 
local candidates.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Medium  
Description


---
*Page 92*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
   
  
The programme may face difficulties in identifying appropriate technology companies to es tablish 
investments ( in forms of JVs or other partnerships) , given the nascent nature of low -carbon and climate-
resilient solutions and the difficulty of technology commercialisation.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The three mitigation measures below will bring the impact from medium to medium -low.  
 
1. Executing entities (esp. NHIS and NH ARP)  will team up with global players who will support all the 
pooling, sourcing, and matchmaking activities whenever intervention is necessary, leveraging a 
strong global network and relevant partnership foundations . 
2. Coupled with relevant investment and company operating experience applicable to the fund, the 
GP will leverage its strong networks of investors, technology partners, and industry experts for 
identifying climat e sensitive companies and secur ing actionable pipelines. At the same time, the 
GGGI will strengthen the existing network by bringing in local ecosystem stakeholders across the 
ASEAN region.  
3. A set of criteria encompassing technical feasibility and a minimum threshold of mitigation and 
adaptation impacts will be set up to validate appropriate candidates . 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low Low 
Description  
 
As the programme plans to provide tailor -made acceleration and consulting services to JV (or other 
partnership) candidates or JVs themselves based on individual diagnostic analysis, the executing of the 
acceleration services across components 1 and 2 may not meet the urgency and timeline of limited partner 
investor needs. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The two mitigation measures below ensure the impact remains low. 
 
1. During initial discussions, the GP will share with potential investors the overarching goals of the 
programme and CTF, as well as the timeframe to ensure that there is a clear understanding that for 
this programme, and ultimately the sought-after paradigm shift for the ASEAN region, to be successfully achieved, patient capital is required.  
2. KDB and the GP of the programme aim to bring on a diverse portfolio of companies across different 
growth stages to participate in the programme and CTF. The targeted allocation of investments 
across seed, series A, B, B+ investment types, described in further detail in Annex 2 (Supply -driven  
FS), is designed to establish a more diversified portfolio for investors across industries and 
timeframe of returns . With such endeavours, by  creating the best possible climate solutions going 
to market over the first few years of the fund execution, the programme shall narrow the gap with 
timeline of limited partner investor needs as much as possible.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4


---
*Page 93*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
 
As a 1 1-year life investment instrument with diverse cross -sectoral investors and stakeholders, the CTF  
may face challenges with the fund’s  long-term  governance in light of volatile economic conditions and 
complexity over the duration, diverse interests, and geographies of its investments.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The three mitigation measures below ensure the impact remains low. 
 
1. The GP will have governance mechanisms and strategies aligned with national long- term 
economic development plans of respective target countries, leveraging its extensive experience 
managing private investment vehicles for public and private institutional investors.  
2. The CTF will be structured according to industry best practices for long-term fund management 
including legal provisions , monitoring and reporting requirements of the environmental and social 
management system (ESMS), and governance requirements for private investment vehicles.  
3. The CTF shall leverage the GGGI’s solid local presence and network  across the ASEAN region. 
The GP will keep up with the updated local dynamics , and will be informed of  the top events and 
stories of the season in close communication with the Regional Sustainability Management Unit 
(SMU) which governs five National SMUs in partner countries . 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Low 
Description  
 
The programme presents challenges associated with the investment portfolio over limited access to 
information and potential m isconduct by portfolio companies, as well as difficulty of attracting follow -on 
investments. 
  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The three mitigation measures below ensure the impact remains low. 
 
1. The GP will establish communication channels with the investment portfolio to implement regular 
reporting practices in mitigating risks related to insufficient and/or misleading information 
provision s.  
2. The GP will assist the investment portfolio with  diversified strategies to guide them towards  
adequate capital trajectory with milestones for their sustained growth.  
3. In close communication with the GP, the SMU s (GGGI) and the Team NH (centred on NHIS ) will 
offer agile assistance to tackle such risks, leveraging their own expertise for the sake of the 
programme success – not just for their own components : a local presence and stable network with 
key local partners for the GGGI; and diplomatic actions as a government agency.  
Selected Risk Factor 6


---
*Page 94*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Forex  Low Low 
Description  
 
As the programme will invest into five different countries, there may be impacts of dealing with various 
local currencies and fluctuations in exchange rates with the investments.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Given the likely structure of the CTF in Singapore and investment flow into and out of the respective 
programme countries  with different local currencies , the impact of foreign exchange will primarily be upon 
repatriation in the form of dividends or upon exit. After the GCF Board approval, the programme in the 
meantime will perform analysis for the financial risks for investments in project-specific and CTF -level 
financial models, which can include local currency to USD likely long-term swap rates , for instance.  While 
using these rates could provide adequate comfort that project financials are able to cope with any potential 
future currency volatility , other measures to minimise the forex risk could be proposed after a customised 
due diligence at GP’s own discretion. This  ensures  the impact remains low.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6  
Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low Low 
Description  
 
Risks associated with money laundering, terrorist financing,  or other prohibited practices , throughout the 
process of mobilising and transferring funds via multiple layers of partner entities  with weaker anti -money 
laundering controls  and a lack of traceability  
  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The three mitigation measures  below  ensure the impact remains low. 
 
1. Given KDB, equipped with a strong internal  compliance system under a strict/regular guidance of 
the Korean government as the member  of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) , will ensure that 
the programme adheres to the GCF’s Anti -Money Laundering (AML) and Countering the Financing 
of Terrorism (CFT) Policy in place, as well as other compliance mechanisms to mitigate the risk of 
money laundering, terrorist financing, or prohi bited practices, all executing and partnering local 
entities are subject to the same policies as well.  
2. The CTF is to be operational under t he best practice governance mechanism  by undertaking 
investments only after thorough screening and due diligence that include AML/CFT and Know Your 
Customer  (KYC) procedures  to prohibit the consideration of an investment with potential and 
present clients along with their previous transaction records against international and/or local watch 
lists. Above all, careful attention will be paid when it comes to investment countries in the Grey List.  
3. Lastly, legal  agreements will require investors to affirmatively confirm that the sources of capital of 
their investments into the CTF does not come from any prohibited sources.


---
*Page 95*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
 
The Programme has developed its own Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), 
encompassing both CTF and non-CTF components. CTF component pursues maximisation of 
sustainability outcomes beyond “do not harm” principles. Non-CTF components (Component 1, 2, and 4) are extension of the fund’s environmental and social (E&S) risk management and due diligence. As such, 
non-CTF components of the ESMS (in Components 1 and 2)  aim to support readiness of the applicant JVs 
as they will reduce rejection rates i n the CTF approval stage in Component 3. Non-CTF components also 
aims to generating co-benefits of capacitating the candidate JVs in E &S management performance, 
regardless of the fund application results. Importantly, ESMS of the Programme is in line with the Revised 
Environmental and Social Policy of the GCF (Adopted in B.BM -2021/18). 
 
Mainstreaming Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) into the Programme Implementation, 
CTF is committed to Supporting Projects with E&S Risk Category B/I-2 and below. While  micro  scale 
sub-project investments  of the CTF mostly anticipate minimal or no adverse social & environmental (E&S) 
risks – Category  C/I-3, the programme set up an environmental  and social management system  (ESM S) to 
ensure systematically promoting sustainable co -benefits of the funded activities and safeguarding the 
ecosystem services, environment, and the communities of all the five NOL countries from environmental 
and social risks associated with the funded activities beyond the medium (moderate) levels.  
 
The programme proactively follows the mitigation hierarchy to avoid, minimise, and mitigate any risks and 
impacts . Where avoidance, minimi sation,  or mitigation measures are not available or sufficient, and where 
there is sufficient evidence to justify and support viability, remediation and restoration will be required 
before adequate and equitable compensation of any residual risks and impacts . The ESM S (particularly, 
for the CTF component)  ensures compliance with the respective countries’ safeguard system (EIA/E&S 
laws, regulations , and procedural requirements), GCF ESS/Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, Harassment 
(SEAH), IFC PS (KDB adherence to it as per the Equator Principles) and Exclusion List, the EHS Guidelines of the World Bank Group, and core labour standards of the International Labour Organisation 
(ILO) , while integrating them  into the business  cycle to m anage any associated E&S risk . The programme 
will not finance any project classified as high risks ( Category A /I-1) and/or likely to pose adverse impacts to 
the indigenous peoples  (IP) in line with the IFC PS 7  (see ESM S Appendix E of the IP screening checklist 
and Appendix M of the Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework ). 
 CTF’s E&S Performance Management  is Integrated to the Fund Risk Management . The CTF E&S 
and Gender  Compliance Team  will carry out routine ESS compliance duties  throughout the entire fund 
operation process : from  the fund application (E&S screening and categoris ation), fund appraisal and 
approval to contracting (E&S review summary and E&S c ovenant preparation, as required), to ex -poste 
due diligence (compliance monitoring and evaluation o f JV-specific regular E&S progress report for 
Category  B activities, recommendation on remedial/corrective actions to grievances /unexpected 
occurrence of regular/justified risk s/outstanding cases ). For atypical proposal cases where E&S risks are 
uncertain and the nature of the risks are highly complex or unknown (i.e., in case the proposal involves a relatively new/emerging climate technologies, and there are not sufficient data base to assess the risks 
and impacts in advance), the CTF E&S and Gender Compliance Team (ESGCT) will refer the case to the 
Expert Advisory Committee (EAC/a sub-committee on ESS matters) for consultative procedures to 
determine the risk category and required E&S management measures (ESIA, ESMP, or any other topical 
management plans).


---
*Page 96*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
   
 In case a certain E&S issue poses potentially high risks to investors and host countries, necessarily  
including vulnerable groups such as the indigenous communities , the deprived, and women and girls , the 
E&S Risk Management Committee (ESRMC) will be convened ad hoc , inviting the representatives of the 
stakeholder  groups . For the highest level of risk  – unjustified , i.e., hard to remedy  within the ESMS and the 
Covenant, so that the CT F is required to consider  the cessation or cancellation of investment agreement, 
the CTF senior management shall be activated to address the  concerning  red flags . In the latter case, an 
external audit will be strictly carried out with KDB’s direct engagement. 
 
The programme is organised as a fit combination of: (i) preparatory stages for the CTF application 
(Components 1 and 2) ; (ii) CTF investment as Component 3 (from application, approval, implementation of 
the approved climate projects, and monitoring and evaluation); (iii) a simultaneous and/or parallel activities 
on the ground for local ecosystem capacity building (Component 4). 
 
Accelerating ESS Capacity Enhancement of Shortlisted JVs for Investment Readiness. Given  that 
most of the local applicant companies and some of global innovators might not be properly equipped with a 
strong level of ESMS , the R&DB readiness and acceleration ( components  1 and 2) shall assist local and/or  
JV level entities in  strengthening their preliminary ESMS and climate impact status  by providing diagnos tic-
based advisory support. In addition, upon request, the applicant JVs have access to readiness -stage ESS 
and climate impact consulting services:  i.e., scoping, preliminary E&S screening, and categoris ation. E&S 
advisory  service s as part of the non- CTF components  are extension of the fund’s  E&S risk management 
and due diligence, as they will reduce rejection rates in the CTF approval stage in component 3, while 
generating co-benefits of capacitating the candidate JVs in E&S management performance, regardless of 
the fund application results. 
 
Information Disclosure & Grievance Redress Mechanism  (GRM) . For Category  B projects, JVs may be 
required to establish a separate stakeholder engagement and commitment plan (SECP) including the information disclosure plan in accordance with the GCF IDP -aligned ESMF : the frequency and level of 
disclosure may vary in proportion to the level and nature of the E&S risks and impacts. This  will be fine-
tuned by the CTF E&S and Gender Compliance Team ’s (ESGCT) review, consultation,  and capacity 
building support. Also, all of the JVs are required to develop and operate the GRM in accordance with the 
GCF standards, as KDB, GGGI, SMU, and the GP can also be alternative receptors of grievances  in the 
intermediate executing platform . Grievances lodged at the JV or country SMU level shall be reported 
through regular procedures  to the CTF, which will be primarily reviewed by the CTF E&S Compliance 
Team . A high-risk grievance will be reported to the E&S Risk Management Committee for their attention,  
and will be subject to the fund-level adjudication as a critical part of the CTF risk management mechanism. 
Depending on the nature of grievances  and findings of the resultant audit (or internal investigation) , the 
fund’s decision may be disclosed to the public through a website and other accessible m eans to country 
stakeholders for the sake of transparency and accountability . 
   
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
 
Gender Assessment (GA) and Gender Action Plan (GAP) Established to O vercome the Challenges 
Facing Women and Girls in STEM and Entrepreneurial S pace.  The programme’s GA and GAP have 
been devised based on a dynamic process of consultations with key local stakeholders with literature 
review and feedback communication. GA extracted findings asset that women’s  entrepreneurial ecosystem 
seems limited to small and micro-sized enterprises, characterized by  low profitability and informality , 
across the target countries; few women entrepreneurs in the formal sector is attributable to (i) social and 
cultural constraints, (ii) access to business  and markets , and ( iii) lack of financing. While limited  progress 
has been recently observed in girls’ higher  education in all the five countries, women’s participation in 
science, technology, engineering, and math ( STEM ) has been identified  to be significantly less than that of


---
*Page 97*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
   
 men’s. S&T enterprise s in the region  with cultural stigmatisation seems culturally less likely to welcome 
women as a counterpart . Women also seem  underrepresented in the ICT sector and relevant areas 
requiring a capacity for innovation. In light of this, w omen in the five recipient countries need to be given 
prioritised opportunities to become equal partner s for climate technology innovation and entrepreneurship, 
to empower themselves , and to benefit from the programme as the active key agency : be it a direct 
recipient and a primary beneficiary  of the programme through evolv ement of the funded activities. 
 
Gender Benefits. Gender benefits  of the proposed progra mme has two prongs: On one hand, the very act 
of financing and supporting the climate tech star t-ups and JVs will benefit women by reducing their climate 
vulnerability and enhancing their resilience. Another prong is the programme design (through gender 
mainstreaming) itself. Most importantly, gender plays a key role as one of the CTF investment criteria (see 
Table 3); only JVs (or partnerships) screened by the CTF Gender Compliance Team shall grasp the 
investment opportunities at scale.  
 
As per the CTF investment criteria, the programme deliberately targets  female technology  leaders and 
gender -friendly (women-founded, headed or more than 50% employees being women) firms as prioritised 
beneficiaries of the CTF funding. Selection of the local candidate firms for the CTF will target at least 30% 
of the selected f irms being gender -friendly ( outcome statement of c omponent 1 in GAP) and CTF shall 
target 50% of the fund portfolio companies being either gender -friendly or committing to establish and fulfil 
their own gender mainstreaming action plans  as an investment agreement condition. (outcome statement 
of component 3 in GAP). Component 4 (TA)  of the proposed programme shall focus on nurturing and 
supporting the creation of enriched gender -inclusive tech-driven entrepreneurship ecosystem . 
 
Integrating Gender Considerations into the Entire  Programme since the Programme Inception, 
Maximising the Synergy Effects with E&S Safeguards Specialists.  Since a scratch outline of the 
concept, the programme has been designed, advanced, and sophisticated with a strategic gender focus , 
driven by a team of KDB, GGGI, and external gender experts . It has resulted in programme components 
equipped with measures and tools for nurturing talented women to be skilled human resources and 
encouraging their proactive engagement surrounded by  the region’s  innovation leap; e.g., Under 
component 1, partnership with local academic institutions was first inspired with an aim to employ female 
students majoring in STEM subjects , recognising realistic cons traints of forming women-led SMEs (JVs) in 
component 2 as a result of feasibility studies .  
 
Above all things, the programme pl ans the establishment and operation of an independent E&S and 
Gender Compliance Team (ESGCT)  in pursuit of the best gender risk management mechanism in close 
communication with ESS experts, on which the climate technology acceleration initiative will be excellently 
operational with female talents accounting for 50% of the programme beneficiaries and creation of lots of 
women-led/owned tech companies in the five countries’ nascent innovation markets .  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Adequate Financial Management  at the Programme’s Core. As a legally authorised accredited entity  
under the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA)  effective since re-accreditation,  KDB will supervise  and 
oversee the whole capital flow of the programme, pursuant to the Funded Activity  Agreement (FAA)  to be 
made upon the Board approval on the funding proposal . The programme’s financial resources  will be 
channelled, allocated, transferred, managed, monitored, audited, and sustained by a set of legal and 
contractual arrangements, pursuant to the FAA provisions; KDB  pre-sets up the programme-specific 
structure of multiple legal and contractual arrangements as depicted in the Capital Flow with Legal and 
Contractual Arrangements  of Section B , to be able to direct the alignment of the FAA umbrella setting and 
control all the contracting parties . Meanwhile, KDB shall receive, channel,  hold,  administer, monitor, return,


---
*Page 98*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
   
 and record the GCF proceeds in an independent  GCF  account  in accordance with the AMA and FAA , so 
as to avoid a mix of investments  sourced from KDB or  third parties . 
 
In addition to KDB’s overarching financial oversight and supervision at a programme level, the programme 
builds partnership arrangements with global/local investors through intermediation of the GP team, and 
with local  ecosystem stakeholders through intermediation of the GGGI. In that some of them or their 
sources of capital may come from countries in the Grey List and prohibited sources  under AML/CFT 
guidance, KDB will strengthen stricter due diligence and legal arrangements , surely including AML/CFT 
covena nts, with the executing entities. In particular, the programme has endeavoured a tie with local 
partner enti ties under formally regulated systems of finance, in order to ensure adequate management of 
the proceeds  at a project level. Designated local partner  entities will function as safety nets  to address 
conventional financiers’ heightened concerns  over traditional lack of transparent capital flows due to 
immature financial management system s and informal economic environments in the investment receiving 
countries . Legal or contractual agreements to be entered into between the GGGI and local acceleration 
partner entities will stipulate roles, obligations, and responsibilities as robust covenants to ensure 
transparent and accountable management of financial resources in compliance with the FAA, in terms of, 
including but not limited to,  information disclosure, reporting, anti -money laundering, and counter terrorist 
financing.  
 
Executing entities will follow KDB’s guidance for financial management. In fact, KDB once had operated 
and managed the GCF Project Preparation Facility (PPF)  proceeds in partnership with GGGI and its  
engaging co nsortium partners over 11 months, which was fully audited by an independent external auditor 
and transparently confirmed with a clearance from  the GCF Secretariat. In short, as for this team -up, such 
operation and management capacity of the GCF proceeds have been already proven. KDB, GGGI, PwC 
(and its consortium members), and the GP team  all are equipped with an internal oversight mechanism 
that includes financial control and internal/external audit, ev aluation, investigation, and other management 
support system to maintain various financial transactions in different forms in line with the global standard, 
which is transparently disclosed under several internal and external supervisory layers . 
 
Procurement Undertaken in Compliance with KDB Procurement Policy, Proven to be Aligned with 
the GCF Standard. Upon launching the PPF in July 2021, KDB issued a request of proposals (R fP) to 
receive competitive bid offers . The two-month long open tender  process was carried out in compliance with 
KDB proc urement policy  aligned with the Act on Contracts to Which the State is a Party  as a state-ow ned 
bank  under scrutiny by oversight authorities as well as civil parties , which abides by the GCF procurement 
guidance: re -confirmed by the GCF re-accreditation assessment in 2021- 2022.  The contract was awarded 
to a PwC-led consortium , composed of PwC’s global legal services network , investment advisory firms , 
and sustainability experts, whose bid met the requirements in the R fP. In addition, NH  ARP was assessed 
and selected as per KDB internal regulation on the fund manager selection. 
 
The programme is accordingly to procure services of the pre-selected consortium  members  along with the 
GGGI and its  global/local partner  entities . As to country -specific selection of local partner entities , during 
the PPF phase, the GGGI advertised terms of reference (ToR) as per its procurement policy, approved by 
the GCF standard as Delivery Partner, while the NDAs’ recommendations  and advice were reserved via 
consultation . In rolling out activities on advancing climate technology business and the respective 
ecosystems, relevant, multi -disciplinary  stakeholders at both local and global levels are to be adequately  
procured upon the discretion of the pre-selected consortium members as per KDB guidance, to facilitate 
the programme execution. F or instance, in case technical expertise on a specific climate technology  (e.g., 
weather forecasting, carbon capture, utilisation and storage)  is required during the due diligence process, 
advisory services from specialised technical agencies may be procured on an ad hoc basis.  
 
Procurement Supervision and Oversight. If additional procurement is required in addition to partnering 
entities procured during the PPF implementation, all executing entities will follow KDB’s guidance for


---
*Page 99*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
   
 procurement  – Article 6 (Procurement Method) of the Guidance for GCF -Funded Projects approved by the 
GCF, while pursuing their own procurement policy and rules only in case theirs are stricter in terms of 
threshold and method as for GGGI and using the existing service providers of NH ARP. All the 
procurement activities will be reported to KDB –  so accordingly to GCF –  while being screened as per 
regular supervision and oversight duties as Accredited Entity of the programme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals wi ll be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in 
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal inc ludes confidential information.  
 
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and 
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.   
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 100*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS )  
☒ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 3 Co-financing  letter  of intent , if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☐ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☒ Annex 1 7 Multi- country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21 Operations manual + Project Selection Tool  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions  and adaptation benefits (ex -ante impact modelling)  
☒ Annex 2 3  Climate basis and additionality analysis  
☒ Annex 2 4  Country -level climate rationale    
☒ Annex 2 5  EE Capacity Assessment


---
*Page 101*
---

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
Nation Religion King 
Ministry of Environment 
NQ : ...... 5:15 ..................... MoE 
Mr. Yannick Glemarec 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund Secretariat 
Songdo International Business District 
G-Tower, 175 Art Center-daero 
Y eonsu-gu , Incheon 22004 
Republic of Korea Phnom Penh. J3 ... Apri J .. ,. $. 0.~~ 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the Korea Development Bank (KDB) regarding 
Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation of Climate 
Technopreneurship 
Dear Mr. Glemarec, 
We refer to the programme titled Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation 
of r:limate Technopren eurship as included in the funding proposal subrnilted by the Korea 
Developweut Bank (KDB) to us on 8 March :2022. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment, the National 
Designated Authority of Cambodia. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The Royal Government of Cambodia has no-objection to the programme as included in the 
funding proposal; 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national 
prionties, strategies and plans of Cambodia; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards , the programme as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations. 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within 
the scope of the programme 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly a/i1~tt the GCF website. 
Please, Mr. Glemarec , accept the assurances of my high conside ation and regards. JQ-~ 
· ster of Environment 
hair of the National Council for 
Sustainable Development 
Morodok Techo Building (Lot 503) Tonie Bassac, Chamkarrnom, Phnom Penh, CAMBODIA, Phone: 023 213 908 I 023 220 369. Fax: 023 212 540 No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 102*
---

MINISTRY OF FINANCE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
FISCAL POLICY AGENCY
R.M. NOTOHAMIPRODJO BUILDING 2ND FLOOR JALAN DR. WAHIDIN RAYA NOMOR 1 JAKARTA 10710
TELEPHONE (+62 21) 3441484; FACSIMILE (+62 21) 3848049; WEBSITE www.fiskal. kemen keu.go.id
Ref. :S-51/KF/2022 08 April 2022
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Executive Director
Secretariat of the Green Climate Fund
175, Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu , Incheon 406-840
Republic of Korea
Subject :Funding Proposal for the GCF by Korean Development Bank regarding 
Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation of Climate 
Technopreneurship
Dear Mr. Glemarec ,
Werefer totheprogram ofCollaborative R&DB Programme forPromoting theInnovation of
Climate Technopreneurship  submitted by Korean Development Bank  to us on 10 March 2022.
The undersigned istheChairman ofFiscal Policy Agency, Ministry ofFinance astheNational
Designated Authority  of Indonesia .
Pursuant toGCF decision B.08/10, thecontent ofwhichweacknowledge tohave reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal .
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a)The government ofIndonesia has no-objection totheprogramme asincluded inthe
funding proposal ;
(b)The programme asincluded inthefunding proposal isinconformity with Indonesia ’s
national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c)Inaccordance with theGCF’senvironmental and social safeguards, theprogramme as
included inthe funding proposal isincomformity with relevant national laws and
regulations .
Wealso confirm thatournational process forascertaining no-objection toprogramme asincluded
in the funding proposal  has been duly followed.
Wealso confirm thatourno-objection applies toallprojects oractivities tobeimplemented within
the scope of the program .
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
Yours faithfu lly,
Ditandatangani  secara  elektronik
Febrio  Nathan Kacaribu
Chairman


---
*Page 107*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the 
Innovation of Climate Technopreneurship  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  Korea Development Bank  (KDB)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme  Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Philippines, and Vietnam  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Environmental and Social Management  System ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, June 14, 2024  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Bahasa Indonesia, Khmer, Lao, and Vietnamese   
Explanation on language  These are the official languages of the target countries.  
The Philippines use s English as its official language.  
Link to disclosure   
English:  
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_E
nglish.pdf  
 
Bahasa Indonesia* : 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_Ba
hasa.pdf


---
*Page 108*
---

Khmer *:  
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_K
hmer.pdf   
 
Lao*: 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_La
o.pdf   
 Vietnamese*: 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_Vi
etnamese.pdf   
 
Other link(s)  https://www.kdb.co.kr/index.jsp → Investor Relation → 
Sustainability → Green Climate Fund → Disclosure of 
Environmental and Social Information (here) → No.3  
Remarks  An ESM S consistent with the requirements for a Category I -
2 programme is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Management System ” 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , Indigenous Peoples Planning  
Framework  (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF)  /  
Friday, June 14, 2024  
Language(s) of disclosure  English, Bahasa Indonesia, Khmer, Lao, and Vietnamese  
Explanation on language  These are the official languages of the target countries.  
Link to disclosure   
English:  
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_E
nglish.pdf  
 
Bahasa Indonesia *: 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_Ba
hasa.pdf  
 Khmer *:  
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_K
hmer.pdf   
 
 
Lao*: 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_La
o.pdf   
 
Vietnamese*: 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/wcmscontents/pdf/2024_ESMS_Vi
etnamese.pdf   
  
Other link(s)  https://www.kdb.co.kr/index.jsp → Investor Relation → 
Sustainability → Green Climate Fund → Disclosure of 
Environmental and Social Information (here) → No.3  
Remarks  Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF) is contained in 
the ESMS, and translated for affected local stakeholders.


---
*Page 109*
---

Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date Friday, June 14, 2024  
Place  ESMS (both hard and soft copies for the vulnerable peoples’ 
convenience) will be made available at Global Green Growth 
Institute (GGGI) Country Offices in the five NOL countries, given that GGGI is the Executing Entity of the programme.  
GGGI Cambodia  
4th Floor, Ministry of Environment, Building 503, Sangkat 
Tonle Bassak, Khan Chamkar Mon, Phnom Penh, Cambodia  
GGGI Indonesia  
Jl. Taman Patra Raya No. 10, RT 5/RW 4, Kuningan Timur, 
Kecamatan Setiabudi, Jakarta Selatan 12950, Indonesia  
GGGI Lao PDR  
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), 3F, Corner of Souphanouvong Rd. and Sithane Rd., P.O Box 5745, Vientiane Capital, Lao PDR  
GGGI Philippines 
25th Floor, Menarco Tower, 32nd Street, Bonifacio Global City Taguig, Metro Manila, 1634 Philippines  
GGGI Viet Nam  
Room 311, Ministry of Planning and Investment bldg.  
65 Van Mieu Street, Dong Da District, Ha Noi, Viet Nam  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, July 15, 2024  
* Subsequent to the disclosure of this form t o the Board and active observers on June 14, 2 024 
(KST), the  following updates ha ve bee n made: The translation of the  Environmental and Social 
Management System ( ESMS) into the  local languages of the target countries (Bahasa Indonesia, 
Khmer, Lao, and Vietnamese) have bee n made available o n June 21, 2024.
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 110 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP240 
Proposal name:  Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation 
of Climate Technopreneurship  
Accredited entity:  Korea Development Bank (KDB)  
Country/(ies):  Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People's Democratic Republic (the), Philippines (the), Viet Nam  
Project/programme size:  Medium 
I. Summary  
Brief on the 
programme  This proposal is a resubmission from the thirty -seventh meeting of 
the Board  (B.37).  
The Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation 
of Climate Technopreneurship targets the transfer of innovative climate technology solutions and empowers local entrepreneurship acceleration ecosystems in five member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations: Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, Philippines and Viet Nam.  
This research and development bank (R&DB) programme will 
create an incubation and acceleration programme for global technology innovators and local entrepreneurs. It will also establish a c. USD 201.2 million Climate Technopreneurship Fund (CTF) to crowd  in private capital. The programme will be accompanied by 
various technical assistance activities targeted at building capacity on the ground, including policy support to enable technology transfer, and an incubator and accelerator which will find and incub ate local companies to enable them to receive and scale up 
technology from global climate technology companies.  
The programme is visionary in its attempt to showcase a comprehensive intervention to facilitate climate technology transfer in South -East Asia and has heeded the call of the 
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat (COP to the UNFCCC) in attempting to make clean technologies available to entrepreneurs in South- East Asia.  
Targeted 
programme size  USD 226.7 million  
Proposed GCF 
involvement  USD 104.47 million (USD 83.75 million in equity; USD 20.72 million 
in grants)


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 111 
 
 
Recipient of GCF 
assistance  For the equity component, which will create a technopreneurship 
fund, the finance will flow directly to the Climate 
Technopreneurship Fund through the Korea Development Bank, 
the accredited entity (AE). 
KDB will be the recipient of the grants and will distribute the funds 
to the executing entities (EEs) and local partners responsible for 
delivering the technical -assistance activities.  
 
The programme  has four components which will be managed by different EEs.  
Component Executing entity  Funding (USD)  Type of source 
funding (USD)  
1 Country -driven 
acceleration 
Readiness  KDB, Global Green 
Growth Institute (GGGI)  8.6 million  Grant  
2 Global acceleration 
for collaborative R&DBs  NH Investment & Securities (NHIS)  9.5 million  Grant  
3 Climate Tech Fund 
(CTF ) NH Absolute Return 
Partners ( NH ARP)  201.2 million  Equity  
4 Technical assistance 
& project 
management costs  KDB, GGGI  7.5 million  Grant  
Total 226. 8 million  201.2 million 
(equity)  
25.5 million (grant) 
II. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
2.1 Impact potential        Scale:  Medium  
1. The independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) recognizes and welcomes KDB taking 
its first step in responding to the call of the COP to the UNFCCC to promote technology transfers 
in developing countries. This is especially impressive as KDB is a recognized entity in this space 
globally and has played a significant role in technology transf er to and from the Republic of 
Korea.  
2. Given the call of the COP to the UNFCCC and the role of the Republic of Korea in the 
successful transfer of technology for both the Republic of Korea and countries worldwide, this is a welcome proposal.  
3. The expected impact target of the programme is also well received: (i) mitigation 
(avoidance of greenhouse gas emissions) amounting to 1,050,976 tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent; and (ii) adaptation targeting 7,403,487 direct and indirect beneficiaries over the 
lifespan of the programme, with 78 per cent of the funding expected to go towards adaptation


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 112 
 
 
measures and 22 per cent towards mitigation. The funding proposal states that 50 per cent of 
the beneficiaries of the proposed programme are assumed to be women.  
4. The iTAP notes that this programme aims to be a market -making intervention, which, by 
its very nature, means causality is difficult to prove in terms of climate -impact outcomes. 
Therefore, the iTAP considers the paradigm shift potential of this programme to be its most 
significant factor.  
5. Tailored solutions to the region: In comparison to the previous two submissions , the 
programme has become more focused owing to its prioritization of sectors for each country : 
The funding proposal includes a table listing 7 eligible prioritized technology needs and 35 
technology transfers allocated differently for each of the target countries. The iTAP welcomes 
the additional work perfor med by NH ARP , the G eneral Partner (GP),  in tailoring target 
technologies and sectors to specific countries, which improves the focus in each country and 
increases the chances of success.  
6. A more tailored financing approach to the different markets, and the different types of 
companies within them, which prioritizes only two or three technologies in each market , will 
have a higher chance of success.  
7. The programme (i) is still complex in both its design and execution ; but, (ii) has 
significantly improved the long -term alignment of the executing entity, NH ARP, and its 
parent company, NHIS (the limited partner (LP)), through respective contribution targets to the 
CTF of USD 2 million by the GP and USD 10 million by the LP.  
(a) More specifically, in terms of complexity , multiple interfaces would exist in the proposed  
programme between numerous executing entities which have never worked together  
before , and which have very different mission statements, capacities, expertise and 
experience – this naturally raises execution concerns. Such concerns are not 
insurmountable, but they do require a realistic plan from the AE on how such risk will 
be manage d. The plan of the AE is to have multiple coordinating m anagement units 
between each executing entit y and itself, between country and regional teams, and 
between the investment teams and government s. Some level of coordination is 
important in any programme of this size, but the high level of coordination envisaged in this programme between the EEs seems to arise from a failure of design . Component 1 , 
as the key building block of creating local investable companies,  should be created and 
housed within the GP, wh ich can then directly hire/partner with local and international 
incubators in different countries and in different sectors, or build its own internal 
capacities to cater to large r markets.  
(b) An important indicator of alignment of interest is to have at least one of the EEs having 
at-risk capital in the proposed programme alongside GCF capital. This will ensure that , 
notwithstanding the complexity of the programme and the challenges ahead, the EE will 
have enough capital at risk that it will put the right resources and time into fixing 
whichever features in the initial design of the programme may not be fit for purpose. 
The iTAP welcomes the intention of the GP to contribute at least USD 2 milli on to the 
CTF and the intention of its parent company , NHIS , to invest up to USD 10 million as an 
LP. 
8. Execution risk in terms of timelines  
(a) The timelines do not seem realistic for achieving 40 investments and exiting those 
within 11 + 3 years . Considering that day 0 is GCF approval, it would be followed by 
fundraising and building out the team  (1–2 years) ; identification of  both  global 
technology companies (1 year) and local companies (1 year); necessary changes  to local 
government regulation (1 –5 years); identification , incubation and acceleration of 
successful local companies (1 –5 years); set  up of the joint ventures (presumably 1 year); 
scale up of investment (4 years); and then exit  (2-3 years)  – a total of 12 -22 years .  Some


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 113 
 
 
of these steps may be performed in parallel, but no discussion of the timeline risks and 
the possible scenarios (upside, downside) was presented to the iTAP to evaluate.  Whilst 
we applaud the drive to accelerate these transformations  and their impact, the 
programme has not provided adequate analysis or assessment of timeline and execution 
risk for this programme .  
2.2 Paradigm shift potential        Scale:  Medium  
9. Technology transfer towards developing countries is a visionary goal and the iTAP 
congratulates the AE on its high aspirations. However, one of the main barriers identified for 
successful technology transfer is the adoption and enforcement by the receiving  countries of a 
licensing framework. The solution provided is to make this framework compulsory . But it is not 
clear who will make it compulsory and who will enforce it . It remains unclear to the iTAP how 
such a compulsory licensing framework would work in  practice , and how the AE w ould  be able 
to make it compulsory for the respective governments. It is also unclear how such a framework 
would  be enforced and as such the iTAP does not see how the international technology 
providers would be assured that their intellectual property would be protected.  
10. In addition, it is unclear how the necessary local licensing and regulatory changes would 
happen and what support, if any, the different governments would provide for such changes. 
The iTAP acknowledges that the funding proposal package development has relied heavily on 
national designated authorities and their recommended local players, but that this structure 
seems very generic: everyone is in favour of  the transfer of technology in principle, but there is 
no information on a pre -agreed framework under wh ich specific technologies and their 
licensing requirements would be adopted by the governments of the participating countries.  
11. Ultimately, the programme may face difficulties in identifying appropriate technology 
companies to establish investments (in the form of joint ventures or other partnerships), given 
the fact that low-carbon and climate -resilient solutions are in the early stages of development 
and the difficulty of technology commercialization.  
12. Notwithstanding the lack of specifics, the iTAP commends the addition of three different 
modalitie s for accelerating tech nology  transfer in South -East Asian countries, which could be 
more appropriate for different stages of the target companies and countries.  
2.3 Sustainable development potential       Scale:  Medium  
13. Creating an ecosystem to support the acceleration and incubation programme will spur 
the emergence of climate technology entrepreneurs as pioneer industry players and thereby the 
emergence of local climate technology companies. The programme aims to provid e support for 
40 locally owned and registered climate technology entrepreneurs, and it has potential to create 
a wide range of green job opportunities in the local markets.  
2.3.1.  Gender co -benefits  
14. The programme will focus on nurturing and supporting the creation of an enriched 
gender -inclusive technology -driven entrepreneurship ecosystem. At least five local gender 
experts will be hired in each national Stakeholder Management Unit (SMU), who will pr omote 
gender expertise on the ground. The programme will target female technology leaders and 
gender friendly firms as prioritized beneficiaries of the CTF and as the local joint venture 
candidates. This has the potential to increase women’s participation in the climate technology 
industry.  
2.3.2.  Social and environmental co-benefits


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 114 
 
 
15. Creating joint ventures between local companies and global technology providers will 
ensure that indigenous climate technology and knowledge are fully considered when selecting 
the climate technology innovation in the target countries. The climate technology products and services will aim to deliver improvements in air, water and soil quality , and to support 
sustainable livelihoods through conservation and biodiversity. These positive impacts will lead 
to improvements in health and safety, access to education and cultural preservation.  
2.4 Needs of the recipient         Scale:  Medium  
16. The needs of the recipients have been very thoroughly researched but not necessarily 
assessed, analysed and prioritized. Outcomes of studies and analyses (see annex 2 to the 
funding proposal) are broad and merely conclude that the needs of the five participating countries are classified into the following three overall categories (although the needs vary by 
country): (i) weak regulatory framework; (ii) limited access to fi nance; and (iii) nascent or 
immature climate technology and innovation ecosystem.  
17. In addition, from the description of the studies performed, it remains unclear whether 
technology transfer is the right solution for many of the small and medium -sized enterprises 
(SMEs) in most of the countries targeted. Many of the SMEs may benefit more from climate financing rather than agreeing to and entering into sophisticated and complex technology -
transfer agreements in order to access finance.  
18. The programme will promote needs -specific technology -transfer activities for the five 
different countries, concentrating on (i) establishing a regulatory and policy framework, 
tailored to climate technopreneurs; (ii) addressing the financing gap through crowding in 
private -sector capital and equity investments;  and (iii) nurturing a robust innovation ecosystem 
by enhancing awareness and providing capacity -building assistance.  
(a) Cambodia:  The corporate structure and business ecosystem of Cambodia is oriented 
around SMEs, which account for around 70 per cent of the country’s employment, 99.8 
per cent of its companies and 58 per cent of its gross domestic product. There is a weak 
institutional environment for technology innovation, so SMEs that are large enough, 
have faced challenges, including a lack of skilled human resources and poor access to 
finance, because most of them lack the necessary assets to secure credit. The missing 
middle “backbone group” of SMEs, which are too high risk to be attractive to global 
investors, will be served by the proposed programme in various ways, such as training 
local talent to make full use of technology.  
(b) Indonesia:  Following the unprecedented challenges posed by the coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID- 19) pandemic and reallocation of climate priorities and budgets, in 2020 
only 13 per cent of the financing needs outlined in the nationally determined contribution (NDC) m itigation road map were addressed. It is therefore clear that 
vibrant private -sector engagement with investment to crowd  in and assist with climate 
technology deployment is essential for Indonesia to meet the commitments made in its 
NDC;  
(c) Lao People’s Democratic Republic : The country is seeking to improve the overall 
sustainable management of its national resources. The challenges in doing so have 
undermined the country’s long -term development, exacerbated by climate change and 
the COVID -19 crisis. The Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is 
committed to enhancing access to finance fo r local entrepreneurs as well as 
strengthening regulatory and institutional arrangements. The programme will assist in the government’s mission by unlocking the role of the private sector via technology 
trade at the corporate level, and devising an innovation- driven management framework 
for the country’s existing resources at the institutional level;


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 115 
 
 
(d) Philippines:  The Philippines’ needs arise as a result of (i) the absence of a centralized 
repository of information and indicators and data on SMEs regarding climate -change 
adaptation and mitigation; (ii) investment gaps; (iii) the limited availability of capacity -
building initiatives for climate technology firms; (iv) the impact of the COVID -19 
pandemic, community quarantine, and the resulting disruption in the supply  chain and 
distribution channels; (v) low accessibility of public services designed to sup port 
entrepreneurs; and (vi) limited support on climate innovation activities. The country’s 
entrepreneurs will take advantage of the investment opportunities and incentives 
throughout the programme, with the aim of improving market conditions and other 
enabling circumstances for the climate technology innovation leap; and  
(e) Viet Nam:  The country needs to respond to climate -driven natural hazards such as 
heatwaves, drought and floods, which accelerate the overexploitation of non -
substitutable natural resources, such as water, at an alarming pace. Meanwhile, people who are at the bottom of the economic pyramid in Viet Nam are disproportionately 
exposed to risks: primarily those residing in the Mekong River Delta, the Red River and 
the Central Coast regions. Although investment in climate actions is urgently required to 
minimize adverse climate impacts, the limited availability of climate- responsive 
technologies along with the funding gap for technology entrepreneurs has resulted in 
institutional bottlenecks for climate business deployment. The programme will 
therefore stimulate i nnovation so benefits will permeate down to all, including the most 
vulnerable in the economy.  
2.5 Country ownership               Scale:  High  
19. The iTAP would like to highlight the expansive country ownership plans of the AE . 
20. Country -specific analyses have been conducted through an extensive literature review, 
covering each country’s NDC and technology needs assessment, as well as other national 
policies and plans, to ensure that the programme is aligned with the country’s prio rities. A 
number of strategic early programme reviews have been conducted, including two feasibility 
studies (one demand -driven and one supply -driven), and a stakeholder engagement plan and a 
gender assessment have been completed.  
21. The AE has held extensive stakeholder consultations with the governments, ministries, 
relevant public entities, state- owned enterprises, venture capital firms ( VCs), investors, start -up 
assisting service firms, and international donors as well as civil society organizations since the concept design stage. The wide -ranging stakeholder consultations resulted in the creation of an 
SMU governance structure to ensure stro ng country ownership.  
22. The national designated authorities of the target countries will function as members of 
the SMU Steering Committee to offer high -level policy guidance and strategic advice over the 
course of executing country -specific activities and will support partnership coordination among 
the key stakeholders.  
2.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                  Scale:  Medium  
23. The estimated cost per tonne of carbon dioxide  equivalent  for the total requested 
GCF amount dedicated to mitigation (22 per cent of the total GCF request) of USD 22.99 million 
(including guarantee and grant) is USD 22.06.  
24. GCF funding could  catalyse private investments of USD 120.75 million from KDB, 
general partners, limited partners, Korea International Cooperation Agency, Asia– Europe 
Meeting SMEs Eco -Innovation Center , and local intermediary entities. Overall, the co -investment 
ratio on the total GCF investment is 1:1.16.


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 116 
 
 
25. The mobilization of investors is difficult to assess given the fundraising risk associated 
with a GP which manages a similar fund of USD 15 million and whose capital came mainly from 
its parent company ( i.e. the GP does not have significant experience fundraising from outside 
sources ). However, the iTAP acknowledges and applauds the tranching of GCF capital 
disbursement in line with fundraising milestones, which mitigates fundraising risk for 
component 2 ( The fundraising of the CTF ).  
26. However, there is no similar tranching of the  grant capital awarded to Component 1 or 
any performance -based  milestone that the executing entity (GGGI) need s to meet to access 
further GCF grant capital. This adds to the execution risk for the programme.  
27. The upstream work of component 1 is essential for the creati on of the appropriate 
pipeline for the CTF.  According to the  information provided by GGGI  during the  written  
questions -and-answers , “GGGI will team up with various third -party partners – for example , 
sourcing local companies together with top -tier local VC/P rivate equity firms  with abundant 
pipeline s, and training local entrepreneurs with international/local business experts” . If the 
executing entities – GGGI and KDB – do not incubate enough investable companies for CTF, the  
whole programme may  fail.  When  the iTAP shared our concerns the AE and the EE responded 
that they are mitigating this risk by creating coordinating  committees to facilitate the multiple 
interfaces KDB itself will be the main coordinator and GGGI the executor of the pipeline:  
building its content and incubatin g local companies. However, such a loose arrangement 
increases the likelihood of execution risk down the line. Clearer accountability upfront is needed on how the value chain of companies and projects will funnel through to the CTF and its 
GP, with more power being given to the GP to define and agree terms for the roles of the other 
components’ executing entities ( component s 1), key performance indicators, including the 
ability of the GP to replace such entities if they do not perform.  
28. The iTAP welcomes the involvement of GGGI in this proposal given its extensive work 
with target country governments in policy and international cooperation. GGGI has a strong 
track record of driving legislative, administrative, and regulatory change in diverse developing 
country contexts employing a green growth and climate responsive lens, with over 300 policies 
adopted across Asia, Africa, Europe, L atin America and the C aribbean , Middle East and North 
Africa , and the Pacific. GGGI has accumulated a variety of working experience and built -up, close 
ties with key ministries (incl uding  national designated authorities in the programme’s target 
countries) as the proven delivery partner for the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support 
Programme , which supports the target governments’ capacity, including the regulatory set -up 
and policy design.  
29. However, GGGI does not  currently  have a strong  track record of incubating companies,  
which scale up and raise substantial capital to be able to meet the enormous climate challenges 
of the target countries. GGGI has a n average annual total budget of USD 100 m illion  (only a 
fraction of which is for incubation), but it has nonetheless been able to mobilize USD 3 million  of 
additional capital into the companies it has trained and incubated. Alt hough the iTAP 
acknowledges that companies take time to scale up and  attract further capital, it is difficult to 
evaluate GGGI’s performance.  
30. NHIS and NH ARP (as the GP of CTF)  on the other hand, have such experience and are 
the right party to directly determine what their pipeline should look like.  Rather than go 
through an intermediary, NHIS and NH ARP  can hire directly flexible , country -specific 
incubators and technical assistance specialists and/or combine with building out their own 
incubation team.   Moreover, it would be more cost and time efficient, outcome  targeted, and 
speciali zed to have the GP in charge of component 1 than going through a large international 
company such as GGGI with large overhead costs, and with out strong  track record in choosing 
and scaling local ventures companies which become commercially successful.


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 117 
 
 
31. Lastly, having the EE of the incubation of the pipeline (component 1) as a different entity 
to the main Fund  (CTF)  (component 3)  as a pre -ordained set up by KDB may be too inflexible: 
These two EEs  have  never worked together, they have different commercial orientation s, 
requiring  the two very different organizations to understand each other’s cultures, constantly 
coordinate investment strategies which will change and adapt with time, requiring unnecessary 
complex coordination via the SMUs and KDB .  This l evel of coordination and alignment has 
undoubtedly increase d the level of GCF capital/fees  required to run this program .  This decrease 
in efficiency and effectiveness would have been underst andable  if the trade -off was that 
Component 1 was run by a nimble, commercial,  and deeply experienced entity with a  track 
record in finding and incubating the right companies for technology transfer and scale.   
III. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
32. The proposed KDB programme has been one of the most ambitious programmes the 
iTAP has evaluated  and the iTAP  congratulates  KDB for the programme’s  most challenging and 
inspirational  aims . The iTAP welcome s the significant changes in design and execution of the 
proposed programme  for that proposed at B.36 , which make this a solid proposal.  
33. The iTAP commends the AE for improving the programme since its initial review during 
the lead -up to B.36. It welcomes the improved focus associated with reducing the number of 
sectors and most importantly the engagement of a fund manager (NH ARP) with relevant 
experience for component 3 ( although that experience includes being a fund manager of USD 15 
million as opposed to the current proposed fund (CTF) of USD 200 million).  
34. Despite the above -mentioned welcome improvements, there are significant items from 
the B.36 assessment which were not addressed – and getting the design of the programme, its 
execution and , especially,  the accountability of its executing entities right is particularly 
important because of the importance of the role of GCF in supporting and ensuring the success of technology -transfer initiatives.  
35. The programme is still very complex and high risk with multiple executing entities 
which have never worked together – all held together by an AE whose main role will be 
coordinating a complex and expensive institutional set -up which could have been simplified by 
designing component 1 around the GP . The GP could have used the USD 8.5 m illion  in grants to 
hire the support they need  directly  & flexibly , rather than having GGGI be an intermediary. In 
this regard, t he proposed programme risk s being too expensive, inefficient,  and ineffective. To 
mitigate this concern, we have outlined a recommended condition below , which  attempts to 
address potential non-performance  by GGGI . This condition is very similar to the already existing 
performance -based condition put on NH ARP by GCF to disburse capital based on fundraising 
milestones.  The iTAP’s additional  condition would similarly ensure that the incubation capital is 
awar ded to GGGI is disbursed in three tranches, conditional on them incubating a minimum viable 
percentage (30%) of investable companies for CTF , evaluated every two years . It aims to ensure 
that the EE of C omponent  1 performs in terms of KPIs agreed before they receive further capital.   
36. In summary, such a visionary concept needs to marry complexity and innovation in 
goals on the one hand with simplicity, focus and deep expertise in implementation to mitigate 
execution risk. The diversity of South Asian markets in terms of capacity to adopt technology and the varied profile of the companies within each market, the broad spectrum of technolo gies 
and sectors, the regulatory frameworks and licensing regimes, the many stakeholders involved, 
and the multitude of executing and advisory agencies t o the programme highlight a high 
executing risk to this pr oposed programme in terms of fundraising, investment execution and 
achieving the stated climate outcomes.


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 15/Rev.01  
Page 118 
 
 
37. As such, the iTAP recommends that the Board approve this f unding proposal conditional 
on: 
(a) Condition to be met prior to the first Disbursement of GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds in 
respect of Component 1:  
(i) Delivery to GCF by the Accredited Entity, in form and substance satisfactory to 
the GCF Secretariat, of evidence that the amount of disbursement requested is 
not more than one third (1/3) of the total GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds 
budgeted for Component 1 of the Funded Activity;  
(b) Condition to be met prior to the second Disbursement of GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds 
in respect of Component 1:  
(i) Delivery to GCF by the Accredited Entity, in form and substance satisfactory to 
the GCF Secretariat, of evidence that the amount of disbursement requested is 
not more than one third (1/3) of the total GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds 
budgeted for Component 1 of the Funded Activity;  
(ii) Delivery to GCF by the Accredited Entity, in form and substance satisfactory to 
the GCF Secretariat, of evidence that 30% of the beneficiaries under Component 
1 meet the investment criteria of the CTF Fund and assessed through 
Components 1 and 2 as having high potential to make the CTF Fund investment pipeline;  
(c) Condition to be met prior to the third Disbursement of GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds in 
respect of Component 1:  
(i) Delivery to GCF by the Accredited Entity, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of evidence that 30% of the beneficiaries under Component 
1 (excluding those beneficiaries counted to meet the condition for the second 
Disbursement) meet the investment criteria of the CTF Fund and assessed 
through Components 1 and 2 as having high potential to make the CTF Fund 
investment pipeline;  
38. Include the following covenant in the Funded Activity Agreement:  If the Accredited 
Entity has not satisfied the conditions for second or third Disbursement of GCF Non -
Reimbursable Funds in respect of Component 1, respectively, within two (2) years of the date of 
the previous disbursement of GCF Non -Reimbursable Funds i n respect of Component 1, it shall 
consult with the GCF Secretariat and submit a restructuring proposal in respect of Component 1.


---
*Page 119*
---

  
       GCF/B .39/02 /Add.15/Rev.01  
Page 119 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP240 ) 
Proposal name:  Collaborative R&DB for Promoting the Innovation of Climate 
Technopreneurship  
Accredited entity:  Korea Development  Bank  (KDB)  
Country/(ies):  Cambodia, Indonesia, L ao PDR, Philippines, Vietnam  
Project/Programme size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
AE appreciates iTAP assessment that grasp ed the programme’s core theme and unique 
features  and considered the paradigm shift potential as the most significant factor . 
Paradigm shift potential  
AE appreciates iTAP comments that will be carefully considered  for the proper programme’s 
implementation.  
Sustainable development potential  
AE appreciates iTAP assessment  that recognised various kinds of co -benefits, which will be 
maximised for the NOL countries’ leap . 
Needs of the recipient  
AE appreciates iTAP assessment that paid attention to the needs of the five individual 
countries. With consideration on your comments, AE shall optimise the Funded Activities in 
line with the needs as much as possible.   
Country ownership  
AE appreciates iTAP assessment that recognised a strong country ownership based  designing 
and implementation plan of the programme.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
AE appreciates iTAP assessment that considered the execution of Component 1, willing to 
take recommendations and comments into account.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:


---
*Page 120*
---

  
       GCF/B .39/02 /Add.15/Rev.01  
Page 120 
 
 
 AE appreciates iTAP ’ consideration and efforts tha t all aim at the programme success.  With 
regards to proposed conditions, we shall consult with the Secretariat for specific and practical 
arrangements.


---
*Page 121*
---

0 March 2024  
Gender documentation for FP2 40
GENDER ASSESSMENT & GENDER ACTION PLAN 
COLLABORATIVE R&DB  PROGRAMME 
FOR PROMOTING  THE INNOVATION OF  
CLIMATE TECHNOPRENEURSHIP


---
*Page 122*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
1 
 
Table of Contents  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  1 
1. INTRODUCTION  2 
2. METHODOLOGY  6 
3. COUNTRY SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT  7 
CAMBODIA  7 
Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Cambodia  7 
General Situation Analysis of Cambodia  8 
Climate Change and Gender in Cambodia  10 
Climate Technopreneurship and Gender in Cambodia  12 
Priority Sectors and Gender Implications in Cambodia  14 
INDONESIA  16 
Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Indonesia  16 
General Situational Analysis of Indonesia  17 
Climate Change and Gender in Indonesia  19 
Priority Sectors and Gender Implications in Indonesia  22 
LAO  PDR  23 
Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Lao PDR  23 
General Situation Analysis of Lao PDR  24 
Climate Change and Gender in Lao PDR  27 
Priority Sectors and Gender Implications in Lao PDR  29 
PHILIPPINES  29 
Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of the Philippines  29 
General Situation Analysis of the Philippines  33 
Climate Change and Gender in the Philippines  37 
STEM and Higher Education, and Gender in the Philippines  39 
Priority Sectors and Gender Implications in the Philippines  40 
VIETNAM  40 
Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Vietnam  40 
General Situation Analysis of Vietnam  42 
Climate change and Gender in Vietnam  43 
Business Entrepreneurship and Gender Dynamics in Vietnam  46 
Priority Sectors and Gender Implicatio ns in Vietnam  48 
4. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  49 
5. GENDER ACTION PLAN  53 
APPENDIX 1. PRELIMINARY STAKEHOLDER MAPPING BY COUNTRY  59 
APPENDIX 2. GENDER PROFILING FORM (GPF)  63 
APPENDIX 3.  SIMPLIFIED GENDER ANALYSIS (GA) & GENDER ACTION PLAN (GAP) 
(GENERAL TEMPLATE)  65 
APPENDIX 4. STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION ACTIVITIES  79 
APPENDIX 5. SECTOR/TECHNOLOGY -SPECIFIC GUIDELINE S FOR GENDER 
MAINSTREAMING FOR CTF ENTERPRISES/PROJECTS  80


---
*Page 123*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
2 
 
1. Introduction  
Programme Overview  
The Collaborative R&DB  Programme for Promoting the Innovation of Climate Technopreneurship is a 
multicounty project aiming to support entrepreneurs with climate technology -enabled solutions that will 
accelerate the low carbon and climate resilient transition across Southeast As ia, underpinned by the 
success of pilots in Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, the Philippines and Vietnam. Comprised of four key 
components . Components 1 (Country Driven Climate Acceleration Preparedness) and Component 4 
(Technical Assistance) focus on acceleration readiness and the ecosystem for local climate technology 
firms, respectively. Components 2 (Global Acceleration for Climate Technop reneurs) and Component 
3 (Climate Technopreneurship Fund, CTF hereafter) are oriented more towards investment -ready JVs. 
(For more details of the proposed Programme, see the Funding Proposal.)  
Gender Assessment: Objectives  
This gender assessment aims to p rovide a rapid assessment of the gender situation in Cambodia, 
Indonesia, Laos, the Philippines and Vietnam ; identifying gender  equality and women’s empowerment  
constraints, opportunities  and recommendations  to ensure gender inclusiveness and gender 
empowe rment through the proposed Programme. To do so, country -specific gender analyses were 
carried out in the backdrop of the related national legal and institutional framework: Through the desk 
reviews and a series of consultative meetings with the relevant key stakeholders (with gender specialists 
of KDB  (AE) and the GGGI (EE of the Component 1 and Component 4), representative s of NHIS and 
NH ARP  (EE of the Component 2 and Component 3) and other delivery partners (Acceleration 
Advisory Consortium gr oup for Component 2 of the  Programme)1, the general situation of gender equity, 
gender perspective on climate change and the country’s responses, climate technopreneurship  (or 
generally business entrepreneurship) , particularly of the women  were examined. This assessment also 
presents the gender landscape of identified priority sectors/technology that are likely to be funded 
through the Programme with their respective impacts on gender equality and empowerment, as well as 
promising intervention points throu gh the Programme design.  
This assessment also informed the development of the Gender Action Plan (GAP) for the Programme. 
GAP is an important implementation tool to mainstream the overall execution of the Programme in 
accordance with the GCF Gender Policy (2019).  
Key findings  
In a nutshell, the report finds that women and girls (esp. in remote rural areas) in all the five target 
countries, i.e. Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, the Philippines and Vietnam, are more vulnerable to 
climate change, disproportionally affected a nd, to a varying degree among the countries, largely isolated 
from the (climate and general) technology -based entrepreneurship ecosystem. Having said that, 
innovative scale -up of enterprises related to climate adaptation and mitigation technologies will be nefit 
women as much as men, if not higher, as they are more vulnerable to climate change -related challenges 
and risks. In general, sectors/technology areas that girls and women are either more employed (such as 
in agriculture, where female farmers are a ma jor (although mostly unrecognized and informal) 
workforce in the four countries except in the Philippines) or girls’ and women’s livelihood could be 
substantially improved through the Programme (such as water supply and wastewater management, 
climate -smart  agriculture , etc.) are areas that are strongly recommended for investment.  
In all five countries, the women ’s entrepreneurial ecosystem is limited to small and microenterprises. 
Compared with the ir male counterparts, women -led businesses and enterprises are often characterized 
by lower profitability and constitute in majority informal sectors. Access to formal credit systems is 
 
1 For overall governance structure of the Programme, pls see Figure: Governance Structure between Local and Global Components i n 
Section B.3 of the Funding Proposal of this proposed Programme.


---
*Page 124*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
3 
 
often limited due to the respective countries’ social and cultural norms and (in some locations) religious 
precepts. In some coun tries, STEM education often favours male students and technology -based 
entrepreneurship support are predominantly enjoyed by men.  
Nevertheless, there are signs of improvements: In Vietnam and the Philippines, more women are taking 
ICT and engineer careers , which had been dominated by men. In Lao PDR, women are leading agents 
for MSMEs in street vending and retailing businesses. Across the five countries’ women are active 
participants in the agricultural sector, whose rich know -hows and experiences need to be tapped for 
climate technology entrepreneurship in the agricultural  sector.  
Recommended Action Plan  
The Programme has an explicit goal of proactively inviting women climate technology and business 
entrepreneurs in the five countries and ensuring the funded JV activities shall clearly mainstream gender 
into their implementation process in line with the Gender Action Plan (GAP) of this Programme 
(Chapter 5 of this report).  
The f ollowing actions were integrated into the designs of the Programme:  
1) Gender Component in CTF ’s Investment Criteria  
The Programme prioritize s the “women -led enterprises/businesses” as CTF recipients  and the Fund’s 
Investment Criteria include “Gender Mainstreaming” Criteria , as follows:  
Table 1. CTF  Investment Criteria: Gender Component2  
9 Gender  
mainstreaming  [JV formation dimension]  
 
✓ At least 50% of the CTF -invested JVs are “Women -led JVs” that 
are defined in Condition 1 below, or alternatively ; 
✓ JVs are requested to prese nt a gender mainstreaming commitment 
plan (GMCP)  to the CTF.  
 
[Condition 1  “Women -led JV” Definition]  
It constitutes the following conditions . The conditions below will be screened 
from the selection process of local entrepreneurs. The women -led SME 
candidates shall be prioritized for selection. :  
▪ SMEs with at least 26% of the total capital is owned by women;  
▪ At least one woman participates on the Board of Directors 
and/or different types of boards or internal committees, such as 
ESG committees, among others (CEO, COO, CTO) , and/or;  
▪ SMEs with more than 30% of the workforce are female s3.  
 
2 For the full content of the CTF Investment Criteria, see Table  of the same title in Section B3 of the Funding Proposal of this Programme.  
3 CTF’s definition of the “women -led JV” is based on the IFC’s definition of “women owned enterprise,” according to which: “An 
enterprise qualifies as a woman -owned enterprise if it meets the following criteria:  
(A) ≥ 51% owned by woman/women; OR  
(B) ≥ 20% owned by woman/women; AND (i) has ≥ 1 woman as CEO/COO/President/Vice President; AND (ii) has ≥ 30% of the board of  
directors composed of women, where a board exists. “ (Source: International Finance Corporation (IFC), IFC’S Definitions of Targeted 
Sectors, available at: 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/industry_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/financial+institutions/priorities/ifcs+d efinitions+of
+targeted+sectors ).   
Vietnam has it s own definition of “Women -owned small and medium enterprises (SME)” as “an SME having one or more women owns at 
least 51% of its charter capital and at least a woman is the executive director of this enterprise. (Source: Law 04/2017/QH14  on assistance 
for small and medium sized enterprises, available at: https://vanbanphapluat.co/law -04-2017 -qh14 -on-assistance -for-small -and-medium -
sized -enterprises  ) In Lao PDR such definition has not been found. In the Philippines, I ndonesia and Cambodia, the above -referred IFC 
definition is being used. (Source:  HAWASME, Mekong Business Initiative, Women -owned Small and Medium -sized Enterprises in Viet 
Nam: Situation Analysis and Policy Recommendations, 2016, available at:  https://ww w.economica.vn/docs/publications -and-reports/17)


---
*Page 125*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
4 
 
  
✓ The above conditions shall be screened from the local SME 
selection process at Component 1. The women -owned SME 
candidates shall be prioritized for selection.  
 
[Condition 2]  The funded SMEs (esp. which do not meet the Condition 1 above), 
need to be ready to commit to gender mainstreaming. A proactive Gender 
mainstreaming commitment plan (GMCP)4 needs to be developed and 
presented as part of the application package to CTF.  
 
✓ Proactive measures for gender mainstreaming include, among 
others:  
▪ Set specific employment and (esp. high -value skill) training 
targets for girls and women  with concrete timelines.  
▪ Reflect gender inclusiveness in the design/business plans of 
the JV enterprises  (along the climate technology RD&B  
processes) by, e.g. intentionally targeting the female 
population as major beneficiaries or active agents of the 
enterprises.  
 
✓ At Component 2 (Acceleration Program), the candidate JV/SMEs 
will be provided, upon request, a customi sed guidance by the CTF 
gender expert (s) (as part of the Acceleration Advisory Consortium 
Group)  to establish GMCP.   
 
 
[CTF -funded Enterprise dimension]  
 
✓ All the CTF  investment JVs/activities are requested to develop 
concrete gender performance indicators and generate tangible 
gender -related results proven.  
 
✓ The minimum requirement for CTF -supported JV enterprises are: 
① Gender -disaggregated impacts to be presented, monitored and 
evaluated; ② A (simplified) Gender Assessment and Gender 
Action Plan(*) to be prepared, submitted as part of the CTF 
application packages . (*At minimum a standard format (Appendix 3 
of Annex 8)) need to be filled in and submitted.)  
 
✓ Overall g ender performance shall be monitored and evaluated 
throughout the JV implementation (Component 3) against the 
submitted GMCP and GAP.  
 
▪ Prioritisation scoring system for a winning gender -balanced 
portfolio  
▪ Higher gender scores will be weighted higher in selection and 
investment in cases where scores are identical in other criteria  
 
Given the varying circumstances across the five countries, through the consultation with the KDB and GGGI gender specialists,  it was 
agreed that the CTF’s definition shall be more relaxed than the IFC’s defi nition and also include the female employment components, to 
promote the women’s employment to the applicant JVs.  
4 The funded SMEs meeting the Condition 1 are also encouraged to develop and implement the GMCP. GMCP is to be presented as par t of 
the Simpl ified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template) esp. Section I -2 (Entity -level Gender 
Mainstreaming Commitment Plan).


---
*Page 126*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
5 
 
 
2) Gender -related Capacity Building & Technical Support  
Component 1 (Country Driven Acceleration Readiness) will profile the gender aspects against the 
above -presented 3 conditions for the CTF’s “women -led JV” definition (in Table 1 above.) of all the 
participating local firms in the five countries. All the app licant firms will be requested to prepar e gender 
profiling by the above -referred criteria. Those who are not meeting the “women -owned” firm status 
will be required to prepare gender  mainstreaming plan for the firm level. All the applicants for the CTF 
will also be required to establish JV/enterprise levels gender mainstreaming strategies and action plan 
(Gender Action Plan) through Component 2 (Global Acceleration for Collaborative RD&B) activities. 
The gender commitments by each of the applicant JVs shall be submitted as part of the CTF application 
package as an important component for the Fund’s investment decision -making in Component 3 (CTF). 
Component 4 (TA) shall focus on nurturing and supporting the creation of enriched tech 
entrepreneurship ecosystem development from a gender inclusiveness perspective. Women in 
Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, the Philippines, and Vietnam need to be given opportunities to become 
equal partners for climate technology innovation and entrepreneurship, to empower themselves a nd 
benefit from the Programme as active participants be them  airect recipient s of the Programme support, 
primary employees and technicians, or the primary beneficiaries of the Programme through evolvement 
of the funded activities.  
The National Climate Ent repreneur Accelerator Programme (N -CEAPs) (Component 1 of the 
Programme) will ensure the local women -led entrepreneurs to strengthen their readiness to participate 
in a JV partnership with a global entrepreneur(s) (Component 2) and execute the climate tech nology JV 
enterprises through the CTF support (Component 3). All the applicant JV enterprises will be required 
to carry out a gender profiling and prepare and execute a gender mainstreaming commitment plan 
(GMCP).  
Country Sustainable Management Unit (SMUs) in the respective five countries and a gender specialist 
of the CTF (its Environmental & Social and Gender Compliance Team, ESGCT) shall provide capacity 
building and technical support for each JV participant to p repare their gender action plan and implement 
them in line with the CTF’s Gender Action Plan (GAP) (which is in accordance with the GCF Gender 
Policy (2019)5) woman entrepreneurs and their climate technology enterprises/businesses in the five 
countries would be empowered to enjoy rare opportunities to spearhead in the global level climate 
technology innovation, upscale their businesses beyond their location and countries to the ASEAN level 
in the long term.  
  
 
5 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/ge nder-policy


---
*Page 127*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
6 
 
2. Methodology  
This Gender Assessment is largely based on desktop research  and close consultation with the key 
stakeholders including the Accredited Entity (KDB) and the Executing Entities (GGGI for Component 
1 and Component 4, and Representatives of  NHIS and NH ARP  for Component 2 and Compone nt 3), 
as well as potential delivery partners (Acceleration Advisory Consortium group for Component 2 of the 
Programme).6 Following are some of the key consultation activities carried out in relation to the GA 
and GAP preparation:  
Assessment: Analysis and Structure  
The f ollowing sections include each of the five countries’ legal and institutional framework  and 
development analysis related to gender equality  and women’ s empowerment . Areas with gaps and high 
potential for women’s participation ar e also highlighted with a view to identify effective intervention 
points to maximize benefits to the women. This paper also views the issue of climate change 
vulnerability, climate technopreneurship (or business entrepreneurship in general, in case the 
information on the former is lacking) from a gender perspective and identif ies root causes for the 
persistent gender inequality as well as signs of progress in the five countries.  
Country assessment has been made through a dynamic process: A series of consul tation meetings with 
KDB (AE), Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI, EE for Components 1 and 4) and NHIS and NH 
ARP (EE for Components 2 and 3), and potential delivery partners (Acceleration Advisory Consortium 
group for Component 2 of theProgramme. All the  EEs of the Programme Components were regularly 
consulted through call conferences and face -to-face meetings. Data have been gathered and opinions 
were sought from the inception state of the assessment preparation. Extensive discussions have been 
made with  the GGGI Gender specialist and gender team throughout the preparation of this report, who 
have also coordinated country stakeholders in the review and feed backing processes (See Appendix 4 
below for detailed activities carried out). As EE of Components 1  and Component 4, GGGI will oversee 
executing GAP for the respective components targeting girls and women in the five countries (and 
beyond to ASEAN level in the future through the rollout.)  
The last section of each country assessment includes the gender a nalysis of some of the key 
sectors/technology that have been identified by each country  for funding support through GGGI’s  pre-
feasibility study (country demand analysis): Potential effects of the investment on gender perspective 
and feasible measures for gender inclusiveness and empowerment are recommended. In the end, the 
Study presents key recommendations for integration i nto the Gender Action Plan (GAP) of the 
Programme.  
 
  
 
6 For overall governance structure of the Programme, pls see Figure: Governance Structure between Local and Global Components i n 
Section B.3 of the Funding Proposal of this proposed Programme.


---
*Page 128*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
7 
 
3. Country Specific Assessment  
CAMBODIA  
● Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Cambodia  
International Agreements on Women's Rights. Cambodia has enacted several international 
agreements and signed several international declarations related to violence against men, women,  and 
children. Starting from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), Cambodia ratified the 
United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW) in 1992 and ratified its Optional Protocol in 2010, the U N Declaration on the Elimination 
of Violence Against Women (1993), UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People (UNDRIP) 
(2017), and the UN Security Council Resolutions (SCR) 1325, 1820 and 1888 related to women, peace 
and security. At the regional le vel, the country signed the Declaration of the Advancement of Women 
in the ASEAN Region in 1988, which focuses on the promotion and implementation of women’s 
equitable and effective participation in all fields and at all levels, and the Declaration on the Elimination 
of Violence Against Women in the ASEAN Region (2012).  
Institutional Arrangements.  For the promotion of gender equity, the government of Cambodia 
established  the Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MOWA), the Cambodia National Council for Women, 
the Te chnical Working Group on Gender (since 2004 and chaired by MOWA, with the UNDP and the 
Japan International Cooperation Agency as co -facilitators), several Gender Mainstreaming Action 
Groups in the government line ministries, and Women and Children’s Consul tative Committees 
(WCCCs) at all levels of subnational government.7  
At the national level, Cambodia has made progress in addressing domestic gender inequality through 
legislative initiatives, national action plans, education programs, and establishing re sources for 
prevention and response. Nowadays, the main components of the country’s framework related to 
women’s rights include:  
- The Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia states that “all forms of discrimination against 
women shall be abolished. The exp loitation of women in employment shall be prohibited. Men 
and women are equal in all fields , especially with respect to marriage and family matters…” 
(Article 45)  
- The 2005 Law on Domestic Violence and the Protection of Victims   
- The Law on the Suppression of Human Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation in 2008  
- The National Action Plan on Prevention Violence Against Women II 2014 -2018 (NAPVAWII). 
It was developed and app roved by the Royal Government of Cambodia to provide multi -
institutional operational plans addressing domestic violence, rape and sexual violence, and 
violence against women with increased risk  
- The National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2019 -20238, wh ich includes a specific 
section on “Enhancing Implementation of Population Policy and Gender Equity”, in the 
national category outcome of Human Resource Development  
- The Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency Phase IV 2018 -
2023.  It is the “Socio -Economic Policy Agenda” of the Political Platform of the Royal 
Government of the Sixth Legislature of the National Assembly and specifically mentions 
 
7 WCCCs were established by a decree of the Ministry of Interior  in December 2009.  
8 National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2019 -2023 - OD Mekong Datahub. (2019). Retrieved from Opendevelopmentcambodia.net 
website: https://data.opendevelopmentcambodia.net/laws_record/national -strategic -development -plan-nsdp -2019 -2023.


---
*Page 129*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
8 
 
gender equality, in the first rectangle on Human Resource Development, enhancing the nee d 
for mainstream women ’s social -economic situation and strengthening  their role in the society.9  
- The Neary Rattanak strategic plan IV 2019 -2023 is a five -year strategic plan for gender equality 
and women’s empowerment in Cambodia. This plan outlined MOWA 's central role in 
assessing, reforming, and implementing policy to: mainstreaming gender in development 
policies and plans in all sectors and at all levels; mainstreaming women's entrepreneurship 
through expanded education, technical, and vocational train ing for women; and uplifting social 
morality, the values of women, and the Cambodian family through investments in gender equity 
and strengthened partnerships.  
Women and Climate Change. The Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan  2014 -2023  includes the 
objective to reduce sectoral, regional, gender vulnerability and health risks related to climate change 
impacts. Cambodia’s  MOWA has formed a Gender and Climate Change Committee  in 2016 with the 
Asian Development Bank’s assistance10, which ha s the key role to gather information on gender and 
climate change, conduct studies on the impact of climate change on women and children, and build 
climate change capacity in the ministry’s departments. In line with the updated Cambodia’s Nationally 
Determ ined Contribution (NDC), all Ministries recognized the priority of targeting women’s 
participation in climate action, by pursuing ranges from 15% to 70%.  
In collaboration with relevant ministries,  such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisherie s 
(MAFF), the Ministry of Environment (MOE), MOWA facilitates a mechanism  for gender 
mainstreaming with climate change nexus at policy levels11. Political commitments in this climate 
change -gender nexus are reflected in the National Strategic Plan on Gender and Climate Change 2014 -
2023, Master Plan for Gender and Climate Change (2018 -2030)12 and Action Plan on Gender and 
Climate Change 2019 -2023.  In particular, the National Strategic Plan on Gender and Climate Change 
2014 -2023 proposes policy measures covering both adaptation and mitigation, cross -cutting agendas 
and institutional, organizational and human capacity development, research and develo pment, financing, 
monitoring and evaluation.13  
Although Cambodia has been working hard to reduc e gender gap in diverse sectors, there remain s a 
way to go. According to the United Nations, with an effort, gender gaps in education in Cambodia has 
been reduc ed. However, with the advent of the COVID -19 pandemic, progress has been slowed down 
or in some cases reversed as in the case of gender wage gaps and increased gender -based violence. 
Traditional bias  of positioning women in i nformal, under -paid or unpaid w ork such as domestic and 
care work  has been reported to be deepened14.   
● General Situation Analysis of Cambodia  
Cambodia is a predominantly rural  society, with  a population of approximately 16 million people (2019), 
whose 51.19% are women,15 with only 39.4% living in urban areas. Over the past decades, Cambodia’s 
gross domestic product has increased at a remarkable rate reaching 7% in the period of 2018 and 2019 . 
However, Covid -19 cris is hit the country’s economy hard and its GDP decreased by -3.1% in 2020.  
The economy of the country is heavily reliant on tourism, agriculture, the garment industry, construction, 
 
9 Rectangular Strategy Phase 4 of the Royal Government of Cambodia - OD Mekong Datahub. (2020). Retrieved from 
Opendevelopmentcambodia.net website: https://data.opendevelopmentcambodia.net/laws_record/rectangular -strategy -phrase -4-of-the-royal -
government -of-cambodia .  
10 Ministry of Women Affair (2020) Retrieved from the official website: https://www.mowa.gov.kh/en/det ail/5542  
11 https://ncsd.moe.gov.kh/sites/default/files/2019 -
06/MASTER%20PLAN%20ON%20GENDER%20AND%20CLIMATE%20CHANGE.pdf  & 
https://www.uncclearn.org/wp -content/uploads/library/final -digital_cambodia_report.pdf  
12 Cambodia National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD) (2018). Retrieved from the official website: 
https://n csd.moe.gov.kh/sites/default/files/2019 -06/MASTER%20PLAN%20ON%20GENDER%20AND%20CLIMATE%20CHANGE.pdf  
13 FAO (2021). Retrieved from Fao.org website: https://www.fao.org/faolex/results/details/en/c/LEX -FAOC 182425/.  
14 https://cambodia.un.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Gender%20Deep%20Dive%20 -%20CCA%20Cambodia_V6_010322_LQ.pdf  
15 Cambodia National Institute of Statistics. (2019). Cambodia Socio -Economic Survey 2019 -20. Retrieved from Nis.gov.kh website: 
https: //www.nis.gov.kh/index.php/en/14 -cses/86 -cambodia -socia -ecomonic -survey -2019 -20.


---
*Page 130*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
9 
 
and the real estate sector. Trade restrictions and  international travel bans heavily have affected the 
overall economy.   
With the higher portion of the population hav ing been vaccinated, COVID -19 confirmed cases have 
significantly dropped  from the end of 202116. However, there are up-and-downs during 2022. Still , the 
confirmed patients are few. As the global COVID -19 situation has been eased, Cambodia’s major 
industries such as garment, travel goods, and footwear exports have been resilient. In addition, tourism 
also has been doing well since la te 2021. In that sense, the World Bank predicts 4.8% of economic 
growth in 202217. In turn, besides the influence of COVID -19, due to the global economic downturn, 
declining in exports is projected, and economic growth  in 2023 is not projected to be as good as in 
2022 .18  
Cambodia scored 0. 593 on the Human Development Index (HDI) in 2021 , falling into the medium 
human development group with a rank of 14 8 (2020)19.  In the same year of 2021, the  Gender 
Development Index (GDI) , which measures gender gaps in human development achievements on health, 
knowledge and living standards,  classifies Cambodia as a medium equality (Group 3 countries)20 with 
a score of 0.926 . The OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019 (SIGI)21 which focus es on the 
discrimination against women in the  formal and informal laws, social norms, and practices, Cambodia 
ranked “low” in terms of gender discrimination in social institutions (score 0.3). In particular,  the 
country ranked high on discrimination in the “restricted civil liberties” (41%).22 
Gender inequalities in Cambodia is also reflected in governance, education , and employment. This is 
largely due to (among others ), gender  roles, culture /religious /social norms . 
Gender equality in the labour market in Cambodia  has been fluctuating over time and worsened since 
2020: the female labour force participation rate (against male labour force)  has fallen from 88% in 2019 
to 86% in 2020 and 2021 respectively23. Women  in Cambodia continue to  face a gender pay gap with 
an income per capita 3,697$ for women and 4,822$ for men.24  Considering a large portion of women’s 
labour  is not captured in official data as most of the  women’s work remains in informal sector and 
temporary types of employment, the reality may be even starker. Women are mostly employed in the 
primary sector, with a progressive increase in the secondary and tertiary. Women represent 74% of the 
agricultural  workforce while they own only 15.4% of the recorded agricultural land area (2017 
Cambodia Socio -Economic Survey).25 Women also spend significant time on unpaid domestic and care 
work, which affects the time available to engage in paid work. Marital status  is the most important 
 
16 WHO (2022). COVID -19 Joint WHO -MOH Situation Report 90. Retrieved from https://www.who.int/cambodia/internal -publications -
detail/covid -19-joint-who-moh-situation -report -90 
17 World Bank (2022). Retrieved from website: https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press -release/2022/12/07/cambodia -s-economy -is-
recovering -but-could -face-headwinds -world -bank -report -
says#:~:text=The%20World%20Bank%20forecasts%20economic,Update%20for%20Decembe r%202022%20said.  
18 Europa (2021). Retrieved from website: https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/publication/cambodia -economic -update -living -covid -
special -focus -impact -covid -19-pandemic -learning_en  
19 The reported country ranking is only available in the year 2020 latest.  
20 What is the advantage of grouping countries into five GDI groups instead of ranking them according to the absolute deviation f rom parity? 
| Human Development Reports. (2020). Retrieved January 3, 2022, from Undp.org website: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/what -advantage -
grouping -countries -five-gdi-groups -instead -ranking -them -according -absolute .  
21 The SIGI covers four dimensions of discriminatory social institutions, spanning major socio -economic areas that affect women’s lives: 
Discrimination in the family; Restricted physical integrity; Restricted access to productive and financial resources; and  Restricted civil 
liberties. https://www.genderindex.org/sigi/ .  
22 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019. Available at: https://www.genderindex.org/ranking/ .  
23 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.CACT.FM.ZS?locations=KH . The graph indicates that the female to male labour 
participation ratio had been more equal prior to 2000, which ranged between 94% and 96%. It is not clear the main reason for significant fall 
since 2000s. This may be due to the data accuracy and sufficiency (i.e., technical issue in data collection) or any other sub stantial factors.   
24 UNDP. (2021). Gender Development Index. Retriev ed from https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf.  
25 ADB. Cambodia Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development Sector Assessment, Strategy, and Road Map. (2021). Retrie ved 
from https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/718806/cambodia -agriculture -rural -development -road-map.pdf .


---
*Page 131*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
10 
 
determinant of women’s wage employment, given the fact that married women are 38% less likely to 
be in paid employment.26  
The literacy rate for the population aged 15 years and older in Cambodia is slowly increasing reaching 
84% in 202127, while inequality persists in these numbers with 8 8% of male s reaching the adult literacy 
rate28 compared to 80% of females (20 21)29.  
Physical and sexual violence against women is reported to be persisting. As indicated in the Cambodia 
Demographic and Health Survey 2014, 20% of women aged 15 -49 were exposed to physical violence 
at least once in their lifetime, and 6% of them had experien ced sexual violence at least once since they 
were born. Further concerns come from sex trafficking, in the 2018 Global slavery index reported that 
Cambodia has over 260,000 victims of human and sex trafficking, including minors.  
Because of persistent gend er inequalities, COVID -19 had a disproportionate impact on women and girls 
in Cambodia. Especially lives of Cambodian women  who generally earn less, save less, and hold 
insecure and informal jobs, or live near and in  poverty have been worsened by the pande mic. The ability 
of being engaged in paid work has also been  constrained by the closure of schools  during the pandemic 
spread in 2020 and 2021  along with an increased demand for women’s unpaid care responsibilities.  
During the same period , education qualit y for girl children and women was equal especially in rural 
areas due to the gender digital divide, with women’s and girls’ more limited access to the Internet. 
Restricted movements such as quarantine, isolation,  and closed schools during the peak of the pandemic 
were reported to  have increase d the  risk of child abuse , gender -based violence and sexual exploitation 
globally. Women and girls in Cambodia also face d escalating risks of domestic violence due to tensions 
in the hou sehold from food and economic insecurity.30 
● Climate Change and Gender in Cambodia  
Cambodia is particularly vulnerable to climate change, with variable and extreme weather patterns such 
as severe rainfalls and droughts, ranking 12th most climate -vulnerable country in the Climate Risk 
Index from 1999 -2018.31 The estimated loss and damage from climate change was 1.5 billion dollars in 
2015 alone, forcing many households into a cycle of debt caused by borrowing money as a coping 
strategy during natural calamities and emergencies.    
Women  in Cambodia  are increasingly seen as more vulnerable than men to the impacts o f climate 
change because of their connection to poverty and  higher  dependence on natural resource s. Women, 
especially in times of crisis and post -crisis, also end up being overburdened by the responsibility of 
caring for their family members, including chi ldren and the elderly.32 
Following are some of the general snapshots of the Cambodian women’s vulnerability to climate change 
from the perspective of the four major sectors, i.e., agriculture, renewable energy, water and waste 
management . Thus,  proactive gender mainstreaming in these sectors is expected to enhance women’s 
resilience to climate change.  
Women and Agriculture.  Climate disasters h ave been found to be particularly damaging to the 
agricultural sector, rural communities, and therefore rural women, which represents 74% of the 
 
26 The Gender Wage Gap in Cambodia | UNDP in Cambodia. (2021). Retrieved fro m UNDP website: 
https://www.kh.undp.org/content/cambodia/en/home/library/the -gender -wage -gap-in-cambodia.html .  
27 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS?locations=KH   
28 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.MA.ZS?locations=KH   
29 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.FE.ZS?locations=KH   
30 Gender Equality and COVID -19. (2020). Retrieved October 24, 2021, from Sweden Abroad website: 
https://www.swedenabroad.se/fr/ambassade/cambodia -phnom -penh/current/ news/gender -equality -and-covid -19/.  
31 Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., Schäfer, L., & Winges, M. (2018). GLOBAL CLIMATE RISK INDEX 2020. Retrieved from 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/20 -2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf .  
32 Cambodia Women’s Resilience Index. (2019, December 23). Retrieved from ActionAid Cambodia website: 
https://cambodia.actionaid.org/publications/2019/cambodia -womens -resilience -index -2019#downloads .


---
*Page 132*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
11 
 
agricultural workforce and produce 80% of Cambodia’s food.33 Agriculture and natural resources are 
the primary sources of income for most women in the country. Between 1996 and 2013, floods damaged 
67% of all the paddy fields in Cambodia, while drought caused a 31% loss of the total crop during the 
same period. Patriarchal gender norms in Cambodia tend to create better opportunities for men in 
commercial or higher -income agricultural activities. 1 out of 5 rural households is accounted for as 
female -headed households. They are reported to be facing significant challenges  in obtaining irrigation 
water and agricultural land34.  
Vulnerability of Cambodian rural women , esp ecially  rural female -headed households,  has been 
worsened by their limited capacity and opportunities to diversify agricultural practices and to lessen 
dependency on climate -sensitive natural resources. One of the reasons for Cambodian r ural women’s 
limited coping capacity is t heir limited access to knowledge over new agricultural production and post -
production techniques and technologies  compared with their male counterparts .  Furthermore, disaster 
prediction and preparedness information are often not shared with the female members of the rural 
communit ies in Cambodia , reducing their chances of adaptation and, in some cases, survival. There is 
a clear need to capacitate and emp ower Cambodian rural women to be better equipped with the 
knowledge and skills for climate -resilient agricultur e as well as disaster preparedness.  
Women and Water.  Sustainable and reliable water supply and sanitation services remain scarce in 
Cambodia’s r ural areas. Only 11% of rural homes had access to piped water in 2017, even though  73% 
of urban  households had improved water supply. Only 56% of rural households had access to improved 
sanitation, and about 41% of rural residents still practice open defec ation, which can cause diarrhea  and 
other public health problems.35  Urban -rural divide in access to basic drinking water services and safely 
managed drinking water services are  also stark in Cambodia . As of 2018, w hile about 90% of urban 
population can access drinking water services, and 56% of them to managed drinking water services, 
only about 65% of the rural population has access to drinking water services , and only 1 7.6% to 
managed drinking water services respectively36.  
Data on mortality rate attributed to unsafe water, unsafe sanitation and lack of hygiene is not available 
in Cambodia. Nevertheless, shortage and unclean water provision affects girls and women more 
severely. Lack of sanitation facilities for girls and women, which makes them sharing facilities with 
men and boys (or having to travel to remote outer locations for defecation) increases the risk of abuse 
and assaults, endangering their personal safety. Women and girls also have specific hygien e needs, 
without which women and girls would risk health hazards.  
The impacts of drought, flood, sea -level rise, and extreme weather conditions have a significant effect 
on ecosystems and water supply, degrading natural resources while imposing severe con sequences for 
mental health and human wellbeing.  In general , the lack of accessible water nearby also burdens girl 
children and women as they are culturally responsible for fetching water. This will demand more time 
and physical labour  from girls and wome n37. 
The increased weather variability has the highest impact on vulnerable people and women, causing the 
water supply infrastructure to be destroyed, resulting in a loss of water resources and changes in water 
 
33 ADB. Cambodia Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development Sector A ssessment, Strategy, and Road Map. (2021). Retrieved 
from https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/718806/cambodia -agriculture -rural -development -road-map.pdf . . According to 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (MAFF), 64 percent of women in Cambodia are involved in 
agriculture. ( https://asiafoundation.org/2019/12/04/water -gender -and-poverty -in-cambodias -stung -chinit -watershed/ )  
34 https://asiafoundation.org/2019/12/04/water -gender -and-poverty -in-cambodias -stung -chinit -watershed/   
35 ADB. (2019, September 30). Help Cambodi a Expand Access to Water Supply, Sanitation Services. Retrieved from Asian Development 
Bank website: https://www.adb.org/news/adb -help-cambodia -expand -access -water -supply -sanitation -services.  
36 https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world -development -indicators   
37 As women are specifically responsible for water in the home, the Ministry of Rural Development of Cambodia is training women to repair 
wells and promote local sanitation. While these measures are important, they largely support women in serving the home an d do not increase 
women’s economic independence or capacity. (Water, Gender, and Poverty in Cambodia’s Stung Chinit Watershed, 2019)


---
*Page 133*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
12 
 
quality, while droughts affect freshwater sec urity.38 Improving  access to modern industrially processed 
water service to remote rural areas will significantly benefit female rural farmers  extending proper water 
and sanitation infrastructure  in urban slum areas would significantly enhance the quality of life and 
even survival of the low-income households and especially girls and women in slum areas.  
Women and Waste Management.  The waste sector is responsible for approximately 2.1% of GHG 
emission s in Cambodia, a s of 2016. Solid waste and wastewater management is an ongoing challenge 
in the country with increasing levels of waste generation. Waste composition is also changing with an 
increasing share of non -degradable waste such as plastics, metals, and electronic  waste. There is a need 
for additional waste segregation, treatment and reuse infrastructure and management systems. Rapid 
economic and urban development, combined with a growing middle class, has had a substantial impact 
on waste generation in Cambodia's major cities and waste collection and management is increasingly 
recognized as a major issue in the country. Currently, households , local companies and factories 
frequently dispose of their waste by burning it or dumping it in public places, streams, and d eserted 
locations, posing public health threats and soil, water and other environmental pollution risks.  
While there is a general lack of data on the actual amount of recycled waste in Cambodia, recycling 
activities of limited scale are observed in Phnom P enh. Several private companies are exploring the 
business potential targeting both organic and inorganic waste. Both men and women have a low level 
of awareness about  the waste sector and recycling.39   
Informal female workers as garbage collectors  and dismantlers  in urban areas, such as Phnom Penh, are 
the key actors in waste recycling in a sector largely lacking central organization.40 While this provides 
previous income generation opportunities to low-income  Cambodia women41, lack of se gregation of 
toxic and hazardous materials, and unregulated unhygienic recycling practices pose serious threats to 
occupational safety and health. Only a limited amount of recyclable waste is collected nationwide, and 
domestic recycling activities in Cambo dia are limited due to the lack of recycling industry, recycling 
infrastructures and a market for recyclable materials and recycled products. Therefore, some of the 
recyclable wastes and materials are exported to neighbouring  countries for recycling purpos es. 
● Climate Tech nopreneurship and Gender in Cambodia  
Cambodia’s entrepreneurship ecosystem is behind the lower middle -income average as well as 
Cambodia’s ASEAN peers, globally ranking 113th out of 137 countries in the 2018 Global 
Entrepreneurship Index (GEI).42  
Given the relatively recent development of climate tech nopreneurship, specific country data related to 
the field are not available. The empower  initiative of UNEP and UN Women, aims to support women’s 
entrepreneurship in th e renewable energy sector, and it is partnering with the NCDD’s and organizations 
such as SHE Investments, Nexus for Development and SNV to implement pilot interventions, 
 
38 KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA. CAMBODIA CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGIC PLAN 2014 -2023 2013 National Climate Change 
Committee. Retrieved from https://www.cambodiaip.gov.kh/DocResources/ab9455cf -9eea-4adc -ae93 -95d149c6d78c_007729c5 -60a9 -47f0-
83ac -7f70420 b9a34 -en.pdf .  
39 GIZ. (2019). Partnership Ready Cambodia: Waste management. Retrieved from 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/GBN_Sector%20Brief_Kambodscha_Waste_E_WEB.pdf.  
40 Heinrich Böll Stiftung. Veins of Phnom Penh: Urban waste pickers as the best infrastructure for recycling waste. (2018). 
https://kh.boell.org/en/2018/12/17/veins -phnom -penh -urban -waste -pickers -best-infrastructure -recycling -waste.  
41 They are locally called  “ad chais”, mainly comprised of less physically fit and aged women who often cannot fit into more regularized 
work settings in shop assistants, factory workers or cleaners at construction sites. They comprise the most societally margin alized groups./ 41 
Heinrich Böll Stiftung. Veins of Phnom Penh: Urban waste pickers as the best infrastructure for recycling waste. (2018). 
https://kh.bo ell.org/en/2018/12/17/veins -phnom -penh -urban -waste -pickers -best-infrastructure -recycling -waste .  
42 ENTREPRENEURIAL CAMBODIA. Cambodia Policy Note Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public 
Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized. Retrieved from 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/30924/128265 -REVISED -Nota -Entrepreneruship -
web.pdf?sequence=5&isAllowed=y .


---
*Page 134*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
13 
 
influencing policy and providing training, mentorship, and access to finance for fema le entrepreneurs 
in Cambodia in renewable energy to improve their lives and livelihoods.  
Historically, there has been a time when Cambodian women were pushed into entrepreneurship: During 
Pol Pot regime many women were  induced to widowhood due to the loss of their husbands by the Pol 
Pot genocide from 1975 to 1979. At present, women entrepreneurs own 62% of microenterprises. It is 
notable that women -owned businesses in Cambodia remain at a largely micro level in the informal 
sector (26% of women’s SMEs in C ambodia are informal) on subsistence basis.  
A greater level of Cambodian women’s economic engagement, however, it does not always imply that 
they are able to fully embrace equal opportunities with their male counterparts. Barriers exist to 
Cambodian women  in doing business, especially in non -agricultural sectors, such as manufacturing, 
service and knowledge sector. The key constraints for women entrepreneurs even in the formal sector 
are: 
- Social and cultural constraints : Women's economic empowerment and progress in Cambodia 
are hampered by societal norms and traditional gender relations. Even though women 
nominally hold equal rights to men, they are still viewed as having a lower social status than 
their male counterpart s. Buddhism, the country’s major religion which accounts for 97% of the 
population, also has a strong influence on gender roles as well propagating the belief that it is 
a sin to be born as a woman. According to this idea, women need to cultivate more meri ts in 
the present life to be born as a man in the next life.43 Despite the fact that Cambodian society 
has become more open and women have assumed increasing leadership roles in the economy, 
with a rate of female top managers at 57.3% (2016), women's econo mic freedom and prospects 
are still limited due to their subjugation to males under the Chbab Srey, a Khmer  code of 
conduct  for women .  
- Access to Business Markets : Less access to higher  education and abovementioned social 
norms favouring  men reduce Cambodian women’s opportunities to network and acquire the 
knowledge needed to formalize their business, which is o ne of the greatest obstacles  to their 
access to market, s caling up their businesses and enterprises , especially for international tra de. 
In general , women in Ca mbodia  usually have less access to and time for networking and 
building business partnerships due to their family responsibilities, which is an additional barrier 
for their business development. Women are less likely to formally register their enterprises 
because the processes are time -consuming, and the procedures complicated. Alternatively, they 
often opt to keep their businesses informal and  micro - or small -scale due to the lack of 
incentives for formalization and the high cost s involved (e.g., taxes).  
- Lack of Financing: Lack of financing was reported to be a top challenge for all SMEs in 
Cambodia, and many women -owned SMEs have been funded from scratch using their own 
savings  without access to external finances . Venture capitals are not a familiar concept for 
Cambodian women, although organizations like SHE investments  are attempting  to take on that 
role.44 Slightly more women than men borrowed from a bank or an MFI. Using informal sources 
and personal savings can help enterprises get started and survive for a while, larger access to 
capital is required for the firm to develop. Only 26% of women entrepreneur s run large 
businesses, and their profits are on average lower than men's.45 Lack of financial literacy also 
 
43 Opinion: The Need to Promote Cambodian Wome n’s Participation in Political Decision Making. (2021). Retrieved October from 
Cambodianess.com website: https://cam bodianess.com/article/opinion -the-need -to-promote -cambodian -womens -participation -in-political -
decision -making ,  
44 SHE  investments is a well -known Programme in providing female entrepreneurs with micro - to medium -sized enterprises with incubators 
and accele rators Programmes, giving mentoring, networking, and financing services. https://www.sheinvestments.com/.  
45 National Institute of Statistics. (2014). Cambodia intercensal economic survey. Retrieved from  
https://www.stat.go.jp/info/meetings/cambodia/pdf/c14ana02.pdf .


---
*Page 135*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
14 
 
aggravates women’s vulnerability in terms of collateral availability and cost of funding, which 
often require specific support and mentoring to fulfill the banks’ requirements.46 
Innovation is an important aspect of the success of many entrepreneurial enterprises, and so it is for 
climate technology. The relative weakness of Cambodia’s national innovation system (NIS)47 is 
reflected in its Global Inn ovation Index: The country ranks 109th out of 131 countries (2021), being at 
the bottom within the ASEAN countries.48  
The severe underrepresentation of women in tech nopreneurship  is felt across many developing 
economies where common structural factors affect women’s participation in the tech industries. For 
Cambodia, additional pressures, institutional and socio -cultural constraints prevent young women from 
pursuing career -advanci ng opportunities in the tech ecosystem.49 Young women who complete post -
secondary education in related STEM or IT fields stay in lower -paid and low -skilled work sectors.50 
Female researchers in R&D (per million people) account for only 26.82 % (2015) compa red to their 
male counterparts.51 Researchers suggest that the ecosystem is dominated by men, particularly mentors 
and start -up founders who act as role models. In one survey, over 80% of tech start -up founders who 
participated in the study were male. 52 
The CTF’s investment criteria explicitly include the prioritization of the “women -owned” SMEs and 
encourage the other applicant enterprises to develop gender mainstreaming plans. Through this, the 
proposed Programme aims to shift the traditional cultural no rms imposed on Cambodian women and 
facilitating Cambodian women entrepreneurs’ access to finance and markets.  
The Programme will address each of the above -listed constraints in the following manner: First, the 
CTF’s  upfront adoption of the gender mainstreaming component as part of its Investment Criteria (see 
Table 1 above) will gradually thaw away the social and cultural constraints Cambodian women suffer 
by inducing change in the public perception on the women’s ro les in climate technology and 
entrepreneurship.  Strong promotion of women’s roles within the JV enterprises as well as the leadership 
roles of the invested companies (through capacitation support in Component 1 and Component 2 as 
well as prioritization fo r CTF approval  in Component 3) will also strengthen women entrepreneurs and 
women -led enterprises to build business networking and partnerships , enabling women to have better 
access to business markets and financing.  
● Priority Sectors and Gender Implicatio ns in Cambodia  
Areas for priority intervention through the proposedProgramme in Cambodia are, among others: 
Climate resilient agriculture/ Water resource management/ Infrastructure retrofit to address the shifting 
climate.  
 
46 Exploring the Opportunities for Women -owned SMEs in Cambodia. Retrieved from https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/9e469291 -
d3f5-43a5 -bea2 -
2558313995ab/Market+Research+Report+on+Women_owned+SMEs+in+Cambodia.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=mOU6fpx .  
47 The national innovation systems (NIS) approach stresses that the flows of technology and information among people, enterprises and 
institutions are key to the innovative process. Innovation and technology development are the result of a complex set of rela tionships among 
actors in the system, which includes enterprises, universities and government research institutes. (OECD). 
https://www.oecd.org/science/inno/2101733.pdf .  
48 Global Innovation Index 2021: Which are the most innovative countries? (2021). Retrieved January 3, 2022, from Wipo.int websi te: 
https://www.wipo.int/global_innovation_index/en/2021/ .  
49 Assessment of Digital Literacy for Employability and Entrepreneurship among Cambodian Youth | UNDP in Cambodia. (2020). 
Retrieved October 17, 2021, from UNDP website: https://www.kh.undp.org/content/cambodia/en/home/library/assessment -of-digital -
literacy -for-employability -and-entrepreneu.html .  
50 Tsang, T., & Poum, C. (2018). FACTORS AFFECTING WOMEN ENGAGING IN TECH CAREERS IN CAMBODIA Rapid Design 
Research. Retrieved from http://www.development -innovation s.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/07/Factors -Affecting -Women -Engaging -in-
Tech -Careers -in-Cambodia -Report.pdf  . 
51 Cambodia | UNESCO UIS. (2021). Retrieved September 10, 2021, from Unesco.org website: 
http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/kh?theme=science -technology -and-innovation.  
52 Responsible Finance Forum (2018), “Cambodia’s Vibrant Tech Start -up Ecosystem” https://responsiblefinance forum.org/wp -
content/uploads/2019/11/Cambodias -Vibrant -Tech -Start -up-Ecosystem -2019.pdf .


---
*Page 136*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
15 
 
The agricultural sector is a ke y driver for Cambodia’s economy, making up an estimated 21.1% of the 
country’s GDP (2019) . It is a female -labour  intensive sector (74% of the workforce). Engaging women 
to learn agricultural production and post -production processing skills and knowledge would be 
particularly beneficial for Cambodian female farmers ’ economic empowerment.   
Since the COVID -19 pandemic, however, technology for the agriculture sector has emerged, along  with 
government efforts in promoting digital business and mitigating the impact of the pandemic. There is 
growing attention to innovative technology solutions in the agriculture sector. Agritech start -ups are 
reported to be springing up (marking 10 in num ber by 2021).  
Several start -ups in Cambodia are working to innovate agriculture , by linking farmers to the agro -chain s 
through online platforms53. By providing online platforms to competent wom an-led agricultural 
enterprises  will significantly increase the female farmers’ income generation potential.  
Clean and sufficient water provision would direct ly ease girls and women in rural areas from hous e 
chores and ensure their basic health, sanitation,  and safety. A number of international  organisation s and 
donors, such as the AFD, JICA, KfW Development Bank, Oxfam and the World Health Organization 
are supporting for improving the country’s water supply and waste management. Often Most water 
supply and wastewater treatment projects  in rural areas are implemented by international NGOs, which 
often work in concert with local NGOs. There would be ample opportunities to empower women in this 
endeavour54.   
Introducing solid waste and wastewater management technologies  has also a substantial potential for 
benefiting Cambodian women. The county has no large -scale waste treatment facilities , and that waste 
collection  practice is limited. Recycling sector is under -developed and, if any,  largely reliant on 
informal garbage collectors. S mall-scale enterprises have emerged to tackle waste management in the 
country,  but it is insufficient  to cover  the rapid  growth in  waste generation. In most cities in Cambodia , 
municipal  solid and organic waste s are being collected and deposited without effective environmental 
and hygiene regulations. Most often garbage collectors are informally employed and constitute the 
lowest income level group  mostly by women who migrated from rural areas . Industrial, toxic, and 
hazardous materials  are often not segregated  exposing the workers to serious public health threats and 
environmental pollution .  
In Oct 2018 Waste Management Strategy and Action Plan of Phnom Penh 2018 -2035 was established. 
Focusing on 3 Rs (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle), the Pl an aims to promote environmentally sound 
management of waste disposal and mitigate impact on environment and human livelihood (Action Area 
3) while involving both formal and informal private recycling sector players. Given the nature of the 
informal practi ces on the ground where vulnerable women being involved, it is desirable to consciously 
mainstream gender in strengthening the waste management system in Cambodia by empowering the 
women in this sector.  
Promoting women -led start -ups in the sectors of manag ing organic waste,  and recycling plastic would 
offer the opportunity for GHG emission reduction and pollution mitigation, while economically 
empowering Cambodian women in the circular economy of waste and resources. The Program may 
consider the example of “Eco -Plastic”, a start -up which is recycling plastic to make asphalt roads.  The 
company was founded  by a young Cambodian woman55.  
  
 
53 See Cambodia’s Ecosystem for Technology Startups, Sopheara Ek & Paul Vandenberg, June 2022 (Country Report No.1/ Ecosystems f or 
Technology Startups in Asia and the Pacific) /  Cambodia’s Ecosystem for Technology Startups (adb.org)   
54 Partnership Ready Cambodia: Water supply and wastewater treatment, Global Business Network 
Programm/ https://www.giz.de/de/downloads/GBN_Sector%20Brief_Kambodscha_Wasser_E_WEB.pdf   
55 https://kr -asia.com/combating -climate -change -through -cleantech -in-cambodia


---
*Page 137*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
16 
 
INDONESIA  
● Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Indonesia  
International Agreements on Women's Rights. Indonesia has ratified and signed several  international 
conventions, treaties, and plans of action on gender equality. Essential among them are:  
- United Nations Convention on the Political Rights of Women, ratified by Law 68/1958  
- United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW), ratified by Law number 7/1984  
- Optional Protocol to the CEDAW, signed by t he Government in 2000  
- International Labour  Organization’s (ILO) Convention number 100 on Equal Remuneration for 
Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value, ratified by Law number 80/1957  
- International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, s igned by the Government in 
2006  
- International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights signed by the Government in 200 0 
The country  also committed to following the recommendations of the 1994 Copenhagen Declaration on 
Social Development, the 1995 Cairo International Conference on Population and Development, and the 
1995 Beijing Platform for Action.56 At the regional level, the country sign ed on the Declaration of the 
Advancement of Women in the ASEAN Region in 1988, which focuses on the promotion and 
implementation of women’s equitable and effective participation in all fields and at all levels, and the 
Declaration on the Elimination of Vio lence Against Women in the ASEAN Region (2012).  
Institutional Arrangements. In 1978, the Government of Indonesia established the Ministry for 
Women’s Empowerment, which was later changed into the Ministry of Women Empowerment and 
Child Protection ( MoWECP), as the national entity to ensure the implementation of gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. In 1998, the  Indonesian  Government founded the National Commission of 
Violence Against Women, while also developing different focal points on women and  children under 
relevant Ministries/Agencies including the Coordinating Ministry of Human Development and Culture, 
MoWECP, Ministry of Social Affairs, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of 
Manpower, and the National Police.57 
At the nat ional level, the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia is the basic legal foundation 
for women’s rights in Indonesia. The Presidential Instruction No. 9/2000 on Gender Mainstreaming in 
National Development instructed all government bodies to imple ment gender mainstreaming for 
planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development policies 
and programs. The Law No. 8/2012 on General Elections introduced the requirement for political parties 
to have a minimum of 30%  women candidates to be elected to the parliament.58 
Gender considerations are also integrated into the National Long -Term Development Plan of 2005 –
2025. The quality of life and role of women and children in various development fields are low: 
Violence, ex ploitation, and discrimination against women and children are reported to be high . The 
 
56 ADB. (2006).  Country Gender Assessment Indonesia. Retrieved from website: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional -
document/32231/cga -indonesia.pdf .  
57 Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (2012). A Guidance Note to Inte grate Gender in 
Implementing REDD+ Social Safeguards in Indonesia. UN -REDD Programme. Available at: http://www.wocan.org/resource s/guidance -
note-integrate -gender -implementing -redd-social -safeguards -indonesia .  
58 United Nations Human Rights Council (2017). Indonesia: National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to 
Human Rights Council resolution 16/21.


---
*Page 138*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
17 
 
Plan aims to strengthen the institutions and network for gender and children mainstreaming at the 
national and regional levels , and increas e the availability of gender d ata and statistics.  
In 2016, the Ministry of Women Empowerment and Child Protection (MoWECP) launched 3Ends 
Programme, a  flagship Programme  targeting addressing  violence against women and children , human 
trafficking , and removing  barriers to economic justi ce for women . The  MoWECP supports women’s 
economic empowerment through the promotion of a home -based industry plan. The Ministry’s 
programme is based on the Ministerial Regulation No. 2/2016 on General Guidance of House -Based 
Industry for Improving Family Welfare via Women's Empowerment.59 
In Indonesia, legal restrictions on women’s ability to act and right to asset ownership still exist. The 
Law No. 1 of 1974 on Marriage impedes women from serving as the head of a household, creating 
further discrimination  in terms of divorce rights. Indonesia does not grant widows equal inheritance 
rights and sons and daughters have different inheritance rights. Indonesia is reported to lack legislation, 
civil remedies or criminal penalties to protect against sexual harass ment. There is no protection under 
domestic -violence legislation for unmarried partners.  
Religion and customs are also important in Indonesia's legal system , generating legal pluralism. While 
the civil law system  is the foundation , coexists with that of customary laws (Hukum Adat or Adat Recht) 
and Shari'a law60 coexist s in practices in some locations . In principle , the adoption of either Adat law 
or Shari'a law should be consistent with the prevailing Indonesian law and regulation s. However , 
inconsistencies exist in terms of marriage and inheritance.61 
Women and Climate Change. In the updated submission of the National Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC) to UNFCCC 2021, Indonesia committed itself to map gender mainst reaming in  
climate change in all development sectors. Enhancing the role of women in development and 
strengthening women's capacity and leadership in climate change has been recognized as a priority for 
social and livelihood resilience.  
The Directorate General of Cl imate Change Control (DJPPI) of the Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry , a female official,  is the key policy -making body on the topic of climate change in Indonesia . 
Also,  a number of  female officials holds the positions of  Directors of Climate Change Adaptation and 
of Climate Change Mitigation.62 
● General Situational Analysis of Indonesia  
As of 2021 the population of Indonesia is  273.5 million people, of whom 49.7% are women.63 As part 
of the G20, Indonesia is considered one of the world’s emerging economies and a newly industrialized 
country .  
According to the Human Development Index 2021 , the country ranks 114th out of 191 studied countries 
and territories ( value 0.705 ). This is 34% improvement from  the 1990 value, mainly mirroring the 
country’s improvements in life expectancy at birth, mean and expected years of schooling, and gross 
 
59 Indonesia. (2017, February 20). National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to Human Rights Council  
resolution 16/21: Retrieved from United Nations Digital Library System website: https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/1637627? ln=es. 
60 Adat law is a set of unwritten rules that apply to certain groups of people based on their traditions and customs, which migh t cover 
informal dispute resolution procedures. Shari'a law applies to Muslim’s localities, where it governs areas such as mar riage, inheritance, and 
finance.   
61 Indonesia: Closing the credit gap for women entrepreneurs | White & Case LLP. (2017, November 20). Retrieved October 26, 2021 , from 
Whitecase.com website: https://www.whitecase.com/publications/article/indonesia -closing -credit -gap-women -entrepreneurs.  
62 http://ditjenppi.menlhk.go.id/tentang -kami -ppi/profil -pejabat.html   
63 OECD. (2021). OECD iLibrary | OECD Economic Surveys: Indonesia 202 1. Retrieved from Oecd -ilibrary.org website: 
https://www.oecd -ilibrary.org/economics/oecd -economic -surveys -indonesia -2021_fd7e6249 -en . While Indone sia is relevantly free from the 
practices of gender -selective abortion and excess female mortality compared with other Southeast Asian countries, it is reported in some 
peripheral region of the country, with strong patrilocal traditions, indicates higher g ender ratio discrepancy among minors under the age of 
15, which may indicate the persistent practice of selective abortion and excess female mortality. See:  https://www.niussp.org/health -and-
mortality/gender -bias-births -child -mortality -indonesiapeut -parler -de-discrimination -sexuelle -en-indonesie/


---
*Page 139*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
18 
 
national income per capita. Margin of improvement was greater for women than men . Accordingly, the 
country’s Gender Development Index  in the same year (value 0. 941) marked slightly below the global 
average.64 Notwithstanding, in the OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019 (SIGI)65 of 
Indonesia, the level of discrimination against women was assessed  as “high” (with a score of 41.6% ):  
The worst outcome s in terms of Indonesia’s gender inequalities were  in the area of  “discrimination in 
the family” and “restricted civil liberties”.66  
In 2020, the female representation in the national parliaments was about 20.3% of the available seats , a 
substantial increase from the previous year (2019 rate: 17.4%). Indonesia is behind its minimum target 
of 30% women elected to the parliament. In gener al, female representation in public decision -making 
remains relatively  low.67 Indonesian women are less likely to participate in public  affairs and primary 
decision -makers  in private affairs are often males. O nly 15.46%  of the households nationwide are 
headed by women.68  
Since the 1970s, women ’s education started to improve. By 2020 the literacy rate for the  above - 15-
year-olds marked  97% for males and 95%  for females .69 
A significant gender gap  exists  in employment and evidence of gender discrimination persist s in the 
labour market. In 2019, the employment rate of women in Indonesia was 52.2%, while men had a rate 
of 79.3%.70  Wage and income gaps remain large with male s at 69.7% and female s at 51.7%, 
respectively. Women are also more likely than men to work in the informal sector: 81.8% of the  
women’s employment is in the informal sector compared to 79.4% of men, where a significant number 
of them are un (der-)paid workers.71  
The economic recession  after the Covid -19 pandemic  outbreak  affected the Indonesian labour  market 
and the national unemployment rate increased by 1.8%, up to 7.1% between August 2019 -2020.72 
Women are disproportionately more affected by the current economic recession, mainly because of the 
extra burden of unpaid work, massive layoffs in female -dominated service sectors, such as retail and 
tourism, and light manufacturing, such as clothing. Low-income  women working in the informal sector 
are mostly self -employed, or are employed on informal and insecure contractual arrangements. They 
are at the h ighest risk of losing their income source during the pandemic, suffering the most.  
As the global pandemic situation has been eased, the Indonesian economy is also recovering. Indonesia, 
representatively Bali, is one of the attractive tourism destinations, the tourism sector has particular 
concerns, and related businesses started to boost again.73 Although the pandemic situation has not 
finished, President Joko Widodo announced the removal of large -scale restrictions on crowds and 
people's movements after ob serving the past 10 months' improvements74. Due to the COVID -19 shock, 
internet or digital platforms enlarged and many firms utilizing those technologies have increased. 
 
64 Gender Development Index (2022) Retrieved from: ht tps://hdr.undp.org/gender -development -index#/indicies/GDI  
65 The SIGI covers four dimensions of discriminatory social institutions, spanning major socio -economic areas that affect women’s lives: 
Discrimination in the family; Restricted physical integrity; R estricted access to productive and financial resources; and Restricted civil 
liberties. https://www.genderindex.org/sigi/ .  
66 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019. Available at: https://ww w.genderindex.org/ranking/ .  
67 United Nations Human Rights Council (2017). Indonesia: National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to 
Human Rights Council resolution 16/21.  
68 Badan Pusat Statistik. (2021). Survei Sosial Ekonomi Nas ional (Susenas), 2019 Kor.  Harvard Dataverse . 
https://doi.org/doi:10.7910/DVN/9T0QN1.  
69 Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above) - Indonesia | Data. (2021). Retrieved November 2, 2021, from Worldbank.org 
website: https://data.worldbank.org/i ndicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS?locations=ID .  
70 OECD. (2021). OECD iLibrary | OECD Economic Surveys: Indonesia 2021. Retrieved from Oecd -ilibrary.org website: 
https://www.oecd -ilibrary.org/economics/oecd -economic -surveys -indonesia -2021_fd7e6249 -en.  
71 World Bank. 2015. Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Indonesia for the Period 2016 –2020. Jakarta. website: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curate d/en/195141467986374707/ pdf/99172 -REVISED -assem -Bank -Indonesia -Country -Partnership -
Framework -2016 -2020.pdf.  
72 World Bank. (2020). Indonesia. Retrieved from World Bank website: https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/indonesia/overview  
73 https://www.worldbank .org/en/news/press -release/2021/12/16/indonesia -economy -grew -in-2021 -despite -covid -19-will-accelerate -in-
2022 -world -bank -report -says 
74 https://english.alarabiya.net/coronavirus/2022/12/30/Indonesia -lifts-all-coronavirus -related -restrictions


---
*Page 140*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
19 
 
Almost every industry shows sales drops during the pandemic period. When it comes to t he gender -
related indexes, female managers dominant firms have a greater fall in sales compared to male managers 
dominant ones75. 
● Climate Change and Gender in Indonesia  
Indonesia ranked the 77th most vulnerable country  to climate change  globally in the Climate Risk Index 
from 1999 -2018.76 The temperature increase, intense rainfall, sea -level rise, and the threat to food 
security  are some of the key climate change -related challenges. Low-income  women  in rural regions, 
forest areas, or coa stal areas  are found to be most vulnerable . In particular, single mothers and widowed 
women are especially vulnerable  due to weak social safety nets . 77 
Women and Agriculture. Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries are the three largest economic sectors in 
Indonesia, making 13.7 % of the country’s GDP  (2020).78 Data from the Indonesian Peasant Union show 
that around 70 –80% of workers in agriculture are women .79 Women participate in all aspects of 
agriculture, including f arming, animal husbandry, and fishing. The ecosystem degradation from climate 
change has a significant impact on the survival of rural women which carry a greater share of the burden 
due to the damage of agricultural land and fisheries.  
Rising sea levels, combined with weather variability, rising sea surface temperature, and other negative 
effects, expose fishing households to the possibility of losing their foundation for livelihood, prompting 
some to migrate. Women from poor fishing households are  often burdened m ore. 
Women and Water. The JMP global database ( 2020 ) reported that 92% of the population has access 
to safely managed and basic service drinking water, while 86% have access to basic sanitation.80 
However, water and sanitation deficits exi st across Indonesia's thousands of islands, posing challenges 
for the country.  While there is plenty of fresh water, population growth, urbanization, and expanding 
agriculture are putting a strain on available water resources, quality,  and systems. As a r esult, 63% of 
the low-income  Indonesian households lack access to safe drinking water, and 34% of them lack 
adequate sanitation.  
Women are also the principal water collectors and providers in the household: two out of every five 
Indonesian families delegat e water responsibility to women. Water -fetching is becoming an increasing 
burden borne by girls and women with worsening water shortage . Climate Techpreneurship and Gender 
in Indonesia  
Indonesia is the world’s fourth most populous country. It is the fifteenth largest economy81 and currently 
undergoing a period of significant economic transition with a GDP growth rate averaging  4.87%  from 
2000 to 2021. Indonesia has become a fertile ground for business start -ups and the digital economy. 
Multiple suppor t programs, initiatives, and organizations, such as hubs, accelerators, and incubators, 
are hosted by government agencies, donors, and start -up networks to nurture start -ups and 
 
75 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/37584/IDU087850cba0b204043f608dea019acef5f2be1.pdf?sequence=5&isA
llowed=y   
76 Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., Schäfer, L., & Winges , M. (2018). GLOBAL CLIMATE RISK INDEX 2020. Retrieved from 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/20 -2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Ri sk%20Index%202020_14.pdf . 
77 FAO. (2021). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Retrieved from Fao.org website: 
http://www.fao.org/publications/card/en/c/CA6110EN/ .  
78 World Bank. (2020), “Agriculture, forestry, and fishing, value added (% of GDP) - Indonesia”.  
79 FAO. (2021). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Retrieved from Fao.org website: 
http://www.fao.org/publications/card/en/c/CA6110EN/ .  
80 JMP. (2019). Retrieved from Washdata.org website: https://washdata.org/data.  
81 Per Nominal GDP (2020).


---
*Page 141*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
20 
 
entrepreneurial spirit, provide managerial and technical support, and essentia lly build an active 
community of entrepreneurs. In 2019, it ranked the second -biggest digital economy in Southeast Asia.82  
Nevertheless, the number of entrepreneurs in the country is still very low (around 2%) compared to its 
neighbour ing countries  (6% in  Malaysia, 5% in Thailand, and 7% in Singapore)  in 201783 . Indonesia ’s 
entrepreneurship ecosystem 84 ranks 75th out of the 137 countries in the 201 9 Global Entrepreneurship 
Index (GEI), where  99% of them were  micro -, small - and medium enterprises  until recently .85  
 As of 201 3, 43% of  formal SMEs  in Indonesia have been estimated to be female -owned .86 The World 
Bank estimated that most women -owned enterprises in Indonesia are informal and unregistered 
(97%) and  characterized by a small size . 
The key constraints for women entrepreneurs in Indonesia are:  
- Societal and Cultural Norms : Compared to businesses owned by men, women -owned SMEs 
face constraints that are imposed by women`s dual responsibility for the business on the one 
hand, and family and household on the other. In the technology industry , women are still 
perceived to be unab le to handle multiple functions and tasks that have been dominated by 
men.87 The number of female top managers was 22.1% in 2015  and female -owned enterprises 
tend to be smaller in size.  
Women's interactions with non -family members  are often perceived to be  undesirable . The 
1974 Marriage Law preserves men's traditional status as ho usehold  heads, setting  males to the 
role of principal decision -makers, particularly in business and other public affairs. It is also 
reported that Islamic  norms also influence  on women doing business, particularly in Muslim 
rural regions. As a result, rural women are less keen to do business compared to their male 
counterparts.88 
- Access to Business Markets: Indonesian women in general have lower education l evel than 
their male counterparts.  Vocational training  is often  found only in big cities, limiting 
opportunities to those residing in remote, rural areas. Business skill training is often taken by 
men due to the cultural perception that business training for women is inappropriate . Girls a nd 
women are often burdened with their familial duties a nd the limited freedom of movement . 
 
82 WIT. (2021). Programme Pertumbuhan  Ekonomi Hijau (Green Growth Programme) mendukung Indonesia dalam mewujudkan 
pertumbuhan ekonomi hijau yang dapat mengurangi kemiskinan serta memastikan inklusi sosial, kelestarian lingkungan dan efisie nsi 
sumber daya. Retrieved October 21, 2021, from Gree n Growth website: http://greengrowth.bappenas.go.id/en/towards -the-future -of-climate -
technology -and-entrepreneurship -in-indonesia/ .  
83 Genoveva, Genoveva. (2019). THE INFLUENCE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL CULTURE ON ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 
AMONG BUSINESS STUDENTS. Firm Journal of Management Studies. Retrieved from ResearchGate website: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334281264_the_influence_of_entrepreneurial_culture_on_entrepreneurial_intention_amon g_busin
ess_students   
84 Entrepreneurial ecosystem is defined such as a dynamic community within a geographic region, composed of var ied and inter -dependent 
actors (e.g. entrepreneurs, institutions and organizations), factors (e.g. markets, regulatory framework, support setting, en trepreneurial 
culture), and process which evolves over time and whose actors and factors coexist and intera ct to promote new enterprise creation through 
the spirit of entrepreneurship. 
https:// www.researchgate.net/publication/336037404_The_entrepreneurial_ecosystem_to_foster_competitiveness_among_enterprises_a_nat
ional_level_analysis .  
85 Bambang Hermanto, & Suryanto, S. E. (2017, January 26). Entrepreneurship Ecosystem Policy in Indonesia. Retri eved from 
ResearchGate website: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345769314_Entrepreneurship_Ecosystem_Policy_in_Indonesia .  
86 Women -owned SMEs in Indonesia: A Golden Opportunity for Local Financial Institutions Market Research Study. (2016). Retrieved 
from https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/260f2097 -e440 -4599 -91ec -
e42d45cf3913/SME+Indonesia+Final_Eng.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=lj8qhPY.  
87 Ramadhan Triwijanarko. (2018, October 7). Women’s and Gender Stereotypes in Indonesia Tech Industry. Retrieved from Medium 
website: https://ramadhantriwijanarko.medium.com/womens -and-gender -stereotypes -in-indonesia -tech-industry -de71bf216ab0.  
88 Tahi, T., &  Tambunan, H. (2017). Women Entrepreneurs in MSEs in Indonesia: Their Motivations and Main Constraints. International 
Journal of Gender, 5(1), 2333 –2603. https://doi.org/10.15640/ijgws.v5n1p9.


---
*Page 142*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
21 
 
Poor security for women and girl s’ safety is another barrier.  Women entrepreneurs often lack 
relevant information and suffer from complicated procedures, long processes, and high costs.89 
- Lack of Financing: Indonesian males use more banking services (45%) than women (42%) . A 
higher proportion of females (49%) use informal financial services, compared to males (29%). 
Women use informal financial services – especially in terms of saving and b orrowing – mostly 
to meet  their short -term needs by asking support from  local providers as arisans .90 
- Limited Ownership to Assets as Collateral : In Indonesia, men and women do not have equal 
ownership rights over moveable and immoveable propert ies. Most female entrepreneurs do not 
own fixed assets  as usually homes and vehicles are registered with male family members . This 
prevents woman  entre preneurs from accessing (formal) credit for their business es. Indonesian 
women report a lack of collateral as their top challenge in accessing finance. Only 21% of 
women have these assets registered in their names, even though 88% of the households had 
buildings or land that may be used as collateral.91 
Indonesia ranks 87th Global Innovation Index (2021) for the 3rd year in a row, falling under the lower 
middle -income group. The country falls short compared to its lower middle income -group neighbours  
in ASEAN, such as Vietnam  (44th), and the Philippines ( 51st). 92 In the current digitalization and SME 
ecosystem of Indonesia, the role and contribution that women play are still unclear.   
The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (2018/2019) pictured Indonesia with a significantly low relative 
levels of innovation for women entrepreneurs, with a gender gap of 50% or more compared to men.93 
Over the past decade, women’s participation in the labour market has stagnated. The gender gap has 
remained largely unchanged. In rural areas, younger women are opting out of the labour market 
altogether. In 2019, only 14% of women were working in high -tech industries such as information 
technology and communications compared to 31% of men. 94 Increasing women’s participation in 
STEM is particularly urgent in Indonesia.  
In 2018 , female top managers were  22.1% and female researchers in R&D (per million people) were  
recorded at 44.87%.95 In these occupations, women are paid less than men. The Global Gender Gap 
Report 2021 reports a wide gap in economic participation and opportunity between men and women in 
the country:  A sharp drop was observed in the share of women in senior roles , from 54.9 % in 2020 to 
29.8%  in 202196.  
 Many women still face inequalities like affordability, access to sound digital structure, and availability 
that stop them from effectively adopting the latest digital tools. However, women SMEs are at the 
forefront of adopti ng digital tools to stay afloat during the pandemic. Even more encouragingly, 82% 
 
89 Tahi, T., & Tambunan, H. (2017). Women Entrepreneurs in MSEs in Indonesia: Their Motivations and Main Constraints. International 
Journal of Gender, 5(1), 2333 –2603. https://doi.org/10.15640/ijgws.v5n1p9.  
90 Arisan is a social and money -saving gathering, which represents an alternative to bank loans and other forms of  credit.  For unbanked 
Indonesians, Arisan can be the only way to get any financial service that would give them a lot of advantages as it does not charge interest. 
https:// journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/0973005219898922. /  Survey on Financial Inclusion and Access (SOFIA) Focus Note on 
Gender. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.bappenas.go.id/files/5615/1668/2564/SOFIA_Focus_Note_Gender_Nov_2017.pdf . 
91 World Bank. (2016). Women entrepreneurs in Indonesia: a pathway to increasing shared prosperity. Retrieved October 25, 2021, from 
undefined website: https://www.semantic scholar.org/paper/Women -entrepreneurs -in-Indonesia -%3A -a-pathway -to-Arsana -
Alibhai/169022dd12b7b6987aebaf31fdf757afa6a74e5c.  
92 Global Innovation Index 2021: Which are the most innovative countries? (2021). Retrieved January 3, 2022, from Wipo.int websi te: 
https://www.wipo.int/global_innovation_index/en/2021/ .  
93 GEM. (2020). GEM 2018 / 2019 WOMEN’S ENTREPRENEURSHIP REPORT. Retrieved from GEM Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 
website: https://www.gemconsortium.org/report/gem -20182019 -womens -entrepreneurship -report .  
94 Marshan, J. (2020, November 15). Will Indonesia’s 4.0 revolution leave wom en behind? - Indonesia at Melbourne. Retrieved from 
Indonesia at Melbourne website: https://indonesiaatmelbourne.unimelb.edu.au/will -indonesias -4-0-revolution -leave -women -behind/#_ftn1.  
95 Indonesia | UNESCO UIS. (2021). Retrieved from Unesco.org website: h ttp://uis.unesco.org/en/country/id?theme=science -technology -
and-innovation.  
96 Global Gender Gap Report 2021. (2021). Retrieved from World Economic Forum website: https://www.weforum.org/reports/ab6795a1 -
960c -42b2 -b3d5 -587eccda6023/in -full/gggr2 -benchmarking -gender -gaps-findings -from -the-global -gender -gap-index -2021


---
*Page 143*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
22 
 
of women SME owners as surveyed by UN Women and Pulse Lab Jakarta use digital solutions and find 
them helpful in juggling work and domestic responsibilities.  
The Programme wi ll address each of the above -listed constraints in the following manner: First, as in 
the case of Cambodia, the CTF’s upfront adoption of the gender mainstreaming component as part of 
its Investment Criteria (see Table 1 above) will gradually change in the  public perception on the 
women’s roles in businesses and technology sector in general. All the CTF -supported JVs will 
strengthen their gender mainstreaming by either increasing women’s employment or improving welfare 
programme for female employment and/or  providing other types of gender mainstreaming efforts (See 
Appendix 3. Simplified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template): 
Section 1 -2. Entity’s Gender Mainstreaming Commitment Plan (GCMP) below.)  Gender -friendly 
business manag ement and improved women’s welfare as a labour condition will improve the general 
perception of women’s labour within the formal business sector in the country over time.  
There are some structural issues barring Indonesian women’s equal participation in business and 
technology entrepreneurship in Indonesia, such as the 2017 Marriage Laws, favouring male household 
heads as beneficiaries to formal credit services, and some re ligious dogma negating active roles of 
women in formal business sector. The country SMU may bring these legal/policy -related issues to the 
attention of the country NDA and other relevant government entities of Indonesia as part of Component 
4 (Country Capa city Building) activities.   
Strong promotion of women’s roles within the JV enterprises as well as the leadership roles of the 
invested companies (through capacitation support in Component 1 and Component 2 as well as 
prioritization for CTF approval  in Co mponent 3) will also strengthen women entrepreneurs and women -
led enterprises to build business networking and partnerships, enabling women to have better access to 
business markets and financing.  
● Priority Sectors and Gender Implications in Indonesia  
Areas for priority intervention through the proposed Programme in Indonesia are, among others: Health 
Biomonitoring & Trend monitoring of infectious diseases exacerbated by rising temperature and 
extreme weather events/ Water harvesting/ Domestic wastewater r ecycling/ Climate -resilient crop 
development.  
Since 2010, Indonesia’s government has been spending more to support the government’s new health -
related strategic goals, including digitalization of the sector. The COVID -19 pandemic since early 2020 
accelera ted the trends for a digital transformation of the country’s health sector. Access to basic health 
service s in Indonesia is gender -biased and is compounded by other factors such as geographical location, 
education level and income level. Thus,  little-educa ted, low -incomed girls and women in remote areas 
are benefiting the least from the health services. In addition, due to societal and cultural norms, some 
female health issues, such as menstruation and reproductive health, are often tabooed and not discusse d 
in public. This makes access of the Indonesian girls’ and women’s access to the health service s more 
difficult. Through the digitalization of public health services and better monitoring of disease trends, 
access for girls and women is expected to improve in the long run.  
With increasing water shortage related to climate change -induced extreme weather condition s, 
rainwater harvesting is increasingly being employed both in urban and rural settings. Being a primary 
water collector of a ho usehold, girls and women will be lifted from household chores with better water 
resource management. Treatment of water for safer and cleaner domestic water provision shall also 
benefit girls and women’s health and hygiene and even improve their safety.  
Agriculture, forestry, and fisheries are key drivers of the Indonesian economy and agriculture is a 
female -dominated sector (70 -80%). Thus, the adoption of crop (rice) resilient to drought and flood and 
technology for mariculture development could have a ma jor impact on Indonesian women.  Persistent


---
*Page 144*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
23 
 
rural poverty and malnutrition, as well as rising urbanisation, make Indonesia struggle in improving 
agriculture, fisheries, and forestry profitability and resilience to climate resilient, women should be 
consider ed as primary target  recipients  in this sector . Given the feminisation of agriculture in the 
country, the Programme should use the competitive advantage of women’s rural knowledge and should 
involve them in advancing innovation and entrepreneurship in Indo nesia. This would alleviate poverty 
and food insecurity, especially for rural and coastal households in Indonesia.  
 
LAO PDR  
● Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Lao PDR  
International Agreements on Women's Rights. Lao PDR is a signatory since 1981 to the Convention 
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). A recent Capacity 
Assessment on CEDAW implementation in Lao PDR was conducted by the As sociation for 
Development of Women and Legal Education (ADWLE) in 2016. The Lao Government has also 
established interagency mechanisms, to promote and protect human rights as follows :  
- The National Steering Committee on the Preparations for the Ratificatio n and Implementation 
of the International Covenants on Human Rights ; 
 
- the National Steering Committee on the Preparations for the UPR (Universal Periodic Review) ; 
 
- the National Steering Committee on reporting and implementation of the International 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination ;  
 
- the National Commission for the Advancement of Women (NCAW) ;   
 
- the National Commission for Mothers and Children (NCMC), the National Committee for 
Disabled People ;  
 
- the National Committee for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation and the National 
Committee Against Human Trafficking.97  
At the regional level,  the country signed on the Declaration of the Advancement of Women in the 
ASEAN Region in 1988, which focuses on the promotion and implementation of women’s equitable 
and effective participation in all fields and at all levels, and the Declaration on the E limination of 
Violence Against Women in the ASEAN Region (2012).  
At the national level, Lao PDR has a strong legal framework for promoting gender equality. The 
revised Constitution of 2003 explicitly state s that women and men have equal rights in all spher es -
political, social, cultural and in the family. Women’s equal rights are also stipulated in the Family, Land 
and Property Laws; the Labour Law; the Electoral Law; and the Penal Law.   
- The Law on the Development and Protection of Women (2004) is the most specific Lao 
legislation articulating  equal rights and access for women . The law provided a framework  for 
several subsequent laws defining women  ́s rights and served also as a basis to f orm the National 
Commission for the Advancement of Women and Mother -Child.  
- The Small and Medium Enterprises Development Plan 2016 -2020:  Endorsed by Prime 
Minister Decree No. 253/PM  in 2017, its main objectives are: to promote productivity, 
 
97 https://uprdoc.ohchr.org/uprweb/downloadfile.aspx?filename=1517&file=EnglishTranslation


---
*Page 145*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
24 
 
technology, an d innovation; to enhance access to finance for Small and medium -sized 
enterprises (SMEs);, to enhance access to business development services; to enhance SMEs 
access and expansion to domestic and international markets; to develop entrepreneurs, and; to 
create an enabling environment for establishment and operating business of SMEs and tax 
incentives.  
Women and Climate Change.  Lao PDR established the National Green Growth Strategy (NGGS) till 
2030 in 2018. Through the NGGS, the country is committed to pursuing sustainable green growth 
development that makes the best use of its natural and human resources in line with its Vision 2030,10 -
year Socio -Economic Development Strategy to 2025, 8th  five-year National Socio -Economic 
Development Plan, the Sustainab le Development Goals, and the Paris Climate Change Agreement.  The 
Strategy identified the promotion of the advancement of women’s participation to be an important focus 
and promotes vocational training, labour skill development and creation of jobs for wo men, 
encouraging and promoting the participation of women in economic, political and sociocultural 
activities.  
● General Situation Analysis of Lao PDR  
Lao PDR is a country with a population of about 7.4 million people (2021). 83% of the population lives 
in rural areas and two -thirds rely on subsistence agriculture. Lao PDR has enjoyed high economic 
growth, with a GDP growth rate averaging 7.8% over the last decade98 and falling poverty rates from 
33.5% to 23.2%.99 However, much of this growth has come from th e unsustainable use of the country’s 
natural resources, which has not translated into a commensurate decline in poverty. Women’s access to 
productive and financial resources, especially in land ownership and use rights are restricted and so is 
women’s part icipation in leadership and access to education and employment.  
In 2019, Lao PDR scored 0.613 on the Human Development Index (HDI), ranking 137th out of 189 
countries, grouping the country into the medium human development level category.100 Despite 
consist ent economic growth, many challenges remain for better distribution of the economic benefits.  
Lao PDR has a Gender Development Index (GDI) of 0.927, classified as a country with “medium to 
low” gender equality (Group 5).101  Lao PDR’s Social Institutions a nd Gender Index (SIGI) scored to 
be low (with a score of 0.262) in  gender discrimination in social institution . 102 
The political representation of women in the National Assembly has grown by nearly 20% since 1990. 
It’s among the highest in the region. In L ao PDR women make up less than 5% of high -level government 
officials.  89% of village chiefs are men. Women are still under -represented in senior government 
positions with 10% occupancy in 2018.  
In Lao PDR, the working population is made up of an equal sh are of women and men, but 
generally, women occupy the lower rungs of the labour market.  The share of women in wage 
employment is lower in all sectors at 35%103. ILO estimates that in Lao PDR, 64.3% of female 
employment is in the agricultural sector, 26.9% is in the services sector, and 8.8% is in the industries 
sector. Of the total employed females, over 87.5% are self -employed104.   
 
98 GDP growth (annual%) – Lao PDR: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=LA . 
99 World Bank Group (2015). Drivers of Poverty Reduction in Loa PDR https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/publication/drivers -of-
poverty -in-lao-pdr 
100 UNDP (2020). Gender Inequality Index -Human Development Reports: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2020.pdf   
101 Human Development Report (2013). The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World. (2013). Retrieved from 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country -Profiles/KHM.pdf .  
102 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019. Available at: https://www.genderindex.org/ranking/ .  
103 https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/la/Country -Analysis -Report -Lao-PDR -2015.pdf  
104 https://www.unicef.org/laos/media/4831/file/IMPACT%20OF%20COVID -19%20ON%20REIMAGINING%20GENDER.pdf


---
*Page 146*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
25 
 
Decision -making of female business owners in managing the businesses is often shared within their 
family members such as  husbands. Women’s decision -making is not so  high in public  contracts and 
signing legal documents (only 58% and 57% respectively of the men contracting).  
The gender gap in education has narrowed105. The literacy rate for the population aged 15 years and 
older in Lao PDR has also improved, reaching 84% in 2020 on average. However,  gender disparity 
persist s: 90% for males vs.  79% for females (2020).106  
Having said that, Laotian women are active economic agents, marking 70% of the country’s economic 
migrants. An increasing number of women are migrating to Thailand as workers mainly in the service 
sector and as domestic workers. A UNODC study estimates tha t 35% of women migrants to Thailand 
are victims of sexual exploitation. Physical and sexual violence  persist,  and domestic violence is a silent 
but widespread problem: 1 in 5 women is reported to be a victim in Lao PDR.  
Because of pre -existing gender inequalities, COVID -19 had a disproportionate impact on women and 
girls in Lao PDR. The COVID -19 pandemic and its corresponding mitigation measures have 
significantly increased women and girls’ exposure to gender -based violen ce (GBV). Female workers 
were more likely to lose their source of income due to COVID -19. The economic implications of this 
crisis are skewed towards jobs and sectors where women are overwhelmingly represented such as 
agricultural and service sectors. The impact of the crisis on these sectors, combined with the after -
effects of severe weather events on the agricultural sector in 2019, must have left a substantial impact 
on women107. 
Women and Agriculture . In Lao PDR a third of the country’s GDP (29.9%) is ge nerated in the 
agricultural sector and over 75% of the population is engaged in agricultural activities. Women in Lao 
PDR are key players in agriculture, with more than 50% of the agricultural population being women 
since 1980.108  As high as 70% of the total female employment is concentrated in the  agricultural 
sector.109 Women traditionally manage marketing of agricultural products and livestock production. 
They are typically given key responsibility for food security in the family .  
However, Women’s high level of participation in agricultural work in Lao PDR is not always a source 
of women’s empowerment. As stated by the World Bank and ADB’s 2012110 gender assessment report 
for Lao PDR, FAO’s Country Gender Assessment of Agricultura l and the Rural Sector (2018)111, and 
ASEAN State of Gender and Climate Change Report (2022)112, women’s role in agriculture is 
significant, but often undervalued. Increased agricultural productivity and opportunities for off -farm 
jobs, often taken by female  agricultural workers, are helping to pull some households, in selected areas, 
out of poverty.  
Lao PDR is transitioning from subsistence farming to commercial agriculture. This transition has 
brought benefits for some rural communities, but it has also exa cerbated gender disparities. Scaling up 
for commercialization in the agriculture sector often resulted in dispossession and deprivation of small 
farming landowners of their productive land, including female land holders. This worsened the 
vulnerability of small -scale farmers, esp. those who cannot find employment off -farm.  
 
105 https://gggi.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/10/Gender -and-Green -Growth -Policy -Brief -Lao-PDR.pdf   
106 World Bank (2021). Literacy rate https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.1524.LT.FE.ZS?locations=LA  
107 https://lao.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub -pdf/covid -19_impact_assessment_lao_pdr -_brief_women_1_0.pdf  
108 UNDP (2016). Human development report 2016: Lao Pe ople’s Democratic Republic. 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country -notes/LAO.pdf  
109 OECD (2021). Strengthening Women’s Entrepreneurship in Agriculture in  ASEAN Countries https://www.oecd.org/southeast -
asia/regional -Programme/networks/OECD -strengt hening -women -entrepreneurship -in-agriculture -in-asean -countries.pdf  
110 World Bank and ADB (2012). Country Gender Assessment for LAO PDR Reducing Vulnerability and Increasing Opportunity 
https://www.adb.org/sites/defa ult/files/institutional -document/33755/files/cag -lao-pdr.pdf  
111 https://www.fao.org/3/CA0154EN/ca0154en.pdf  
112 https://asean.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/08/State -of-Gender -Equality -and-Climate -Change -in-ASEAN_FINAL -1.pdf


---
*Page 147*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
26 
 
As noted by the World Bank’s 2016 working paper on the feminization of agriculture,113commercial 
agriculture is, however, opening new opportunities for women to undertake paid employment outside 
the family farm, particularly through participation in ‘non -traditional export crop production’ (as 
contract farmers or direct wage employees). Formal contractual arrangement s to secure fair work 
condition s for female agricultural workers need to b e strengthened.  
Women and Water.  About 80% of Lao PDR’s water flow materializes during the rainy season and the 
rest during the dry season. Most of the domestic water supply in Lao PDR is adequately supplied by 
streams and rivers. Most  people in rural areas obtain their water supplies fro m streams, rainwater, and 
water from public standpipes or wells for drinking. Bathing and laundry washing usually take place in 
streams or at public standpipes. 114 Nevertheless, some parts of the country experience water shortages 
during the dry season, pa rticularly in the headwaters of some rivers and areas far from perennial rivers. 
General pressure on water resources of the country is compounded by Lao PDR’s incompatible legal 
and institutional capacity to manage its rapid economic development and popula tion growth in recent 
years. New issues are flooding and drought, which have started to significantly impact the country in 
recent years. One of the challenges to Lao PDR is to expand its irrigation capacity (including water 
storage and distribution infras tructure) to overcome localized temporary water shortages in a country 
so richly endowed with water resources.  
The Lao Social Indicator Survey 2017 reported that 48.7% of those responsible for gathering water for 
the family are women along with girls 9.4% (Table 2). The disparity is even steeper in (esp. remote, 
without road) rural area s: women and girls in rural areas are bearing a much heavier burden of water -
fetching for the family. This takes significant time away from their education and other activiti es that 
could lead to better jobs, as well as income generation.  
Table 2. Person Collecting Water in Lao PDR in 2017115 
 
 
Water quality is often substandard due to the lack of proper water treatment facilities in rural areas and 
poor sanitation condition s often result in illness of the individuals.116 The country’s open defecation 
rate is the second -highest in the region, often leading to gro und water pollution. Lao PDR and the World 
Bank have been working to supply rural areas with facilities to reduce open defecation.  
 
 
113 World Bank (2016). Feminization of Agriculture in the Context of Rural Transformations: What is the evidence? 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25 099/ACS20815.pdf?sequence=6&isAllowed=y  
114 Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (2012). Lao Environment Outlook 2012. 
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/8485/ -LAO%20Environment%20Outlook%202012 -
2012Lao_EO_2012.PDF?sequence=3&isAllowed=y  
115 2017 the Lao Social Indicator Survey.  https://lao pdr.un.org/   
116 World Bank (2016). Improving Rural Sanitation in Lao PDR https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/publication/improving -rural -
sanitation -in-lao-pdr


---
*Page 148*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
27 
 
● Climate Change and Gender in Lao PDR  
Lao ranks 45th in the Global Climate Risk Index (CRI) 2019 and 52nd in CRI from 2000 to 2019117. 
Climate change results in hotter seasons, heavy floods, droughts, abnormal cold and other irregular 
weather patterns to which crops are vulnerable. Crop crises because of  extreme weather can result in 
food shortages, familial stress, and even occurrence of domestic violence .118   
Women are mainly responsible for household water supply and energy for cooking, yet their voices are 
soften excluded from local and national decision -making processes in energy policies and coping plans 
to climate change.  
 
Figure 1. Lao PDR Total Primary Energy Suppy in 2018  
 
Lao PDR’s entrepreneurship ecosystem is behind the lower middle -income average as well as Lao 
PDR’s ASEAN peers, ranking 102nd  out of the 137 countries in the 2019 Global Entrepreneurship 
Index (GEI).119 World Bank reports indicate that SMEs in Lao PDR are a major employer, but their 
productivity is relatively low. While accounting for 81% of the total labour  force in 2010, SMEs 
in Lao PDR contribute only about 16% to GDP. Men account for most workers in the formal sector, 
and as a result have greater access to social protections, exempting female workers whose majority 
remain in the informal sector.  
Data is not available on the number of firms and micro -entrepreneurs operating in the informal economy 
in the country, such as street vendors, tuk -tuk dri vers, handymen, construction workers, etc. and the 
contribution of the informal SMEs as an economic sector is largely unknown. Informal street vendors 
take predominance as Lao women’s business patterns. Women represent more than 90% of 
vendors in fresh foo d markets throughout the country.  
Meanwhile, women -owned SMEs registered in Lao PDR are also predominantly made up of small firms. 
By sectors, women -owned enterprises mainly function in the retail and wholesale trade, and only to a 
 
117 The Global Climate Risk Index identifies the extent to  which countries have been affected by extreme weather  events.  
/https://germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202021_1.pdf   
118 FAO (2018). Country gender assessment of agriculture and the rural sector in Lao people’s democratic Republic. 
https://www.fao.org/3/CA0154EN/ca0154en.pdf . 
119 The Global Entrepreneurship and De velopment Institute (2019). Global Entrepreneurship Index 2019 https://thegedi.org/wp -
content/uploads/2020/01/GEI_2019_Final -1.pdf.


---
*Page 149*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
28 
 
small extent in the industrial sector. In small firms, wom en are more  engaged in the retail and wholesale 
trade sector than in the industrial sector. While direct data on women’s entrepreneurship in the 
technology sector  is not available , it is judged to be low.  
Given the quite recent development of climate tech nopreneurship, specific data related to the field are 
not available for Lao PDR.  
Women’s economic participation is heavily skewed to the unpaid jobs or informal sector.  The 
number of male government employees is 2.5 times higher than female employees.120  Wage payment 
rates in 2018 was just 13% for women, compared to 25% for men.121 Limited education opportunities 
impact Lao women’s capacities and skills necessary for starting a business and managing it efficiently 
and profitably. The barriers for women are  even steeper for technology -related businesses.   
- Female workers on average earn only two -thirds the monthly wage of their male counterparts. 
Increasingly women are taking up conventional male occupations such as plumbing  and 
electrical engineering etc. fo r better income and enterprise development, whose market demand 
is steadily on the rise.  
- Access to Business  and Markets: Women suffer lower level of education and cultural norms 
on women’s roles in the households are limiting women’s opportunities to network and acquire 
the knowledge needed to formalize their business  and to access to market, especially for 
international tra de. Women spend four times the amount of time on housework per day (2.6 
hours) compared with men (0.6 hours). Moreover, there are legal restrictions for female 
entrepreneurs, as reported in the World Bank ’s “Women, Business and the Law” (2015) 
evaluated th ere are differences between  women and men of the same marital status in 21 areas 
in the country ’s legal system .  
- Lack of Financing : Access to reliable and long -term finance and credit poses structural 
challenges to business enterprises of all sizes in Lao PDR , even more difficult to the SMEs in 
informal sectors , where women business owners are more skewed to. It is reported that in 2014, 
less than 20 % of SMEs had access to long -term credit. This poses difficulty for Lao SMEs to 
grow and compete against  other SMEs in Asia.122 Female entrepreneurs in Lao PDR are also 
less likely to have a bank account or credit line. Women market vendors in Vientiane regularly 
report the lack of access to finance and credit as a key barrier to their economic success.123  
Lao PDR  ranked 117th out of 132 countries  in the Global Innovation Index 2021 . 
Women -owned enterprises have been rising in recent years.  According to the World Bank’s 
enterprise surveys, enterprises owned by women had increased from 39% in 2009, to 42% in 2012, and 
to 43% in 2016.124 The country  has a comparatively high proportion of female top managers: 43.1% 
(2018).125 While quantity of th e women’s business enterprises has increased over time, further study is 
 
120 Lao Statistics Bureau, Laos Population and Housing Census 2015  
121 World Bank Group. 2017. World Bank Group Country Partner ship Framework for the Lao People's Democratic Republic, 2017 -2021 
(Vol. 2). Washington, DC: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/381061497445645649/pdf/116234 -WB-v2-
116p -CPF-Long -ReportEng -V6-final-LR.pdf   
122 World Bank, 2014. ‘Lao PDR’s Small and Medium Enterprises to Benefit from New World Bank Financing’. Press Release, June 9, 
2014. Avail able from: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/pressrelease/2014/06/09/lao -pdr-small -medium -enterprises -benefit -new-world -
bank -financing  
123 UN Women. 2017. The Situation of Women Market Vendors in Vientiane: A Baseline Report. Vientiane: UN Women. 
http://www2.unwomen.org/ -/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2017/01/women -marketvientiane.pdf .  
124 Parliamentary Institute of Cambodia (2018). Overview of Women’s Entrepreneurship in Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in La o 
PDR: 
https://pic.org.kh/images/2019Research/20190128%20Overview%20of%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Entrepreneurship%20in%20Micro,%
20Small% 20and%20Medium%20Enterprises%20in%20Lao%20PDR_Phetchinda%20Keovilay.pdf  
125 Firms with female top manager (% of firms) - Vietnam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Philippines, Lao PDR | Data. (2021). Retrieved from 
Worldbank.org website: https://data.worldbank.org/indic ator/IC.FRM.FEMM.ZS?locations=VN -KH-ID-PH-LA.


---
*Page 150*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
29 
 
required to understand whether these have led to benefit women with high value -added jobs in 
formalized sector with safety and security.  
 Few Start -up incubators and accelerators  exist in Lao PDR .  Women’s Entrepreneurial Centre  (WEC) 
is one of the rare business incubators targeting women.  
The Programme will address each of the above -listed constraints in the following manner: First,  CTF 
requires all the Fund -supported JV enterprises  to proactively increase female employment (esp. for 
decent jobs), improve welfare conditions for female employment  (See Appendix 3. Simplified Gender 
Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template): Section 1 -2. Entity’s Gender 
Main streaming Commitment Plan (GCMP) below.)  Gender -friendly business management and 
improved women’s work condition s (equitable with male workers in terms of contractual terms and 
payment etc.) will encourage more women’s participation in the forma l employme nt sector in the 
country over time.  
Strong promotion of women’s roles within the JV enterprises as well as the leadership roles of the 
invested companies (through capacitation support in Component 1 and Component 2 as well as 
prioritization for CTF approv al in Component 3) will also strengthen women entrepreneurs and women -
led enterprises to build business networking and partnerships, enabling women to have better access to 
business markets and financing.  
● Priority Sectors and Gender Implications in Lao PDR  
Areas for priority intervention through the proposed programme in Lao PDR are, among others: 
Climate -resilient crop development with insurance scheme/ Livestock disease control & pest 
management/ Sustainable Forest  management and p rotection/ Wastewater treatment/ Water resource 
management.   
Given the high level of women’s involvement in the agricultural sector, investment in climate -resilient 
technology has a potential to positively impact female farmers and agricultural workers’ l ivelihood. To 
overcome the existent gender disparity in access to agri -technology education and related 
entrepreneurship, the Programme needs to consciously promote female farmers’ participation in the 
funded enterprises related to the climate -resilient ag riculture.   
Enhanced livestock management system s would also benefit female livestock farmers in remote areas 
when  they are provided required technical skill training for disease control and pest management.  
As Laotian girls and women hold higher responsibilities as water collector s for the family , investments 
in climate -resilient water supply and quality management,  along with flood and drought management 
technologies would contribute to improving gender  equality  by easing them from their physical chores 
and time wasted . Wastewater  treatment will improve overall sanitation condition s, and this will in 
particular, positively affect girls and women’s health and safety.  
 
PHILIPPINES  
● Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of the Philippines  
International Agreements on Women's Rights . The Philippines is one of the earliest signatories to  
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). The 
Philippines also ratified the Optional Protocol to the CEDAW on November 12, 2003. Over the last two 
decades,  the Philippines submitted  six State reports and subse quently three NGO shadow reports which 
were accomplished by 47 NGOs to the CEDAW in compliance with the obligations of State Parties.


---
*Page 151*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
30 
 
The country also ratified in 1967 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination, and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in 1974. The 
Philippines also ratified in 1990 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Optional Protocol to the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of childr en in armed conflict in 2003 and the 
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution and Child Pornography in 2002 respectively.  
At the regional level , the country signed on the Declaration of the  Advancement of Women in the 
ASEAN Region in 1988, which focuses on the promotion and implementation of women’s equitable 
and effective participation in all fields and at all levels, and the Declaration on the Elimination of 
Violence Against Women in the A SEAN Region  in 2012.  
At the national level,  the Philippine Constitution  (1987)  stipulates equal protection of women  in its 
Article II Section 12 indicates “It [the State] shall equally protect the life of the mother and the life of 
the unborn from concepti on.” In addition to that Section 14 from the same Article II states "[The State] 
recognizes the role of women in nation building and shall ensure the fundamental equality before the 
law of women and men."   
Magna Carta of Women (Republic Act No. 9710):  As a comprehensive women's human rights law , 
the Act was e nacted in 2009. The Act stipulates that “the State shall take all appropriate measures to 
ensure the opportunity of women, on equal terms with men and without any discrimination to represent 
their government at the international level and to participate in  the work of international organizations.” 
The Act seeks to eliminate discrimination through the recognition, protection, fulfil lment, and 
promotion of the rights of Filipino women, especially those in the marginalized sectors of the society.  
The Act requi res institutionalization for  the Gender and Development (GAD) , a gender 
mainstreaming strategy in all the major government institutions. Thus, in accordance with existing 
guidelines , each of the relevant agency within the government need to prepare specific agenda and 
allocate and execute gender  budget .126  
The Philippine Plan for Gender -Responsive Development (PPGD) 1995 -2025  was adopted in 1995, 
through Executive Order 273 . It contains a long-term vision of women’s empowerment and gender 
equality and translates the Beijing Platform for Action (BPFA) into policies , strategies and programs 
and projects for Filipino women. This 30 -year perspective plan ensures that women -frien dly policies 
take root and flourish.12  
The National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW)  was established in 1975  by the 
Magna Carta of Women with an aim to ensure and advance women’s rights on policies and programs . 
NCRFW  was renamed in 2009  as the Philippines Commission on Women (PCW), with expanded 
mandates of: monitoring and overseeing the implementation of the Magna Carta and capacitating the 
government agencies to execute their respective gender mainstreaming agenda.  
RA No. 8760, (“General Appropriations Act (GAA) On Programs/Projects Related to Gender 
and Development (GAD)” ) was enacted in 2000  to mandatori se all the concerned government entities  
to submit their GAD plan to the PCW . Each plan submitted by the agencies was evaluated based on  its 
 
126 Section 27 of RA No. 8760. To quote: “ All concerned  government  entities  shall  submit  their GAD  plan to the National  Commission  on 
Women  for review.  They  shall  likewise  submit  annual  reports  to Congress,  the Department  of Budget  and Management  (DBM),  National  
Commission  on Women  (NCW),  indicating  the accomplishments  and amounts  utilized  to implement  programs/projects/activities  addressing  
gender  issues  and women  empowerment.  The evaluation  of agencies  utilizati on of the GAD  budget  shall  be performance  based. ”  
See also Section 36 and Section 36 -B of the RA No. 9710. To quote: “Section 36: Gender Mainstreaming as a Strategy for Implementing the 
Magna Carta of Women:  All government  departments,  including  their attached  agencies,  offices,  bureaus,  state universities  and colleges,  
government  owned  and controlled  corporations,  local  government  units  and all other  government  instrumentalities  shall adopt  gender  
mainstreaming  as a strategy  to promote  women’s  human  rights  and eliminate  gender  discrimination  in their systems,  structures,  policies,  
programs,  processes  and procedures.”  
& “Section 36 -B: Creation and/or Strengthening of the GAD Focal Points (GFP): All concerned  government  agencies  and instrumentalities  
mentioned  above  shall  establish  or strengthen  their GAD  Focal  Point  System  (GFPS)  or a similar  GAD  mechanism  to catalyze  and accelerate  
gender  mainstreaming  within  the agency.”


---
*Page 152*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
31 
 
performance.  Since 1995, all government agencies are mandated to allocate at least 5% of their regular 
budget to their respective GADs.  
The Gender Equality Plan  and Women’s Empowerment ( GEWE) Plan 2019 -2025 : This plan is the 
third time-slice framework plan in support of the PPGD 1995 -2025. The plan covers the Philippines 
Development Plan (PDP) 2017 -2022 and the remaining years of the PPGD 1995 -2025.  This Plan set 
out the following Strategic Goal Areas ( SGAs) , as directly relevant to our proposed program  as follows:  
SGA 1: Expand economic opportunities for women (in trade, industry, services/agriculture, fishery 
and forestry/ labour  and employment) . 
SGA 2: Accelerated Human Capital Devel opment through investment in gender equality and 
women’s empowerment (in health and nutrition/ education/ shelter)  
SGA 5: Expand opportunities for women’s participation, leadership and benefits in science, 
technology, ICT, infrastructure, and energy . 
While the Fili pinas’ STEM education  is comparatively faring well compared with the global average 
and other neighbouring countries in the region (marking 43% of the enrolment in STEM education 
being women in 2020),  the Plan notes the need to further strengthen women’s participation and 
bene fiting in the science, technology and innovation ( STI) and ICT sector, especially after the COVID -
19 situation where “STEM jobs and professional work have fared relatively well during the COVID -19 
crisis due to their suitability  to remote work.”127 Thus the  Plan, among others,  aims to support 
technology and innovation  for SMEs and entrepreneurs affected by the COVID -19 crisis and continue 
to promote more women into STEM fields of study and STEM -related careers. The  Philippines Science 
and Education Institute (SEI) will take the lead in GAD in STEM Education program and  increase the 
number of women scholarship program s for S&T education128.  
Other laws related to gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment include, among others:  
- Prohibition on Discrimination Against Women (Republic Act No. 6725): This prohibits 
discrimination with respect to terms and conditions of employment solely based on  sex. Under 
this law, any employer favouring  a male employee over a female in terms of prom otion, training 
opportunities, and other benefits solely on account of sex is considered discrimination.  
- Anti-Violence Against Women and Their Children Act of 2004.  
- Act Providing Assistance to Women Engaging in Micro and Cottage Business Enterprises, and 
for Other Purposes (Republic Act No. 7882), 1995.  
- Act to Promote Entrepreneurship by Strengthening Development and Assistance programs to 
Micro, Small and Medium Scale Enterprises Amending for  the Purpose (Republic Act No. 
6977). This act is otherwise known  as the Magna Carta for Small and Medium Enterprises and 
for other purposes  as amended by RA No. 8269 and 9501  (Known for short, “ Magna Carta for 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)” . It provides all possible assistance to Filipino 
women in their p ursuit of owning, operating and managing small business enterprises.  
- The Go Negosyo Act or Republic Act 10644  (titled “An Act Promoting Job Generation  and 
Inclusive Growth through the Development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises”) 
strengthens MSMEs to create more job opportunities in the country , by establishing “negosyo 
 
127 ADB Brief: COVID -19 is No Excuse to Regress on Gender Equality. November 2020. Retrieved from https://w 
ww.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/651541/covid -19-no-excuse -regress -gender -equality.pdf  
128 Updated Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Plan 2019 -2025 (April 2022, Philippine Commission on Women) / 
https://library.pcw.gov.ph/wp -content/uploads/2022/07/PCW -Updated -Gender -Equality -and-Womens -Empowerment -Plan-2019 -2025 -
2022.pdf


---
*Page 153*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
32 
 
centers” nationwide to support MEMEs through various business advisory servic es, business 
registration assistance, business information and advocacy services etc.  
- Magna Carta for Countryside and Barangay Business Enterprises or Republic Act 6810 
promotes ease of doing business in the countryside and municipalities for small and mi cro-
enterprises .  
- 105-Day Expanded Maternity Leave Law  (RA 11210) (fully titled, “An Act Increasing the 
Maternity  Leave Period to one hundred five (105) days for Female Workers with an Option to 
Extend for an Additional Thirty (30) Days without Pay and Granting an Additional Fifteen  (15) 
Days for Solo Mothers, and for Other Purposes.”)  
- Solar Parents Welfare Act (RA 8972) (fully titled, “An Act Providing for Benefits and 
Privileges to Solar Parents and Their Children, Appropriating Funds therefor and for Other 
Purposes.”) , sets out a comprehensive P rogramme  for social development and welfare services 
for sole parent  and their children, including, among others,  flexible work arrangements, and 
parental leave, livelihood development services, educational and housing benefits129. 
- Anti-Sexual Harassment Act of 1995.  
The Philippines Commission on Women (PCW ), as a pivotal agency of the Philippines Government 
that is mandated to ensure the implementation of the country’s Magna Carta of Women (Republic Act 
No. 9710), which has a focus area on "Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Sector ,” is 
current ly assessing the immediate effects of COVID -19 on the women micro -entrepreneurs (WMEs) 
across the priority regions of the project, to establish need -based measures to back up their gaps and 
losses and economically empower the women M SME owners and entrepre neurs130.   
Another important project funded by the Government of Canada is “GREAT Women Project 2 ” (also 
named, the Supporting Women’s Economic Empowerment in the Philippines Project), which seeks to 
improve  the economic empowerment of  women micro -entrepreneurs  (WMEs) and their workers 
through (1) improving the competitiveness and sustainability of women’s micro -enterprises and (2) 
improving the enabling env ironment for women’s economic empowerment, which PCW participates  as 
the lead executing agency 131.  Great Women Project 2 also completed profiling and enrolment of 831 
WMEs with its 15,770 employees, of which 75 percent or 11,760 were female workers across the 
regions in the country132.  
Women and Climate Change. The Climate Change Act of 2009 of the Philippines recognizes the need 
to identify the “differential impacts of climate change on men, women, and children.” The Act aims to 
incorporate a gender -sensitive, and pro -poor perspective in all climate change and r enewable energy 
efforts, plans and programs, mandating local governments to carry out capacity -building Programme 
with a focus on women and children, especially in rural areas. The National Climate Change Plan of 
the Philippines highlights the need to main stream gender considerations in (ii) research and 
development (R&D); (ii) planning and policy -making; (iii) knowledge and capacity development; and 
(iv) enhancing women’s participation in climate change adaptation. The government has been 
committed since 1 995 to allocate 5% of its annual budget for GAD.  
 
129 ESCAP/APCICT Case Study: Women ICT Fronteir Initative  (WIFI) in the Philippines/ https://www.unapcict.org/sites/default/files/2019 -
12/WIFI%20Case%20Study%20 -%20The%20Philippines%20 -%20Final.pdf  
130 https://pcw.gov.ph/micro -smal l-and-medium -enterprises -development/   
131 The project also involves and involves different national government agencies such as the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), 
Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of Science and Technology (DOST) and (sinc e 2017) the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 
the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT), and the University of the Philippines Diliman Extension P rogram 
in Pampanga (UPDEPP) for technical capacity building activity implementation , as well as private sector partners such as Bayan Academy, 
ECHOsi Foundation, National Confederation of Cooperatives (NATCCO), Socio -Economic Development Program Multi -Purpose 
Cooperative (SEDP -MPC), and other individual SMEs/entrepreneurs. / See more det ails: https://pcw.gov.ph/great -women -project/  
132 This could potentially provide a valuable DB for identifying the potential female -led SMEs to take part in the proposed Programme.


---
*Page 154*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
33 
 
A gender -sensitive approach has been adopted also in the National Framework Strategy on Climate 
Change in April 2010.  
The Philippine Green Jobs Act of 2016 or Republic Act 10771 aims to foster low -carbon, resilient 
sustainable growth,  and decent job creation by providing incentives to businesses that generate green 
jobs. However, there is no gender component in the Act.  
The country established the Climate Change Commission, as a focal point to the UNFCCC. The 
Commission has issued Resolution 2019 -01 on the implementation of the National Climate Risk 
Management Framework. It carries out several  capacity -building programs for national government 
agencies, higher educational institutions, and local government units ensuring gender balance of 
participants, trainers, experts and coordinators involved.  
The first  Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) document submitted by the Philippines 
government proposed to the UNFCCC stipulates the importance of women’s rol es in tackling climate 
change challenges. The Philippines is developing an NDC. The country is still yet to complete and 
organize its national climate change gender -responsive statistics for targeted, fit for the purpose for 
adaptation and mitigation measu res.  
● General Situation Analysis of the Philippines  
The Philippines has made significant progress in empowering women and advancing gender equality. 
Since the Government introduced the C onstitution in 1987 affirming women and men equality, there 
have been serious efforts to mainstream gender concerns in government policies and programs.133 
Based on the 2021 Census of Population by the Philippine Statistics Authority, 50.4% of the total 
population were males while 49.6% were females which resulted in a sex ra tio of 101 males for every 
100 females. In the age groups 0 -45, males outnumbered females. Females, on the other hand, 
outnumbered their male counterparts in the older age groups of 55 years old and over.  
The Human Development Index (HDI) of the Philippin es for 2020 values at 0.718 which placed the 
country in the high human development category134. With this, the Philippines ranks 107th out of 189 
countries and territories. In terms of the Gender Development Index,135 the country falls under Group 1 
countries, with high equality in HDI achievements on health, knowledge and living standards (with a 
score of 1.007). High level status of human development of the Philippine citizens is contrasted to 
the “very high” status of gender -related discrimination  reported in SIGI index in 2019. The highest 
level has been identified in the category  of discriminati on in the family and restricted access to 
productive and financial resources  (both at 67%).  
Poverty continues to be concentrated in specific segments of the population. The poverty incidence 
among the population increased to 23.7% during the first half of 2021 from 21.1% in the same period 
of 2018. This translates to 3.9 million more Filipinos living in poverty.  i.e., farmers (31.6%), fishers 
(26.2%), children belonging to families with income below the official poverty threshold (23.9%), the 
self-employed and unpaid family workers (18%) and women from poor families (16.6%) for the year 
2018.136  
The Philippines ranked 104th out of 160 countries based on the Gender Inequality Index (GII) value of 
0.430. This is based on the following statistics of the Philippines: 28% of parliamentary seats are held 
 
133 ADB (2004). Country Gender Assessment PHILIPPINES. https://think -asia.org/bitstream/handle/11540/6347/pass -
Country%20gender%20assessment%20 -%20Philippines%20Jan04.pdf?sequence=1   
134 UNDP (2020). Human Development Report 2020 The next frontier Human development and the Anthropocene: 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2020.pdf  
135 UNDP (2019). Gender Developme nt Index. Retrieved from http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2020_statistical_annex_table_4.pdf.  
136  The Philippine  Statistics  Authority (2020). Poverty Statistics for the Basic Sectors in 2018 https://psa.gov.ph/content/f armers -fisherfolks -
individuals -residing -rural -areas -and-children -posted -highest -poverty


---
*Page 155*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
34 
 
by women; for every 100,000 live births, 121 women die from pregnancy -related  causes; adolescent 
birth rate is 54.2 births per 1,000 women of ages 15 -19; and female participation in the labour market 
is 46.1% compared to 73.3% for men.  
It is remarkable that in the Global Gender Gap Report 2018 of the World Economic Forum (WEF), the  
Philippines is top 8 th in the list of the most gender -equal countries out of the 149 countries assessed. 
Filipinas are found to excel in educational attainment in all primary, secondary, and tertiary 
levels of education . This also explains the higher leve l of participation of women than men in the 
Philippines as professional and technical workers. Also, in the Philippines , women and men are 
already equally likely to attain managerial positions. This marks the country with stark difference 
from the rest of the target countries. 137 
However, the rapid deterioration in women’s health and survival is alarming.  Compared with the 
score in 2006, the country plummeted in its gender parity in this area in 2018, from 1st to 43rd in the 
country rankings. Further study is required to understand the underlying causes for this. Also 
noteworthy is the persistence of wide gap in wage level between men and women despite women’ s 
parity in education attainment as men : the labour  market in the country is still dominant with male 
workers (with only 51.4% of women workers vs. 76.9% male), ranking 106th out of 149 countries 
assessed and the income disparity between genders remains .  
Women and Agriculture. Filipinas have developed innovative solutions to challenges posed by 
climate change and natural disasters. Conservation farming – in which coffee and root crop s are 
interspersed with rice to have the most efficient water conservation and land use possible – generates 
income from local sales and increases crop diversification, protecting against the risk of crop failure 
due to altered weather patterns. Hazard mit igation is more difficult to integrate in to indigenous 
communities who are in rural areas, with heavy dependence on small -scale agriculture and natural 
resources.138  
Agrarian reform laws and guidelines have increasingly recognized and protected the rights of rural 
women to land and other productive resources.139 However, weak implementation of existing land laws 
and guidelines, customary and discriminatory practices, lack of information and ineffective gender 
mainstreaming strategies have blocked gender equa lity in agriculture and the rural sectors, particularly 
regarding land rights.140 Rural women’s limited registration in the farmers’ databases, which 
traditionally consist of male farmers who are heads of the family, is a barrier to gender equality in 
agric ulture.  
Agriculture is regarded as a male -dominated sector, and officially there are more male farmers 
registered than female farmers. The agricultural labour force is mainly composed of men at 77% while 
only 23% of the employed workers are women.141 Unpaid care work is heavily dominated by women. 
Women tend to be less integrated in value chains than men. Their lack of mobility and access to 
markets, reinforced by social norms, prevent them from linking with buyers, suppliers, and other 
actors in the c hain. In agriculture value chains, women are predominantly active in subsistence 
farming and food for family consumption, whereas men primarily focus on cash crops.142 Women 
farmers face greater disadvantages in accessing agricultural and rural advisory ser vices. They are 
less likely to be targeted for extension services, as many extension agents still do not recognize women 
as farmers. Research shows that despite their primary role in the family’s food security, only 36% of 
 
137 https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf   
138https://www.preventionweb.net/files/globalplatform/5cd6e23ca5361International_Disaster_Risk_Reduction_Strategies.pdf   
139 FAO (2018). Country gender assessment of agricult ure and the rural sector in lao people’s democratic Republic 
https://www.fao.org/3/ca1345en/ca1345en.pdf  
140 National Confederation of Small Farmers and Fishers Organizations (PAKISAMA). (2016). Analysis of Land Tools in the Philippines 
using Gender Evaluation Criteria. http://asianfarmers.org/wp -content/uploads/2015/06/Corral_289 -mar2015.pdf  
141 Philippine Statics Authority (2018). https://psa.gov.ph/content/male -farm -workers -are-paid-higher -female -farm -workers  
142 Quisumbing, A., Heckert, J., Faas, S., Ramani, G., Raghunathan, K., & Malapit, H. (2021). Women’s empowerment and gender equality 
in agricultural value chains: evidence from four countries in Asia and Africa.  Food Security , 13(5), 1101 -1124.


---
*Page 156*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
35 
 
women farmers have access to irri gation, 29% to seeds, 26% to training, 23% to extension 
services, 21% to fertilizers and seeds subsidy, 20% to pest control management, 20% to calamity 
assistance and 14% to financial assistance. According to a study, if women farmers were given the 
same l evel of support as their male counterparts, food production by women could increase by 25% and 
total national food production by 1.5% to 3%.143 
A 2021 publication on Gender and Value Chains from GIZ notes that in Southeast Asia, women are 
also more involved  in small trade, particularly in agricultural goods.144 The Philippine Centre for 
Postharvest Development and Mechanization (PhilMech), an attached agency to the Department of 
Agriculture, has been active in the design, fabrication, and commercialization of  gender -friendly 
technologies to provide both male and female farmers with access to machines that will help them 
increase their productivity.145  
Women and Energy . Access to electricity is still a dream for about 11 million Filipinos. In Southeast 
Asia, th e Philippines ranks as having the third highest number of people who are energy deficient. 
Looking at the data from  the World Bank (2019), the electricity penetration rate is 95.6%. However, 
even for poor families who do have access to electricity, paying for electricity is a constant struggle —
not surprising for a country whose electricity rates are among the highest in the world, second only to 
Japan in Asia.  
The primary energy supply is mainly based on fossil fuels like oil (36 %), gas (6%) and coal and others 
(29%), following IRENA data of 2018. Renewable energy, particularly bioenergy and geothermal have 
a limited share of 29%, and consequently the energy sector results as the largest contributor to 
greenhouse gas emissions in the country.146 
Women in th e Philippines are the primary consumers of energy and are most affected by the lack of 
clean, affordable, and reliable energy. This underscores the value of women’s perspective 
in policies  which, ultimately, contributes to improved robustness of decision -making.   As a major 
influence on family and household decisions, women play an active role in implementing energy 
projects. Having power at home allows the mother of the house to use time -saving equipment such as 
rice cookers and washing machines, among oth er things. Furthermore, the availability of energy in 
isolated rural areas means they don't have to travel half a day to the main island to recharge their phones 
and flashlights. Women's financial opportunities have also increased because of  having electri city, as 
they may work longer hours.147 
 
143 National Confederation of Small Farmers and Fishers Organizations (PAKISAMA). (2016). Analysis of Land Tools in the Philippin es 
using Gender Evaluation Criteria. http://asianfarmers.org/wp -content/uploads/2015/06/Corral_289 -mar2015.pdf  
144 GIZ (2021). Promotion of Sustainable Agricultural Value Chains in ASEAN. https://www.giz.de/e n/downloads/giz2021 -en-agri-asean -
factsheet.pdf  
145 The Philippine Centre  for Postharvest Development  and Mechanization:  https://www.philmech.gov.ph/?page=gender -
corner&subPa ge=gad_role  
146 IRENA. (2018). Indonesia ENERGY PROFILE. Retrieved from 
https://www.irena.org/IRENADocuments/Statistical_Profiles/Asia/Indonesia_Asia_RE_SP.pdf.  
147 Gender perspectives on energy poverty and energy democracy in The Philippines. (2020). Retrieve d from Library.fes.de website: 
https://library.fes.de/TouchPoint/singleHit.do?methodToCall=showHit&curPos=4&identifier=2_SOLR_SERVER_136434115.


---
*Page 157*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
36 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Philippines Total Primary Energy Supply in 2018  
 
The Philippines has a female chairperson of the Philippine National Renewable Energy Board (NREB) 
since her appointment by the Philippine President on 28 March 2019.148 She steers the  performance of 
the Board in its mandate of monitoring the implementation of a program established under the 
Philippine Renewable Energy Act of 2008 (Republic Act No.  9513) and in formulating 
recommendations for new policies to the Department  of Energy (DOE) toward achie ving the renewable 
energy targets of the country. The Department of Energy launched the gender toolkit for the energy 
sector to respond effectively to gender issues and to bolster equal rights and shared responsibilities 
between men and women.149 
Women and Water.  Results of the 2020 Annual Poverty Indicators Survey show that most  families 
had an improved source of drinking water (97.5%). Residents in rural areas are more likely to have 
an unimproved source of drinking water than those in urban areas (9.1% vs . 2.6%). However, 
four in every five families (80.2%) did not practice any method or treatment in ensuring that drinking 
water is safe to drink. About nine in every ten families (93.9%) had basic service level with drinking 
water from an improved source wi th roundtrip collection time of not more than 30 minutes. Families 
with basic drinking water service level in urban areas (96.9%) was higher than in rural areas (90.6%). 
In 2020, about four out of five families (80.4%) had a basic sanitation service level or used an improved 
sanitation facility not shared with another household.150 Women and their households also need water 
for bathing and personal hygiene, laundry, and cooking – which require water that has not been polluted 
by pesticides or fertilizers. In  view of the gender division of labour in Filipino households, women have 
a greater stake in safe water supply. They use the water in their housework, and they care for 
household members who may fall ill due to contaminated water.  
 
148 https://usea.org/article/women -energy -monalisa -c-dimalanta  
149 Department of Energy (2016). DOE GENDER TOOLKIT for the Energy Sector https://www.apec.org/docs/default -
source/Publications/2017/5/Guideli nes-to-Develop -Energy -Resiliency -in-APEC -Off-Grid-Areas/TOC/Annex -8-Philippines -DOE -Gender -
Toolkit.pdf  
150 Philippine Statistics Authority (2020). https://psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files/%5BONSrev -
cleared%5D%202020%20APIS%20Final%20Report_rev1%20wo%20comments_ONSF3_signed.pdf  
 
Source: IRENA  https://www.irena.org/


---
*Page 158*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
37 
 
● Climate Change and Gende r in the Philippines  
The Philippines is one of the world’s most vulnerable populations to the effects of climate change, 
ranking 2nd in the Climate Risk Index from 1999 -2018. 151  When the United Nations Office for Disaster 
Risk Reduction (UNISDR) evaluated disaster -prone countries in 2015,  the Philippines ranked   third . 
This is due, in part, to its geographic location as an archipelago with an exposed coastline, and its 
position in the Pacific Ring of Fire. Extreme w eather events like flooding, typhoons, and earthquakes 
are common; on average,  eight or nine tropical storms make landfall each year. The frequent occurrence 
of natural disasters poses challenges for a developing nation such as the Philippines, which lacks  the 
financial resources and organizational capacity for comprehensive disaster risk reduction.  
Women play an integral role in this localized disaster risk reduction and management, stemming from 
their traditional position as community leaders, as well as  the mobility of the male labour  force in the 
region. Within the remaining population, women are the key drivers in all aspects of community 
organizing and developing resilience. Inequality is often worsened by various risks and hazards that can 
affect the  situation of the poor, the vulnerable, and the severely marginalized. Super typhoon Yolanda 
(Haiyan) in 2013 affected approximately 16 million individuals, half of whom are women and girls.152 
Women are increasingly seen as more vulnerable than men to the impacts of climate change, because 
of their connection to poverty and dependence on natural resources.  
• Business Enterprises and Gender in the Philippines  
The Philippine Statistics Authority indicates that in 2015 there were around 900,000 registered 
enterprises in the country. An estimated 10% of these businesses were classified as small, and less than 
1% were classified as medium. Less than 1% of businesses in the country were classified as large, while 
the vast majority (90%) were compose d of micro -enterprises. It is estimated that there are around 28,000 
SMEs in the Philippines.   
The Philippine entrepreneurship ecosystem is middle -income average as well as its ASEAN peers, 
ranking 86 out of 137 countries in the 2019 Global Entrepreneurship Index (GEI), while the Global 
Innovation Index ranks  the country  51st out of 132 countries (2021).  The Philippine start -up 
ecosystem has strengthened over the years with the recent rise in the number of incubators and 
accelerators and oth er support providers such as Investing in Women, Philippines Women 
Entrepreneur Network and WOCAN which are specifically targeting women start -ups.153 Currently, 
disaggregated data on the nature of business (i.e., whether they are start -ups on climate chang e 
adaptation and mitigation) are not available. There are no available gender statistics on SMEs ownership 
in the Philippines.  
While 77.3% of male s are economically active participating in labour force, women are only 50.1%. 
The only type of workforce act ivity where : 
- the participation of women was higher compared to men in unpaid family work, where the 
women’s participation rate was at 14%, while the men’s participation was at 7% in 2015. 
Women’s participation tends to be generally low across all forms of economic activity. Only 
 
151 Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., Schäfer, L., & Winges, M. (2018). GLOBAL CLIMATE RISK INDEX 20 20. Retrieved from 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/20 -2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf . 
152 Women and the  Environment, Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA+20) Philippine Progress Report  
153 Francisco, Jamil Paolo and Canare, Tristan. 2017. The Challenges To SME Market Access in the Philippines and the Role of Busi ness 
Promoting SME Competitiveness in the Philippi nes (2020). International Trade Centre. Retrieved from  
https://apfcanada -msme.ca/sites/default/files/2019 -01/The Challenges to SME Market Access the Philippines and the Role 
ofBusinessAssociations_edited.pdf.


---
*Page 159*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
38 
 
1.7%  of women in the workforce are employers while male counterparts were 3.5%. Female 
top managers are only 29.9% (2019).154  
 
- Social and cultural constraints: Although the 2009 Magna Carta for Women (MCW , R.A. 
9710) ensures women’s equal rights in all matters relating to marriage and family relations – 
inclusive of owning, acquiring,  and administering property, married women are applied 
exceptions: The Family Code states that in case of disagreement over conjugal property, “a 
husband’s decision shall prevail.” The Philippine Commission on Women is currently working 
to repeal this discriminatory article of the Family Code.155 Policy on land distribution by the 
Philippine government is virtually disadvantageo us to  women. Prioritization  of the beneficiary 
groups to the government’s land distribution  is reported to  favour  men in effect.  
- Access to Business Markets : About 92% of all enterprises in the Philippines  were at micro -
level, where women were most owners and operators. About 60% of women’s enterprises were 
under performing due to lack of management/business support and poor access to finance. 
Many female micro -entrepreneurs are reported to be reluctant to formalize their businesses in 
response to go vernment efforts in this regard, due to concerns about official interference and 
the greater costs of meeting the requirements of formal registration.156  
- Lack of Financing:  The Women in Development and Nation Building Act (Republic Act No. 
7192) stipulates equal treatment between women and men regarding opening a bank account 
and obtaining credit, loans and ensures equal access to public and private sector grants for 
agricul tural credits, equal rights to enter  various financial contractual relations. Again, married 
women in the Philippines are discriminated against . According to the Philippine Tax Code 
(1997), in case both spouses earn wages, the husband is deemed the househo ld head by default, 
eligible for tax exemptions. Although legally not required, some financial institutions require 
and expect a male partner to co -sign any financial contracts.157 Women entrepreneurs often seek 
micro -finance schemes,  but it is reported to be restrictive and complicated in procedures. This 
makes women seek  other more expensive means for credits. Due to their lack of collateral, a 
bank loan is often inaccessible to women.158 
- The government has taken a range of measures to increase women’s financial literacy and 
access to credit – especially for rural women and female entrepreneurs, such as: contract 
standardization, lowered transaction costs, incentive schemes, flexible payment schedules , etc. 
In addition, the Philippines Commission on Women implements the "GREAT Women Project" 
which stands for Gender Responsive Economic Actions for the Transformation of Women.159  
These barriers discourage women from pursuing their business. QBO and DTI’s Sta rt-up Pinay 
Programme aims to mitigate this issue. Start -up Pnay is an initiative that aims to create a diverse, 
inclusive  Start -up landscape in the Philippines by empowering women founders, leaders, enablers, and 
explorers . Through the Start -up Pinay Prog ramme, QBO and DT aim to take meaningful steps towards 
shifting gender norms, especially on the role of women in the workplace.  Impact Pioneers Network is 
 
154 Firms with female top manager (% of firms) - Vietnam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Philippines, Lao PDR | Data. (2021). Retrieved from 
Worldbank.org website: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IC.FRM.FEMM.ZS?locations=VN -KH-ID-PH-LA. 
155 In addition, according to the Civil Code, young wives under the age of 21 is not posited to properly equipped for all acts of  civil life: its 
article 39 states that “a married woman, twenty -one years of age or over, is qualified for all acts of civil life , except in cases specified by law.” 
Married men are not applied the age limit. See: https://www.genderindex.org/wp -content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/PH.pdf   
156 ESCAP (2018). Women’s Entrepreneurship: Lessons and Good Practice Women’s Entrepreneurship: Lessons and Good Practice 
(unescap.org)  
157 OECD. SIGI Philippines. (2019). Retrieved from https://www.genderindex.org/country/philippines/.  
158 ADB (2008), Paradox and Promise in the Philippines: A Joint Country Assessment, Asian Development Bank, Mandaluyong City, 
Philippines, https: //www.adb.org/documents/paradox -and-promise -philippines -joint-country -genderassessment.  
159OECD. SIGI Philippines. (2019). Retrieved from https://www.genderindex.org/country/philippines/.


---
*Page 160*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
39 
 
also a recently launched activity by USAID Philippines which also supports women enterprises as an 
angel investing network.160 
The Programme will address the above -listed constraints in the following manner: First, relatively 
disadvantaged female farmers’ status in the Philippines could be improved when agricultural “women -
led enterprises” are prioritized and supported by the CTF.  In case a CTF -supported enterprises/JVs 
involve involuntary resettlement associated with the land acquisition, the CTF shall apply the GCF 
Safeguard policy on involuntary resettlement, and its interim safeguard standards (such as IFC 
Performance Standard 5 on Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement (2012) and its Guidance 
Note 5161) and ensure equal treatment between male and women as compensation and other benefit 
beneficiaries162.  
Given the equal/higher education level of women in the Philippines, p romoting (by prioritizing for CTF 
approval) the “women -led enterprises” will substantially capacitate the female entrepreneurs in the 
country to remove their structure barriers to the formal finances and credits as well as by strengthening 
their business n etwork and partnership to the global level and address the limitations of many female -
led enterprises stagnant in the small and micro -scale levels.  
● STEM and Higher Education, and Gender in the Philippines  
The Philippines  has, according to  UNESCO, an adul t literacy rate of 98.18%. Only in a few countries 
female literacy rates are above male literacy rates . In the Philippines, 98.24% of all women aged 15 
years and older are literate, compared to 98.12% of men. 75.6% of adult women have reached at least 
a secondary level of education compared to 72.4% of their male counterparts. In the Philippines , there 
are more female graduates than males.  The average Tertiary school enrolment was 35.48% in 2017. 
Among those with baccalaureate degrees, there were more females (56.0%) than males (44.0%). 
Similarly, among those with post -baccalaureate courses, females (59.9%) outnumbered males (40.1%). 
Regarding STEM and higher  enrolment  rate, Filipinas reach around 18%.163   
Meanwhile, the World Economic Forum recorded an  improvement in economic participation and 
opportunity because of  increased wages for women’s estimated income and equal pay for similar work.  
The Philippines ranks higher than any other Asia -Pacific country except New Zealand. However, 
qualified women have less opportunities to be promoted to the top managerial positions and 
female workers with the same educational qualification and responsibilities are being paid less 
than men.  
The Philippines is facing an oversupply in information technology (IT ) and needs more students 
to go into the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.  The undersupply 
of STEM -trained workers is most apparent in the life sciences, physical sciences, mathematics , statistics 
and engineering by 2025. The  Philippine Institute for Development Studies (PIDS) estimates the 
supply -demand gaps in 2025 at 13,964 workers in the life sciences, 569,903 in engineering, 9,689 in 
the physical sciences, and 13,285 in math and statistics.164 In the Philippines, women in STEM -
related industries are often in low -skilled positions and are less likely to progress professionally.  
 
160 US Embassy in the Philippines. (2021 Nov 22). USAID launches two ac tivities to support micro, small, and medium enterprises i n the 
Philippines. US Embassy in the Philippines. Retrieved from https://ph.usembassy.gov/usaid -launches -two-activities -to-support -micro -small - 
and-medium -enterprises -in-the-philippines/.  
161 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/sustainability -at-ifc/policies -
standards/performance -standards/ps5   
162 In addition, if it is clear that the female farmers and residents are socio -economically and climate disaster -wise more vulnerable than 
men, the CTF invested enterprises shall also integrate some spec ial consideration of the female farmers and resident groups as the vulnerable 
groups, in accordance with the GCF Gender Policy (2019).  
163 Marshan, J. (2020, November 15). Will Indonesia’s 4.0 revolution leave women behind? - Indonesia at Melbourne. Retriev ed from: 
https://indonesiaatmelbourne.unimelb.edu.au/will -indonesias -4-0-revolution -leave -women -behind/#_ftn1  . 
164 BusinessWorld Onl ine. Philippines facing oversupply in IT graduates, STEM shortage. Retrieved from: 
https://www.bworldonline.com/philippines -facing -oversupply -in-it-graduates -stem -shortage/.


---
*Page 161*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
40 
 
The ILO has also estimated that  women in the Philippines are 140 percent more likely to lose their 
job due to automation than men.  
● Priority Sectors a nd Gender Implications in the Philippines  
Areas for priority intervention through the proposed Programme in the Philippines are, among others: 
Off-grid renewable energy (RE) and battery storage for health facilities in climate disaster vulnerable 
areas / RE -powered mobile water treatment and desal ination/ Technologies for crop tolerance to 
extreme weather events.   
Women play an active role in impacting energy consumption. Improved availability of affordable clean 
energy, as solar PV and other green energy technologies  would affect mainly the time spent by women 
and girls in doing house chores, electricity bills and the indoor pollution.  The proposed Programme 
also had better target women and young entrepreneurs in gaining the technical skills to enter the 
renewable energy sector . Given the high le vel of education of women, there is a high potential for 
women’s participation in RE enterprises in the Philippines.  
Agriculture is mostly a male -dominant sector, where Filipinas ’ farms are only 23% whose majority are 
of small -scale substantial agriculture  type. In the Philippines, women often  have less access to 
agricultural services (such as irrigation, seeds, training , etc.) and land ownership  than men . The 
Programme needs to target women as benefi ciaries of the commercialization and diffusion of 
agricultural technologies and  have a concrete impact on women's  livelihood and food security.  
 
VIETNAM  
● Legal and Institutional Setup and International Commitment of Vietnam  
International Agreements on Women's Rights. Vietnam  is a signatory to the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights (1948) and most of the key international instruments on gender equality . Vietnam  
participated in the Beijing World Conference on Women (1995) an d follow -up meetings . Vietnam  was 
one of the first countries to ratify the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) in 1982  but it has not signed the Optional Protocol to CEDAW ; Operational Program  to the 
International Covenant  on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ; and  Operational Protocol  to the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . 
At the regional level , Vietnam signed on the Declaration of the Advancement of Women in the ASEAN 
Region in 1988, which focuses on the promotion and implementation of women’s equitable and 
effective participation in all fields and at all levels . The country also signed  the Declaration on the 
Elimination of Violence Against Women in the ASEAN Region in 2012.  
Institutional Ar rangements . The central government agency responsible for overseeing gender 
equality initiatives is the National Committee for the Advancement of Women (NCFAW) , which 
coordinates gender mainstreaming as an inter -ministerial committee. Under NCFAW have been  also 
created the Committees for the Advancement of Women (CFAWs)  in all ministries/agencies and in 
all 64 provinces of the country . 
The Vietnam  Women Union (VWU ) is a mass organization with strong links to the government . VWU  
also works closely with CFAWs at the grassroots level and implement s projects to improve women's 
lives and contribute to their economic development. In addition, at the central level , there  are a number 
of central legislative (i.e. the National Assembly) and administrative and management agencies, as well 
as the mass party organization for women. At sub -national (provincial) levels, a Department of Labour -
Invalids and Social Affairs  (MOLISA) , Department of Culture, Sports and Tourism  (MOCST) ,


---
*Page 162*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
41 
 
Provincial Wo men’s Union, Provincial Committee for the Advancement of Women exist. The Sub -
provincial (district and commune) levels, there also exist similar structure s.  
 
 
Figure 3 -Vietnam’s National Institutional Structure for Gender Equality at the Central Level  
(Source: UN Women, Country Gender Equality Profile Vietnam 2021165) 
 
At the national level , Viet nam has a solid legal framework in place to promote gender equality. The 
Constitution (1946)  proclaims equality between men and women in terms of economic opportunities, 
political engagement, land tenure, property ownership, marriage, and family . After the ratification of 
the CEDAW in 1982, the Vietnamese  government has taken important steps to ensure that legislation 
supports gender equality  as follows : 
- Law on Marriage and Family (2000) upholds the principle of equality in ownership and 
inheritance in case of divorce and death.  
- Law on Gender Equality (2006)  
- The Land Law of 2013  makes it compulsory to have both husband’s and wife’s names on land 
use certificates and house ownership documents.  
- Decree No.56/2009/ND -CD (on assistance to the development of small - and medium -sized 
enterprises) prior itizes assistance program for SMEs owned by women and SMEs which uses 
more female employees .166  However, it is reported that there is no official regulation that 
defines a women -owned MSEs167.  
- The Law on Domestic Violence Prevention and Control came into effect in 2008  as one of 
the most proactive measures taken towards ending many forms of GBV at ho me. A number of 
projects on GBV have also been implemented nationwide, including the Programme for 
Prevention and Response to Gender -Based Violence (2016 -2020) and Vision to 2030; the 
 
165 https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Field%20Office%20ESEAsia/Docs/Publications/2021/10/vn -CGEP_Full.pdf   
166 See Article 5 of the Decree.  
167 “There is no official definition of women -owned SMEs in Vietnam. The General Statistics Office of Vietnam uses the gender of the top 
manager as a proxy (i.e., enterprises managed by a woman are considered to be women -owned) . There is a strong correlation between a 
female top manager and majority female ownership. According to the World Bank Group Enterprise Surveys 2015, there is 79% cor relation 
between having a female top manager and majority female ownership; this study fo und 92% correlation.” ( Women -owned enterprises in 
Vietnam: Perceptions and Potential. (2017). Retrieved from https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/86bc0493 -78fa-4c7d -86ec -
5858aa41fa1a/Market -study -on-Women -owned -enterprises -in-Vietnam_Eng_v1.pdf?MOD=AJPERES& CVID=l -Yi6gF.)


---
*Page 163*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
42 
 
National Action Plan on Prevention of Domestic Violence (2014 -2020); the  Project on the 
Reduction of Domestic Violence in Rural Areas of Vietnam  (2015 - 2020); the Annual Plan to 
Minimize Teen Marriage and Consanguineous Marriage in Ethnic Minorities in 2018; and a 
Programme to support gender equality among ethnic minorities in  2018 -2025.168 
- The Law on Support for Small and Medium -sized Enterprises (2017) stipulates putting 
priorities to small -and medium -sized enterprises that are owned by women or employing more 
female workers. This is the very first time that the country’s laws and regulations explicitly 
mention ed the importance of women -owned SMEs169.   
- Currently, the National Strategy on Gender Equality (2021 - 2030)  sets specific targets  for 
gender equality and meeting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. Some of 
those targets include:  by 2025, 60% and by 2030, over 75% of state management agencies and 
local administration at all levels shall have female leaders; increase female employment 
engaged in paid work to 50% by 2025 and to approximately 60% by 2030; and reducing 
women’s average  hours of housework and domestic care without wage to 1.7 times in 2025 and 
1.4 times in 2030 compared to men.170 
Women and Climate Change. Vietnam’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) was 
submitted in November 2022 to the UNFCCC with specific  reference s to the gendered impacts of 
climate change . However, a  comprehensive integration of gender in the policy frameworks 
underpinning the implementation of the updated NDC is lacking  and there are no explicit gender 
equality targets or measures ident ified to address women’s vulnerabilities in climate change. The 
updated NDC of Viet nam also highlights the need for new technologies and livelihood diversification 
for rural women and stresses that gender inequalities should not be exacerbated by the introduction of 
such technologies.171 
● General Situation Analysis of Vietnam  
Vietnam is one of the fastest -growing economies in the world. The 2019 Population and Housing 
Census reported a d emography of 96.2 million people, with 65.6% of Vietnam 's population  being  
located in rural areas.172 Vietnam  has been praised for its achievement of gender targets and the  
government’s  strong commitment to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
Such efforts have paid off with improved rankings in several global indices, including the Human 
Development Index and the Gender Development Index. In 2020, Vietnam ’s HDI was 0.704 falling 
under the high human development category. It is a substantial imp rovement from 0.475 in 1990 . The 
country now rank s 117th out of 189 countries and territories. The 2020 female HDI value was 0.703 
(0.705 for males), resulting in a Gender Development Index ( GDI) of 0.997, which positively places 
Vietnam  into Group 1 countries.173 Vietnam  has also taken  tremendous steps toward becoming a lower -
middle -income country and reducing poverty  and achieving a low unemployment rate. Considering the 
 
168 VIETNAM’S VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS. (2018). Retrieved from https://sustainable development.un.org/content/documents/19967VNR_of_Viet_Nam.pdf .  
169 Article 5 of the Law, under the heading of “Principles of Support for small - and medium -sized enterprises” include the following 
provision: “5. […] In case many small - and medium -sized enterprises are eligible for support prescribed in this Law, priority s hall be given 
to those owned by women or employing more female workers.”  
170 Government of Vietnam. (2021). Resolution No. 28/NQ -CP the National Strategy on Gender Equality in 2021 - 2030. Retrieved from 
https://english.luatVietnam.vn/resolution -no-28-nq-cp-dated -march -03-2021 -of-the-government -on-promulgation -of-the-national -strategy -
on-gender -equality -in-the-period -of-2021 -203-199301 -Doc1.html.  
171 The State of Gender Equality and Climate Change in Vietnam (EmPower – Women for Climate Resilient  
Societies). R etrieved from https: //asiapacific.unwomen.org/ . 
172 Macrotrends. Vietnam Rural Population 1960 -2021. (2021). https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/VNM/Vietnam/rural -
population#:~:text=Vietnam%20rural%20population%20for%202020,a%200.06%25%20decline%20from%202016.  
173 As identified  by UNDP, Group 1 comprises countries with high equality in HDI achievements between women and men (absolute 
deviation of less than 2.5 %).


---
*Page 164*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
43 
 
OECD’s Social Institution s and Gender Index 2019 (SIGI) ,174 the level of discrimination against women 
is regarded  as “low” (25%). Following the parameters of the index, the categories with higher 
discrimination were  related to “restricted access to productive and financial resource s” and “restricted 
physical integrity”, scored at 32% and 31%  respectively .175  
The country still faces a gender imbalance regarding political decision -making. In 2020, the female 
representation in the national assembly was at 26.7%, with little improvement from 2009 (25.8%) . 
Women are underrepresented across government bodies.176 
Vietnam  has a relatively high labour  force participation rate (76.2%) with an average women’s 
participation of 73.2% (2018) . The country  emphasizes the importance of labour  force participation by 
women. While being highly economically active, women also bear a disproportionate amount of fami ly 
responsibilities. In Vietnam, women’s  challenge in the labour  market is the quality of that employment 
rather than the share of employmen t.:177  
In 2019 , the agriculture sector accounted for 36.1% of female employment;  Combined with  the services  
sector, these  represented the largest sector of employment for women ( 36.8%); while roughly one -
fourth (25.4%) of women  in Vietnam  work in the industrial sector, mostly in manufacturing.178 Since 
the COVID -19 pandemic outbreak , labour force participation has fallen  sharply for both women and 
men, but women bore the bigge r damage . According to an April 2020 analysis by the International 
Labour  Organization (ILO), 64% of workers in the sectors that were hardest hit by the economi c impacts 
of the pandemic in the early months  in Vietnam, namely accommodations and food; manufacturing; 
wholesale, retail trade, and repair; transport and communication; and arts and entertainment were 
women.  It is also reported that the COVID -19 pandemic  has worsened gender inequalities and GBV in 
Vietnam.  
Vietnam  has made remarkable progress in eradicating illiteracy and providing universal education, with 
national statistics indicating almost gender parity in the attendance of girls and boys in general education. 
The literacy rate of the population aged 15 years and above is 95% on average (female 93.6% and male 
96.5%), which is largely due to the implementation of literacy programs and reduced gender inequality 
in terms of access to education, as stipul ated in the Action Plan on Gender Equality in Education 2016 -
2020.179 
● Climate change and Gender in Vietnam  
Vietnam  ranked 38th in the Global Climate Risk Index for 2019 and 13th in the Climate Risk Index for 
2000 -2019180. Over the past 30 years, hundreds of victims have been generated by climate change -
related disasters  while incurring an annual national economic loss of approximately 1.5% of GDP.  
Vietnam ’s most vulnerable areas are located in the Mekong Delta, the Red R iver Delta and the central 
coast, where ecosystems, biodiversity and water resources are at risk and  related economic sectors such 
as agriculture, public health and infrastructure  are increasingly more vulnerable . The poor, ethnic 
 
174 The SIGI covers four dimensions of discriminatory social institutions, spanning major socio -economic areas that affect women’s lives: 
Discrimination in the family; Restricted physical integrity; Restricted access to productive and financial resources; and  Restricted civil 
liberties. https://www.genderindex.org/sigi/ .  
175 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2019. Available at: https://www.genderindex.org/ranking/ .  
176 Statista. Vietnam: proportio n of seats held by women in national parliament. (2020). https://www.statista.com/statistics/730331/Vietnam -
proportion -of-seats -held-by-women -in-national -parliament/.  
177 Theme, G. (n.d.). AUSTRALIA -WORLD BANK GROUP STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP IN VIETNAM. Retrieve d from 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/34895/Perceptions -of-Gender -Disparities -in-Vietnam -s-Labor -
Market.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.  
178 Gender and the labour market in Vietnam* An analysis based on the Labour Force Survey Main mes sages ILO Brief. (2021). Retrieved 
from https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ ---asia/---ro-bangkok/ ---ilo-hanoi/documents/publication/wcms_774434.pdf.  
179 The State of Gender Equality and Climate Change in Vietnam. (2021). Retrieved from https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/ -
/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2021/04/publicati on_Vietnam%20report_digital2%20(1).pdf?la=en&vs=4800 .  
180 Germanwatch. Global Climate Risk Index 2021. Available at: 
https://www.germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202021_2.pdf


---
*Page 165*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
44 
 
minorities, the elderly, women, children,  and people with disabilities are among those who bear the 
burden of the negative impacts of climate change.181   
Women and Agriculture. According to a report conducted by FAO (2019), agriculture c ontributes 21% 
of Vietnam 's total GDP and employs more than 7% of the country's workforce. Women are an 
important labour  force in agricultural production, especially in rural areas, where about 63% of 
the women work in agriculture in the agricultural secto r.182 Agriculture is the sector that will be 
hardest hit by climate change in Vietnam  and women are disproportionately impacted because they 
make up a large slice of the workforce. Their per capita income is relatively lower than males’ .  
Regarding rural wo men, the Vietnamese government is working on providing a preferential credit 
instrument to support women in agriculture. However, it is reported that men are the foremost 
beneficiaries  of the agricultural process mechanization as men are more involved in machinery -related 
tasks like tillage, harvesting, processing and transport.  It is reported that in Vietnam, c limate change 
also intensifies women’s double burden in having to fulfil l both productive and reproductive role s.183 
Women and Energy. Over the past few decades , Vietnam  has emerged as an important oil and natural 
gas producer in the area . According to the IRENA (2018), coal -fired power and oil led primary energy 
supply for the country.184 At the same time, however, Vietnam’s renewable ene rgy sector is one of the 
most vibrant in  the Southeast Asia region. Renewable energy sector account s for 24% (mostly 
hydropower and bioenergy) of the total primary energy supply in the country.185 The electricity 
penetration rate is more than 99%  (WB, 2019) .186 
While the country is providing almost full electrification to their households,187 clean energy solutions 
are not available to everyone,  and women are considered more vulnerable in this regard. As they take 
on traditional household roles, inc luding cooking and fuel collection, their health is more affected by 
indoor pollution and climate change might extend the travel distance to get fuel because of the increased 
scarcity of natural resources. IRE NA (2018) reported that only 64 % of the popula tion has access to 
clean cooking methods. 188   
Gender roles make women the focal point of energy consumption in households, while they are still 
marginalized in terms of decision -making at the community level about energy and they are not well 
integrated in to the energy job market because  most jobs in the manufacturing, construction, and  
engineering are traditionally seen as suitable only for men, thus women are significantly 
underrepresented.  
  
 
181 Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., Schäfer, L., & Wing es, M. (2018). GLOBAL CLIMATE RISK INDEX 2020. Retrieved from 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/20 -2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf.  
182 FAO, Country Assessment Report. Gender in Agriculture and Rural Development of Vietnam. 2019.  
183 The State of Gender Equality and Climate Change in Vietnam (EmPower – Women for Climate Resilient  
Societies). Retrieved from https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/ -
/media/field%20office% 20eseasia/docs/publications/2021/05/empowerpolicy%20brief%20for%20stakeholdersstate%20of%20gender%20eq
uality%20%20climate%20change%20viet%20nam.pdf?la=en&vs=119  . 
184 Total primary energy supply (TPES) is the total amount of primary energy that a country has  at their disposal.  
185 IRENA. (2018). Vietnam Energy Profile. Retrieved from 
https://www.irena.org/IRENADocuments/Statistical_Profiles/Asia/Viet%20Na m_Asia_RE_SP.pdf .  
186 Access to electricity (% of population) - Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Vietnam, Philippines. (2019). 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=KH -ID-LA-VN-PH. 
187 Vietnam Briefing. (2020, November 12). Renewables in Vietnam: Current Opportunities and Future Outlook. Retrieved from Vietnam 
Briefing News website: https://www.vietnam -briefing.com/news/vietnams -push -for-renew able-energy.html/ .  
188 IRENA. (2018). Vietnam Energy Profile. Retrieved from 
https://www.irena.org/IRENADocuments/Statistical_Profiles/Asia/Viet%20Na m_Asia_RE_SP.pdf .


---
*Page 166*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
45 
 
 
Figure 4 - Vietnam Total Primary Energy Supply in 2018  
Women and Water. Vietnam  has a dense river network of 2 ,360 rivers with a length of more than 10 
km. Households' access to improved water supplies increased from 65% in the year 2000 to 95% in 
2017, while access to basic sanitation jumped from 52% to 84% during the same period.189 Nevertheless, 
water quality remains an issue all over the country because of environmental pollution in the river basins 
and natural disasters, which affect the nation's public health. The Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment stated that almost 80% of the diseases in Vietnam are caused by polluted water.190  
Whereas the rivers traversing Vietnam  should provide an abundant supply of water, the country 
experiences uneven distribution of water resources , imbalance in water demand and water storage 
capacity, and unsustainable exploitation and use of water resources, especially from the agricultural 
sector.191 
Water insecurity due to climate chan ge increases the workload of women , especially those working in 
small -scale agriculture as they have to  spend more time on tillage water watering and protecting crops 
against diseases. At the same time, water quality and scarcity due to climate change impact women as 
being the traditional primary water collectors, and due to women’s health -specific need for  clean water 
during menstruation, pregnancy and caregiving.  
Women and Waste management. Urban solid waste collection and treatment rates account 86.5% 
(2019), while the rural rate is down to 63.5% (2019). However, currently, 71% of municipal solid waste 
is still being buried, mostly in an unsanitary manner.  
Women represent 35 -40% of formal waste collectors while they dominate the informal sector with a 
65% participation rate, often living and working under dangerous and unhealthy conditions. In this 
sector , men have higher paid professions in the informal waste economy, being dealers  and owners of 
recycling activities, but also in the formal waste economy, such as truck drivers and managers.192 
 
189 Water, sanitation and hygiene in Vietnam. (2020, February). Retrieved 2021, from Unicef.org website: 
https://www.unicef.org/vietnam/reports/water -sanitation -and-hygiene -viet-nam.  
190 Water, sanitation and hygiene in Vietnam. (2020, Febru ary). Retrieved from Unicef.org website: 
https://www.unicef.org/vietnam/reports/water -sanitation -and-hygiene -viet-nam.  
191 The State of Gender Equality and Climate Change in Vietnam (EmPower – Women for Climate Resilient Societies). Retrieved from 
https://as iapacific.unwomen.org/ -
/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2021/05/empowerpolicy%20brief%20for%20stakeholdersstate%20of%20gender%20eq
uality%20%20climate%20change%20viet%20nam.pdf?la=en&vs=119 .  
192 The role of gender in waste management - GA Cir cular. (2021). Retrieved from GA Circular website: 
https://www.gacircular.com/publications/.  
 
Source:  IRENA,  https:// www.irena.org/


---
*Page 167*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
46 
 
Women and Education.  Regarding tertiary education, Vietnam has a  total gross enrolment ratio of 
28.5% (2016), with more female than male students attending school in upper secondary and tertiary 
levels: 31.7% vis -à-vis 25.5% (2020).193  
However, women’s participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) 
education is less than half of that of men’s (15.38% vs. 31.19%), underrepresenting women in the 
sector of Information Communication Technology (ICT), and areas requiring a capacity for 
technological innovation.194 This reflects the tradi tional expectations impressed upon girls and boys 
when it comes to choosing a course of study or occupation.  
According to UNESCO, among students enrolled in tertiary education, men are considerably more 
likely to specialize in engineering, manufacturing, construction, and services, while women are more 
likely to specialize in social sciences, education, humanities,  and the arts. Additionally, women often 
choose vocational training programs that lead to traditionally women -dominated occupations, limiting 
their career prospects in non -traditional and emerging roles and other economic opportunities. 195 
Moreover, women achieving higher education tend still to be clustered in lower -paid manufacturing 
jobs, garment and footwear industries, the service sector, edu cation field, and paid domestic work, 
earning 10 -12% less than their male counterparts.  
● Business Entrepreneurship and Gender Dynamics in Vietnam  
The entrepreneurial ecosystem of Vietnam  is by far one of the most advanced among the Mekong 
countries  and rank ed 87th out of 137 countries in the 2018 Global Entrepreneurship Index (GEI).196 
Over the past three decades, Vietnam  has shown steady signs of progress in increasing its number 
of women  entrepreneurs . Since 1990, with the introduction of the Private Enterprises Law, the 
Vietnamese legislation has become more gender -inclusive, with women -owned SMEs being mentioned 
for the first time in the 2017 Law on Support for Small and Medium -sized En terprises.  
The statistics, however, are not very encouraging if we take a deeper look at women’s entrepreneurial 
participation. Based on the 2014 GSO Enterprise Census, Vietnam ’s women own about 21% of 
formal enterprises, the majority (57%) are microenterp rises, 42% are SMEs and only 1% or 854 
are large enterprises.  Since 2020, half of these businesses were partially suspended or dissolved given 
the start of COVID -19 and, in the first quarter of 2020, the number of women -owned enterprises 
reported a revenue  decrease of 75%, or more, which is double of losses compared to men -owned 
enterprises.197 
An IFC’s study in 2017 on the needs and opportunities for women -owned SMEs in Vietnam , stated that 
Vietnam ’s investment climate for women is generally supportive . Acc ording to it, Vietnam  has a 
long history of women in business, and compared to many similar economies, there are less inequalities 
between males and women's legal positions in doing business. Whereas it is assumed that women and 
men share the same problems  and experience s in running small companies, there are a multitude of 
challenges faced by female entrepreneurs in Vietnam  that affect women’s ability to realize their 
 
193 Vietnam | UNESCO UIS. (2019). Retrieved from Unesco.org website: http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/vn?theme=science -technology -
and-innovation.  
194 The State of Gend er Equality and Climate Change in Vietnam. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://asiapacifi c.unwomen.org/ -
/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2021/04/publication_Vietnam%20report_digital2%20(1).pdf?la=en&vs=4800 .  
195 UNESCO. (2021). A Complex Formula: Girls and Women in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics in Asia. Retrieved 
from Unesco.org website: 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/in/documentViewer.xhtml?v=2.1.196&id=p::usmarcdef_0000231519&file=/in/rest/annotationSVC/DownloadW
atermarkedAttachment/attach_import_90fa1973 -d643 -4e74 -b84d -
e54e7cd3db86%3F_%3D231519eng.pdf&update Url=updateUrl2920&ark=/ark:/48223/pf0000231519/PDF/231519eng.pdf.multi&fullScree
n=true&locale=en#STEM%20Study%20Final%20Draftv3.indd%3A.154648%3A1417 .  
196 Entrepreneurship & Business Statistics | GEDI. (2018). Retrieved from Thegedi.org website: https://thegedi.org/global -entrepreneurship -
and-development -index/ .  
197 Thi, T. (2021, July 23). Training and support for female entrepreneurs in Vietnam: What do women want and need ? Retrieved from 
Brookings website: https://www.brookings.edu/blog/education -plus-development/2021/07/23/training -and-support -for-female -
entrepreneurs -in-Vietnam -what -do-women -want -and-need/.


---
*Page 168*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
47 
 
entrepreneurial ambitions. 198 Thus, even though men are relatively more likely to be employed in the 
informal sector (the informal employment rate in 2019 was 67.2% among women, and 78.9% among 
men), women are overrepresented among disadvantaged categories of informal workers.  
Vietnam ’s labour  market still has areas of gender -segregation, with women heavily represented in 
marketing, office and support work, human resources, and accounting, rather than in technology 
and innovation -oriented sectors. Further obstacles include lack of market information and 
opportunities for  business development. The challenges of balancing business with family -care 
constrain women’s time to participate in networking and learning activities and further grow their 
business es.199 Research  conducted by ActionAid Vietnam  reported that on average , Vietnamese women 
spend 105 minutes more than Vietnamese men on unpaid care work. The intra -household unequal 
division of labour  between men and women constitutes a considerable brake on women’s labour  
participation and returns to  livelihoods, limiting their opportunities for training, networking, and 
promotion.200 
Lack of Financing : In general, women entrepreneurs find it more difficult to access credit . Even though  
female entrepreneurs bring in average annual revenues like men’s . 42 % of women -owned SMEs had 
difficulty accessing financial resources, which is a key barrier to business development. At the same 
time, the small and micro -size nature of women’s enterpris es along with the fact that th ese kinds of 
businesses mostly lack adequate business planning and accounting systems make it difficult  for them 
to qualify for loans.201  Women's capacity to access finance is also influenced by cultural factors . 
Usually, collaterals are needed to fulfil  the borrowing requirements and many women entrepreneurs are 
unable to fulfil  these criteria since their names are mostly not included on t he state -issued land use right 
certificates (LURC).202 The LURC legislation of Vietnam  stipulates that both men and women shall 
have equal access to land usage and rights, but in practice , women have less land rights and smaller 
farm holdings. Consequently,  women business owners keep relying on informal sources of finance, 
while accessing legal  financial products remains  a privilege for large businesses.  203  
Provincial Women’s Union, provincial People’s Party,  and other government departments have 
developed several action plans on women’s entrepreneurship and renewable energy in supporting the 
NDCs, Green Growth action plan, and other SDG targets. The National Women’s Start -up Program, 
led by the Vietnam  Women’ s Union, also created a special category for renewable energy in 2020, with 
UNEP’s support. Likewise, the EmPower project, led by UNEP, supports another women 
entrepreneur’s initiative in three provinces in Vietnam  to use renewable energy as a means for 
developing climate -resilient livelihoods.204 
Innovation is an important aspect of the success of many entrepreneurial enterprises, and so it is for 
climate technology. Vietnam  continues to be an example for other developing countries in treating 
innovation as  a national priority and is heavily interested in building and promoting its own NIS. In 
2020, Vietnam  had a  ranking of 44 in the Global Innovation Index (2021), heading the lower middle -
 
198 Women -owned enterprises in Vietnam: Perceptions and Potential.  (2017). Retrieved from 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/86bc0493 -78fa-4c7d -86ec -5858aa41fa1a/Market -study -on-Women -owned -enterprises -in-
Vietnam_Eng_v1.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=l -Yi6gF.  
199 #ClosingTheGap Mekong Country Report Vietnam Entrepreneurial Ecosyste m Assessment Commissioned on behalf of: Dutch Good 
Growth Fund (DGGF): Investment funds local SMEs. (2019). Retrieved from http://mekongbiz.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/05/CTG -
CountryReport_Vietnam_Final.pdf .  
200 How much does it cost women for men to be the family’s backbone? (2017). Retrieved from ActionAid Vi ệt Nam website: 
https://Vietnam.actionaid.org/en/publications/2017/how -much -does-it-cost-women -men-be-familys -backbone .  
201 TAF, VWEC, & MBI. (2018). Needs Assessment of Women -Owned Small and Medium -Sized Enterprises in Vietnam.  
202 #ClosingTheGap Mekong Country Report Vietnam Entrepreneurial Ecosystem Assessment Commissioned on behalf of: Dutch Good 
Growth Fund (DGGF): Investment funds local SMEs. (2019). Retrieved from http://mekongbiz.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/05/CTG -
CountryReport_Vietnam_Final.pdf .  
203 THE STUDY A REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (SMES) SUPPORT 
LEGISLATION A ND THE CAPACITY BUILDING NEEDS AND TRAINING SERVICES FOR WOMEN -OWNED SMES AND 
WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS IN VIETNAM Hanoi 12 -2020. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://Vietnam.un.org/sites/default/files/2021 -
02/UNW_Review_Eng%20Full_18.12.2020_6.pdf.  
204 The State of Gen der Equality and Climate Change in Vietnam. (2021). Retrieved from https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/ -
/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2021/04/publication_Vietnam%20report_digital2%20(1).pdf?la=en&vs=4800.


---
*Page 169*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
48 
 
income group and has made the most significant progress over time.205 This is also reflected in the 
number of female researchers in R&D (per million people), where Vietnam has seen a positive outcome 
of 44.8% (2015).206 
In Vietnam the Programme will address the above -listed constraints in the following manner:  
Given the equal/higher education level of women in Vietnam, promoting (by prioritizing for CTF 
approval) the “women -led enterprises” will substantially capacitate the female entrepreneurs in the 
country to remove their structure barriers to the formal finances a nd credits as well as by strengthening 
their business network and partnership to the global level and address the limitations of many female -
led enterprises stagnant in the small and micro -scale levels. Gender stereotyping in the labour market 
and bias of women’s roles in the climate technology sector and aggressive business entrepreneurship 
require a long -term perception change of the Vietnams public. Generating a successful case(s) of the 
climate technology innovative RD&B case out of locally based “women -led enterprises” through the 
Programme will trigger this perception change in the long term.  
● Priority Sectors and Gender Implications in Vietnam   
Areas for priority intervention through the proposed Programme in Vietnam are, among others: Climate 
scenari o modelling with data set analysis, risk detection, and assessment/ climate -smart agriculture/ 
Inter -reservoir operation skills for water -efficient irrigation operation/ Environmental Technology for 
Water.   
Climate -smart agricultural activities include, among others, smart water and irrigation management; 
adoption of improved crop varieties; agroforestry; intercropping trees with crops; sustainable land 
management; agricultural waste treatment such as integration of biogas technologies in livestock 
production; and improved agro -climate information services207. Investments in climate adaptation and 
mitigation technologies in the agricultural  sector would also be particularly beneficial for Vietnamese 
women. Agriculture contributes 21% of Vietnam 's total GDP, with a female employment rate of about 
63%. The Programme should consider women’s climate vulnerability and climate risk exposure, while 
Vietnamese women also lack decision -making power regarding the choice of crops,  technologies or 
commercial development .  
Waste management could also be considered a priority sector for Vietnamese women. In the country, 
waste collection and treatment systems are already developed and women account for 35 -40% of formal 
waste collectors , dominating the informal sector with a 65% participation rate. Investment in recycling 
technologies and infrastructure in Vietnam  could contribute to the female labour migration from the 
informal to formal sector, improving their income generation and work conditions. Promoting women -
led start -ups in the sector of organic waste management, plastic recycling and water would offer the  
opportunity for GHG reduction  and pollution mitigation while empowering women in Vietnam .  
In Vietnam, gender mainstreaming into the policies and plans in agriculture, waste management, water 
management and renewable energy sectors need to be strengthened: Currently. there are no gender 
equality targets or measures identified to address women’s vulnerabilities or lack of agency in climate 
change. The proposed Programme could consider strengthening the capacity of the relevant government 
entities and ministries to strengthen their gender mainstreaming capacities at policy and plan levels, 
while de veloping sector -specific guidelines for gender mainstreaming208.   
 
205 VIETNAM. (2020) Retrieved from https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_gii_2020/vn.pdf .  
206 Vietnam | UNESCO UIS. (2019). Retrieved from Unesco.org website: http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/vn?theme=sc ience -technology -
and-innovation.  
207 Climate -Smart Agriculture (CSA) in Vietnam/  
https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/96227/C SA_Profile_Vietnam2.2.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  
208 The State of Gender Equality and Climate Change in Viet Nam (2021)/ https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/en/digital -
library/publications/2021/04/the -state-of--gender -equality -and-climate -change -in-viet-nam


---
*Page 170*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
49 
 
4. Final Considerations and Recommendations  
The following are the summaries of the key findings  and recommendations from this gender assessment . 
Agricultural Sector  
In Cambodia and Indonesia, women contribute to more than 70% of the agricultural workforce, 
followed by Vietnam (63%) and Lao PDR (over 50%) . Only in the Philippines , agriculture is male 
dominated sector  (with women’s participation only being 23%) . Across the countries, c limate hazards 
threaten the livelihoods and food security of millions of smallholder farmers and agribusiness who 
depend on agriculture in our selected countries, especially women”.209   
The proposed Programme targets climate technology RD&B support for all  five countries. Prioritization 
of the sector will significantly affect the girls and women in the countries. Also, the potential is high to 
engage women entrepreneurs given the high level of women’s participation in the sector.  
Water Sector  
Gender sensit ivity extends to the water sector, water -related natural catastrophes,  and water -borne 
illness outbreaks. Indonesian women, for example, are the principal water collectors and providers in 
their home: two out of every five Indonesian families delegate wate r responsibility to women. In Lao 
PDR,  48.7% of women and 9.4% of girls oversee  gathering water for the household. Gender 
responsibilities related to water have also been found to be strongly defined in rural areas, especially 
for Laotian and Cambodian rur al women. Nevertheless, positive improvements can be recognized in 
the access to water supplies and sanitation, where in Vietnam, households’ access to improved water 
supplies increased from 65% in the year 2000 to 95% in 2017 .  
Women’s role in water manag ement activities  need s to be strengthened with proper training and skill 
development to cope with climate change -related water disasters, such as flood s and droughts. Women 
can become central agent s for Sustainable development and management of  water supplies and water 
treatment. Failure to do so would worsen the water contamination putting the lives of millions of men, 
women, boys,  and girls at risk.  
Energy Sector  
In all five countries , clean energ y solutions are not available to everyone and women are considered 
less privileged. Given the traditional household roles of cooking and fuel collection, women's health is 
more affected by indoor pollution, and women’s time is overspent in collecting fuel because of the 
increased scarcity of natural resources. At the job market level, renewable energy jobs fall under the 
manufacturing, construction,  and engineering sectors, where women are less represented in all of the 
five countries analysed .  
While most directly affected by the types and quality of the energy sources, girls and women are not 
active agents in energy transitions in all the five countries, due to gender bias in education (especially 
in STEM, ICT and energy subjects) as well as cultural tendencies to educate male children to higher 
levels. The proposed Programme needs to proactively invite women’s participation in renewable 
energy -related enterprises.  
  
 
 
209 The term can be defined as such when women have to take on more and more agricultural work due to the migration of men to the  city in 
search of urban employment opportunities.


---
*Page 171*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
50 
 
Waste Management Sector  
Women’s limited participation is also observed across the coun tries in environmentally friendly 
solutions in waste management.  In Indonesia, fewer women participate in the waste collection chain 
and in the formal waste sector. Waste collection is seen as a men's job because the collectors travel fair 
distances away from home on trucks and carry heavy loads. In Vietnam, women represent 35 -40% of 
formal waste collectors, but 65% of them are in the unregulated informal sector, which are underpaid, 
unhygienic and often dangerous. In Cambodia and Lao PDR, solid waste mana gement has recently 
raising attention. All in all, the Programme had better invest in lifting these specific barriers faced by 
women to make waste disposal and recycling initiatives a good opportunity for women’s employment 
and more proactive participation  in the countries’ transition to a circular economy.  
Women’s Business Entrepreneurship In all five countries, the women ’s entrepreneurial ecosystem 
seemed to be limited to small and microenterprises, characterized by low profitability and informality. 
Comm on barriers are: (i) social and cultural constraints, (ii) access to business markets , and (III) lack 
of financing. Remarkable are the strong gender norms, particularly in Cambodia and Indonesia.  
Regarding the (ii) access to the business market, in all the  countries’ labour markets , there is gender  
segregation, with women heavily represented in the agricultural and sales sectors, rather than 
technology and innovation -oriented ones. Women entrepreneurs mostly lack market information  and 
opportunities for bus iness development. The challenges of balancing business with family  care 
constrain women’s time to participate in networking and learning activities and further grow their 
business es. 
In Indonesia, women’s access to financial programs is limited compared to men’s access. Indonesian 
males use more banking services (45%) than women (42%) and a higher proportion of females (49%) 
use informal financial services, compared to males (29%). Men and women do not have equal 
ownership rights over moveable an d immovable property, making it difficult for women to have 
collateral for lending from financial institutions. In Lao PDR female entrepreneurs are also less likely 
to have a bank account or credit line. In the Philippines, although legally not required, s ome financial 
institutions expect a male partner to co -sign any women’s financial contract. Filipino women 
entrepreneurs seeking micro -finance schemes, mostly encounter restrictive and complicated procedures, 
which makes them seek other more expensive mean s for credit. Due to their lack of collateral, a bank 
loan is often inaccessible to Filipinas.  
STEM and Higher education  
In Indonesia, Philippines and Vietnam  the level of literacy rate s is comparatively  high, with no 
significant signs of gender inequality . On the other hand, Cambodia and Lao PDR had low literacy rate 
with marked gender differences  
In Indonesia, Philippines and Vietnam , women’s tertiary enrolment  rate is from 6 to 9 percentage points 
higher than the male one. Nevertheless, women’s participa tion in science, technology, engineering,  and 
mathematics (STEM) education has been found to be significantly less than men’s. More broadly, 
women seem underrepresented in the sector of information communication technology (ICT) and other 
areas related to innovation  in all five countries . 
This reflects the traditional expectations impressed upon girls and boys when it comes to choosing their 
study path or occupation. According to UNESCO, among students enrolled in tertiary education, men 
are considerably mo re likely to specialize in engineering, manufacturing, construction, and services, 
while women are more likely to specialize in social sciences, education, humanities,  and the arts. 
Additionally, women often choose vocational training programs that lead to  traditionally women -
dominated occupations, limiting their career prospects in non -traditional and emerging roles and other


---
*Page 172*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
51 
 
economic opportunities. Moreover, women achieving higher education tend still to be clustered in 
lower -paid jobs, earning less than their male counterparts. 210 
Regarding education, the key barriers for women’s enrolment and STEM education have been identified 
as mostly related to gender roles and lack of financial resources. Particularly vulnerable to those gender 
stigmas are rural women and girls, which are more  likely to experience gender -based violence and early 
marriage, and being prone to premature withdrawals from schooling.  
Decision -making & Empowerment  
It is evident that numerous women in Southeast Asia are in underprivileged situation in terms of access 
and benefits from natural resources and environmental decision -making processes in comparison to 
men. Women in the five countries are not exceptions.  
Recommendations : Acknowledging the key findings related to women and climate entrepreneurship 
in the countries of analysis, the following recommendations should be taken into account while 
implementing the Collaborative R&DB Programme for Promoting the Innovation of Clim ate 
Technopreneurship:  
Component 1  
Country -Driven 
Climate 
Acceleration 
Readiness  - Local SME selection shall prioritize candidate SMEs in each of the five 
target countries which meet the “women -owned SME.” (Defined as: 
SMEs with one of the three conditions:  ① at least 26% of the total 
capital owned by women; ② at least one woman participates on the 
Board of Directors  and/or different types of boards or internal 
committees, such as ESG committees, among others ( CEO, COO, 
CTO), or; ③ with more than 30% of the workforce are females)  
- Each country SMU is recommended to hire one gender specialist, under 
the supervision of GGGI Gender Specialist.  
- Country -specific acceleration support program s (N -CEAPs)  should 
include  gender awareness compo nent and support the participating 
firms to assess their own gender mainstreaming readiness status.  
Component 2  
Global Acceleration 
for Collaborative 
R&DB  - Every selected JVs will submit its own gender mainstreaming strategy 
(at company level), detailed gender assessment and action plan for their 
CTF Proposal, fit -for-purpose. To support this:  
- the Programme should set up a fund-level gender expertise in  the 
Global Acceleration Advisory Secretariat.  
- Integrate gender component to collaborative R&DB services: Fund -
level Gender expertise assist s participating JV candidates to prepare 
gender analysis (GA) and gender action plan (GAP) in accordance with 
the GCF’s Ge nder Policy (B.24/12 adopted in Nov 2019  
 
 
210 UNESCO. A Complex Formula: Girls and Women in Scien ce, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics in Asia. (2021). 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/in/documentViewer.xhtml?v=2 .1.196&id=p::usmarcdef_0000231519&file=/in/rest/annotationSVC/DownloadW
atermarkedAttachment/attach_import_90fa1973 -d643 -4e74 -b84d -
e54e7cd3db86%3F_%3D231519eng.pdf&updateUrl=updateUrl2920&ark=/ark:/48223/pf0000231519/PDF/231519eng.pdf.multi&fullScree
n=true& locale=en#STEM%20Study%20Final%20Draftv3.indd%3A.154648%3A1417 .


---
*Page 173*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
52 
 
Component 3  
Climate 
Technopreneurship 
Fund (CTF)  
 
 - The Fund’s investment criteria should be gender -mainstreamed . 
Following investment criteria to be inserted as part of the CTF’s 
investment/selection criteria:  
➢ At least 50% of the CTF -invested JVs are Women -led: (1) 
SMEs with at least 26% of the total capital owned by women; 
(2) SMEs with at least one woman participates in the Board of 
Directors and/or different types of boars or internal committees 
such as ESG committees, among others  (CEO, COO, CTO, 
etc.); and/or; (3) SMEs with more than 30% of the total 
workforce are females.   
➢ All the CTF investment JVs/activities are gender -mainstreamed 
with concrete gender performance indicators and tangible 
results proven.  
To support this:  
- At the fund level, the involvement of gender expertise should 
support JV -level Gender Action Plan (including gender 
mainstreaming commitment plan) throughout the project period 
through high -level review, monitoring and capacity building 
assistance.   
Component 4  
Technical 
Assistance (TA)  - The project should promote and facilitate effective country TA 
programs to generate a viable pool for further candidate female -
founded/headed/employed local firms for CTF participation.  
- The Programme should identify women representatives for the national 
network /communication platform to foster women technopreneurship.  
- The Programme should identify the areas for cooperation with each 
country for gender -responsive capacity building (for the current and 
future participants of the CTF).   
- The Programme should facilitate the integration of gender indicators to 
be developed and incorporated in to the M&E plan and activities.


---
*Page 174*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
 
53 
 
5. Gender Action Plan  
This GAP shall be implemented as an integrated mechanism of ESMS. Per component of the Programme, agent of the GAP management  are as follows:  
◼ Component s 1 and 4: through the gender specialists of the Regional SMU (GGGI) and Country SMU of the respective five countries211 
◼ Component 2: through the Gender Specialist within the Acceleration Advisory Consortium for Global Readiness Programme Consult ing Services212 
◼ Component 3 (Pre -investment stage): through the Gender Specialist of the Environmental & Social and Gender Compliance Team (ESGCT), the 
Expert Advisory Committee (EAC)213 
◼ 4) Component 3 (Post -investment stage): through the Gender Specialist of the Enviro nmental & Social and Gender Compliance Team (ESGCT) and 
the E&S (and gender) Risk Management (Sub) Committee (ESRMC)214.  
For overall supervision and ensuring the compliance of all the Programme -related activities with the GAP and GCF Gender Policy, as appr opriate, throughout 
all the components, KDB (as AE) would be responsible.  
Activities  Indicators & Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Costs  
Impact Statement:   
▪ Girls and women in the ASEAN region become central agents and major beneficiaries of technological leapfrogging through climate tech 
innovation in self -combating climate change, which steers the region’s paradigm -shifting transition towards low -carbon and climate -resilient 
economies and societies.  
Outcome Statement:  
▪ A gender -mainstreamed  climate entrepreneurship acceleration ecosystem is established with a surging technologically skilled, capable, and 
passionate female entrepreneurs and women -led SMEs as key climate technology innovation agenc ies are established in all the target countries.  
 
Component 1. Country -Driven Acceleration Readiness  
(Executing Entity: GGGI , KDB )  
Output Statement:  
Local SME selection shall prioritize candidate SMEs in each of the five target countries which meet the “women -owned SME s” conditions, as follows:  
◼ SMEs with at least 26% of the total capital owned by women, and/ or;  
 
211 For details, see Section 3.2.2 of the ESMS of this Programme (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal).   
212 For details, see Section 3.2.3 of the ESMS of this Programme (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal).  
213 For details, see Section 3.2.3 of the ESMS of this Program me (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal).  
214 For details, see Section 3.2.3 of the ESMS of this Programme (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal).


---
*Page 175*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
54 
 
◼ SMEs at least one woman participates on the Board of Directors and/or different types of boards or internal committees, such as ESG 
committees, among others (CEO, COO, CTO), and/ or;  
◼ SMEs with more than 30% of the workforce are females.  
 
All the selected SMEs shall produce the Country SME Gender Profiling Form (CGPF)215.  
A1-1. Set up a gender 
specialist/gender expertise 
within  a Regional SMU and  
National SMU in each of 
the five target countries 
(Activity 1.1216)      1. 1 gender specialist 
is locally hired in 
the National SMU 
through partnership  By the date of completion 
of a National SMU in each 
country  KDB/GGGI  USD 50,000  
Gender expertise secured 
through at least one direct 
recruitment or through 
partnership (i.e. 
outsourcing).  
A1-2.  Identify qualified 
local JV candidates: Prepare 
communication content 
including “women -owned 
SMEs” status and N -CEAP  
Investment Criteria for 
Local Entrepreneurs #6. 
Gender Mainstreaming  1. Minimum of 30% 
(committed) and up 
to 50% (target) of  
“women -owned 
SMEs” in the five 
countries are 
identified and eager 
to take part in the 
Programme 
through effective 
communication and 
awareness -
raising217. 
2. All the candidate 
country SMEs are 
convinced of 
adopting its own All through the Program 
operation period  KDB/GGGI  
 
215 Annex 2 of this document.  
216 Activity in bracket indicates the matching activity of the proposed Programme (as shown in the <Programme Summary at a Glance> in Section A.21. Executive Summary of the Funding Proposa l Document (p.7) 
respectively.   
217 CTF Investment Criteria #9 (Gender Ma instreaming) targets at least 50% of the CTF -invested JVs are “women -led” or commit gender mainstreaming by establishing and implementing a gender mainstreaming 
commitment plan (GMCP). At this point, it is not possible to designate a specific target percen tage of “women -led” local business applicant as it is widely open and uncertain as future eventualities. The programme 
will strongly promote “women -led” local firms’ participation and to fulfil the Programme -level 50% minimum target, the Programme will str ive to promote GMCP development and executing to the extent possible to 
all the willing beneficiaries of the Programme.


---
*Page 176*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
55 
 
gender 
mainstreaming 
commitment plan.   
A1-3. Integrate gender 
component to tailor -made 
acceleration services(N -
CEAPs): Support the 
candidate country SMEs 
prepare Country SME 
Gender Profiling Form 
(CSGP)218 (Activity 1.3)  
 
 1 Guidelines to fill in 
Country SME 
Gender Profiling 
Form (CSGP) 
developed.  
2 N-CEAP program 
include s a module 
to assist country 
SMEs to fill in 
CSGP, led by 
gender 
trainer/expert 
through partnership  
 
3 CSGP produced by 
each of the 
candidate country 
SMEs based o n the 
guidelines and the 
country -specific 
support program of 
N-CEAP.   KDB/GGGI  
Component 2. Global Acceleration for Collaborative R&DB  
(Executing Entity: NHIS ) 
Output Statement:  
Every selected JV will submit its own gender mainstreaming strategy (at the company level), detailed gender assessment and action plan for their CTF 
Proposal, fit -for-purpose.  
A 2-1. Set up Fund -level 
Gender expertise (through 
procurement) (Activity 2.1)  1. At least one gender 
expert  is procured, 
whose function will By the date , the Global 
Accelera tion Advisory 
Secretariat is set up.  NHIS /Secretariat  
 USD 200,000  
(5,000 per 
project/technology, on the 
 
218 Annex 2 of this document.


---
*Page 177*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
56 
 
be an integral part 
of the function of 
the Global 
Acceleration 
Advisory 
Secretariat  basis of 40 investments 
approx.)  
A2-3. Integrate gender 
component to collaborative 
R&DB  services: Fund -level 
Gender expertise assist s 
participating JV candidates 
to prepare a simplified 
gender analysis (GA) and 
gender action plan (GAP)219 
in accordance with the 
GCF’s Gender Policy 
(B.24/12 adopted in Nov 
2019)220. (ACTIVITY 2.3.)  
 
*For sector/ technology -
specific guidelines for 
filling A1 -3, see Appendix 
5 below.  1. GA prepared for 
each of the 
participating JV 
candidates.  
2. GAP established 
for each of the 
participating JV 
candidates.  
 
Duly prepared by the JV 
candidates & reviewed & 
quality validated by Fund -
level Gender ex pertise for 
submission to the Fund as 
part of the CTF application 
document packages.   NHIS /Secretariat  
 
Component 3. Climate Technopreneurship ( CTF)  
(Executing Entity: NH ARP /GP)  
Output Statement:  
🡺 At least 50% of the CTF -invested JVs are Women -led (① with at least 51% of the total capital owned by women, and/or ② at least 26% of the 
total capital owned by women and at least one woman participates on the Board of Director, and/or more than 50% of work forces are females) ) 
JVs, or alternatively, have presented the gender mainstreaming commitment plan to the CTF as part of the funding proposal.  
🡺 All the CTF investment JVs/activities are gender -mainstreamed with concrete gender performance indicators and t angible results proven.  
 
219 Considering the lack of capacity of the applicant JVs (being SMEs in developing countries), the GA and G AP will be simplified to cover the most relevant key aspects of the analysis and action plans specific to the 
climate technology/sector/business types. Sample GA and GAP shall be provided with guidance to the JV candidates as part of t he Acceleration progr am. See the standard template for the GA & GAP in Appendix 3 
below.  
220 https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gcf -gender -policy.pdf


---
*Page 178*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
57 
 
A3-2-1-1. Execute Gender 
Criteria within the CTF 
Investment Criteria* 
(ACTIVITY 3.2.1)  
*Prioritization of “women -
led SMEs/JVs” & JVs with 
gender mainstreaming 
commitment plan (GMCP)   At least 50% of the CTF -
invested JVs meet these  
priority selection 
conditions.  
 
Fund -level Gender expertise 
review and validate an 
individual JV candidate’s 
fulfilment of the 
prioritization conditions & 
as necessary, suggest 
complementary measures to 
the submitted GMCP.   NH ARP   
A3-2-1-2. Fund -level 
Gender expertise support s 
JV-level Gender Action 
Plan execution (including 
gender mainstreaming 
commitment plan) 
throughout the project 
period through high -level 
review, monitoring and 
capacity -building 
assistance.  (ACTIVITY 
3.2.1)  All the funded pro jects are 
gender -mainstreamed as 
planned through gender 
mainstreaming commitment 
plan, its process and 
implementation is supported 
and monitored by the Fund -
level Gender expertise and 
reflected in the CTF Gender 
Report.  
Validated by:  Regular 
gender monito ring & 
evaluation reports (at JV - 
and the fund -level).  
   NH ARP  
A3-3-2. (At JV -level) 
Country SMU support s JV-
level gender action plan 
(including gender 
mainstreaming commitment 
plan) implementation by the Monitoring Report on GAP 
implementation is 
submitted, reviewed and 
actively monitored by the 
CTF system throughout th e  NH ARP


---
*Page 179*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
58 
 
funded JVS throughout the 
project period.  entire implementation 
period of a JV activities.  
Component 4. Technical Assistance (TA)  
(Executing Entity: GGGI, KD B) 
Outcome Statement:  
Effective country TA programs generate a viable pool for further candidate female -founded/headed/employed local firms for CTF participation.  
A4-1. Include the gender 
component in knowledge -
sharing activities 
(ACTIVITY 4.1 .2) Knowledge -sharing 
program include gendered 
climate technology 
entrepreneurship component 
in each of the five countries 
respectively.   KDB/GGGI  USD 50,000   
A4-2. Identify the areas for 
cooperation with each 
country for gender -
responsive capacity building 
(of current and fu ture 
participants of the CTF) 
(ACTIVITY 4.2)  At least one gender -
responsive TA Programme 
rolled out per country.   KDB/GGGI  
A 4-3. Integrate gender 
component to the national 
strategy on climate 
technopreneurship 
promotion  At least one strategy with 
concrete action plan(s) are 
integrated into the national 
strategies on climate 
technopreneurship  
promotion of each of the 
five countries respectively   
Is this linked with the 
timelines indicated in the 
M&E plan of the program?  KDB/GGGI


---
*Page 180*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
59 
 
Appendix 1. Preliminary Stakeholder Mapping by Country  
Country  CAMBODIA  
Stakeholders 
Category  Ministerial Actors  Education Initiatives                 
NGOs  Business Initiatives  Ministerial Actors & 
international 
organizations  
Stakeholders  ● Ministry of Education, Youth and 
Sports  
● Ministry of Labour and Vocational 
Training  
● Ministry of Women’s Affairs  
● Gender and Climate Change 
Committee  
● (Ministry of Women’s Affairs)  ● STEM Sisters Cambodia  
● Education First 
Cambodia - Royal 
University of Phnom 
Penh  
● Kampuchean Action for 
Primary Education 
(KAPE)  ● The Cambodia 
Women 
Entrepreneurs 
Association 
(CWEA)  
● SHE  Investments  ● GGGI Country 
Office  
● WB Country Office 
etc. 
 
Country  INDONESIA  
Stakeholders 
Category  Ministerial Actors  Education Initiatives  
NGOs  Business Initiatives  Ministerial Actors & 
international 
organizations  
Stakeholders  ● Ministry of Education, Culture, 
Research, and Technology - 
General Directorate of Higher 
Education, Research, and 
Technology - General Directorate 
of Vocational Education  
● Ministry of Women 
Empowerment and Child 
Protection  ● Universitas Prasetiya 
Mulya (STEMPreneur 
Centre - STEM 
DEPARTMENTS)  
● Del Polytechnic of 
Informatics  
● YCAB Foundation  ● SheMeansBusines s 
Indonesia  
● Indonesian Women 
Entrepreneurs 
Network - IWEN  
● Wanita Wirausaha 
Femina  ● GGGI Country 
Office  
● WB Country Office 
etc.


---
*Page 181*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
60 
 
● (Ministry of Finance) Ministry of 
Cooperatives and SMEs  
● The Directorate General of 
Climate Change Control (DJPPI)  
 
Country  LAO PDR  
Stakeholders 
Category  Ministerial Actors  Education Initiatives  
NGOs  Business Initiatives  International 
organizations  
Stakeholders  ● Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry - 
● Department for the Advancement 
of Women  
● Ministry of Labour and Social 
Welfare  
● Ministry of Education and Sports  
● Lao PDR Women's Union (LWU)  
● National Environment -Climate 
Change Committee  
● Department of  
● Disaster Management and Climate 
Change  
● (DDMCC), Ministry of Natural 
Resources  
● and Environment  ● Faculty of Environment 
Science, National 
University of Laos  
● Gender Development 
Association - Laos  ● The Business 
Women’s 
Association  
● Young 
Entrepreneurs 
Association of Laos 
(YEAL)  ● GGGI Country 
Office  
● WB Country Office 
etc.


---
*Page 182*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
61 
 
Country  PHILIPPINES  
Stakeholders 
Category  Ministerial Actors  Education Initiatives  
NGOs  Business Initiatives  International 
Organizations  
Stakeholders  ● Philippine Commission on 
Women  
● Department of Labour and 
Employment  
● Ministry of Science Research and 
Technology  
● Philippine Department of 
Environment and Natural 
Resources (DENR)  
● Philippine Department of 
Education  
● Technical Education and Skills 
Development Authority  
● Climate Change Commission  ● Stem Leadership 
Alliance  
● Institute of Women's 
Studies  
● Women’s Legal and 
Human Rights Bureau 
(WLB)  
● Women’s Rights 
Movement of the 
Philippines  ● Women's Business 
Council Philippines  
● Philippine Women's 
Economic Network   
● GGGI Country 
Office  
● WB Country 
Office etc.  
 
Country  VIETNAM  
Stakeholders 
Category  Ministerial Actors  Education Initiatives  
NGOs  Business Initiatives  International 
Organizations  
Stakeholders  ● National Committee for the 
Advancement of Women in 
Vietnam  (NCFAW)  
● Vietnam Women's Union  ● University of Da Nang  
● BUILD -IT public -private 
ecosystem  
● WISE Vietnam 
(Women’s Initiative for ● SWOF SEAF 
Women’s 
Opportunity Fund  
● WISE Women’s 
Initiative for Star t-● GGGI Country 
Office  
● WB Country Office 
etc.


---
*Page 183*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
62 
 
● Ministry of Labour – Invalids and 
Social Affairs (MOLISA)  
● Vietnam Women Entrepreneurs 
Council (VWEC)  
● Ministry  
of Science and Technology 
(MOST)  
● Ministry of Education and 
Training (MOET)  
● National Climate Change 
Committee  Start -ups and 
Entrepreneurship)  up and 
Entrepreneurship  
● Vietnam Climate 
Innovation Centre  
● BUILD -IT public -
private ecosystem


---
*Page 184*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
63 
 
Appendix 2. Gender Profiling Form (GPF)  
Each of the country SMEs shall be screened to assess whether the enterprise meets this Programme’s “women -owned SME” criteria. This Company Gender 
Profiling Form (CGPF) shall be filled and submitted to the Programme at Component 1 or Component 2 stage.  
CTF Gender Advisory Team shall review the CGPF of the applicant JVs to the CTF as part of the application package and validat e if the applicant meets the 
Gender Mainstreaming Condition 1 (“The women -owned SME” status), one of the CTF Investment Criteria.  
Does your company fulfil the 
following conditions?  YES/NO  If YES, pls provide details.  If YES, can you submit the evidence?  
[CONDITION 1 -1]  
SMEs with at least 26% of the 
total capital owned by women  YES  (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:  
◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)  
No N/A N/A 
[CONDITION 1 -2]  
SMEs with  
At least one woman participates 
on the Board of Directors 
Director  and/or different types 
of boards or internal committees 
such as ESG Committees, 
among others (or CEO, COO, 
CTO)  YES  
 
 (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:  
◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)  
No N/A N/A 
[CONDITION 1 -3]  
 YES  (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:


---
*Page 185*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
64 
 
SMEs with more than 30% of 
the workforce are females  ◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)  
No N/A N/A 
[OTHERS]  
 
Are there any other aspects of 
your company that could be 
considered to regard your 
company as “women -owned”?  
Pls specify, if there are . YES  (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:  
◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)  
No N/A N/A 
 
The Table above has been filled by (Name of the person/Title or position/Organization/Contact No./ Email Address)  
 
With signature  
 
Date of submission


---
*Page 186*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
65 
 
Appendix 3.  Simplified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template)  
Participating JV candidates in the Acceleration Program (Component 2), or those JV candidates who are not participating in th e Programme but preparing for 
the CTF application by themselves, need to prepare Simplified Gender Analysis (GA)  and Gender Action Plan (GAP) and submit together with the other CTF 
application documents.  
GA and GAP for JV candidates to prepare consists of two levels, namely:  
1) LEVEL I: ORGANIZATIONAL (APPLICANT ENTITY, JV or country SME) LEVEL, and;  
2) LEVEL II: PROPOSED ENTERPRISE LEVEL  
Together with Gender Profiling Form (GPF, See Annex 2 above), GA & GAP documents are part of the CTF Application document pac kages to submi t for 
the CTF application in Component 3.  
This GA & GAP document needs to be drafted by the JV candidate. However, upon request, Fund -level Gender expertise can provide support to prepare it, as 
part of the Acceleration Program (Component 2).  
Over time, t he CTF shall disclose good example of the GA&GAP for the other applicants’ references.   
Following are the key components to be included in the GA+GAP document that needs to be prepared and submitted by the JV cand idates for CTF.  
Contents  Instruction  Answ er (filled by the JV 
candidates)  Reference, explanation & 
Reference sources  (Note)  
LEVEL I: ORGANIZATIONAL (APPLICANT ENTITY) LEVEL  
Section I -1. Overview of the Applicant entity (JV or Country SME) 221.  
A Finalized Gender Profiling Form (GPF) (See Appendix 2 above) Shall be provided here.  
 
221 Section I -1 of this Format is identical with the Gender Profiling Form (GPF).


---
*Page 187*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
66 
 
Does your company fulfil the 
following conditions?  YES/NO  If YES, pls provide details.  If YES, can you submit the evidence?  
[CONDITION 1 -1]  
SMEs with at least 26% of the 
total capital owned by women  YES  (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:  
◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)  
No N/A N/A 
[CONDITION 1 -2]  
SMEs with  
At least one woman participates 
on the Board of Directors  
and/or different types of boards 
or internal committees such as 
ESG Committees, among others 
(or CEO, COO, CTO)  YES  
 
 (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:  
◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)  
No N/A N/A 
[CONDITION 1 -3]  
 
SMEs with more than 30% of 
the workforce are females  YES  (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:  
◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)


---
*Page 188*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
67 
 
No N/A N/A 
[OTHERS]  
 
Are there any other aspects of 
your company that could be 
considered to regard your 
company as “women -owned”?  
Pls specify if there are.  YES  (Pls specify.)  YES: (Pls list up & submit)  
◼ Document #1:  
◼ Document #2:  
◼ Document #3:  
 
No (Pls explain the reason)  
No N/A N/A 
 
Section I - 2.  Entity’s Gender Mainstreaming Commitment Plan (GCMP)  
I-2-1. 
Willingness to 
commit to 
Gender 
Mainstreaming 
of the entity  I-2-1-1. Is your Entity willing to adopt 
Gender Mainstreaming measures 
internally?  
 
□ Yes 
□ No (Pls elaborate the reason here.)  Rationale and advantage of 
the organizational gender 
mainstreaming commitment 
shall be clearly 
communicated during 
Acceleration Program 
(Component 2). Individual 
JV applicant may approach 
Fund -level Gender expertise 
for further explanation 
before making a decision. 
(By written communication/ 
email or virtual meeting etc.)  Standardized 
guidance 
(manual) on 
the 
organizational 
gender 
mainstreaming 
commitment 
will be 
developed and 
provided in 
written for 
reference to all 
the JV 
applicants.  I-2-2. 
Commitment 
Type (1): 
Employment  I-2-2-1. Is the Enterprise Team led/managed by 
a woman/women?  
□  Yes 
□ No (If yes, pls elaborate here.)  Individual JV applicant may 
approach Fund -level Gender 
expertise for further 
explanation before making a 
decision. (By written


---
*Page 189*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
68 
 
I-2-2-2. Will the Enterprise employ 
girls/women?  
□ Yes 
□ No 
 
 (If yes, pls elaborate here.)  
■  Total _______ 
employment of girls or 
women  
 / ( ___% out of total ___ 
number of employments to 
be created for 
girls/women.)  communication/ email or 
virtual meeting etc.)  
I-2-2-3. What level of employment for girls and 
women will the Enterprise employ?  
□ CEO  
□ COO  
□ CTO  
□ Board member  
□ Director & Senior Manager  
□ Mid-level Manager/Administrator   
□ Line workers  
□ (Outsourced) Service workers (Pls 
specify:   )  
□ Others: Pls specify:    (Pls tick all that applicable with 
the respective number of 
employments of girls and 
women)  
 
I-2-3.  
Commitment 
Type (2): 
Budget 
allocation  I-2-3-1. Is there allocation of budget specifically 
for the organizational gender mainstreaming 
within your entity?  
□ Yes 
□ No 
□ Not yet. But willing to introduce.  (Pls specify)  
□ Yes: Pls specify.  
□ No: Pls explain the 
reason for not 
allocating.


---
*Page 190*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
69 
 
□ Not yet. But willing to 
introduce: Pls elaborate your 
plan here.   
I-2-4. 
Commitment 
Type (3): 
Improvement of 
welfare policy 
for women 
employees  I-2-4-1. Are you willing to introduce/improve 
welfare policy for women employees?  
□ Yes 
□ No 
 (Pls specify)  
□ Yes: Pls elaborate your 
plan here.  
□ No: Pls explain the 
reason for not 
allocating.  
I-2-5. Other 
Commitments  I-2-5-1. Pls specify any other gender 
mainstreaming commitment your entity is 
planning to introduce.  (Pls specify here.)  Individualized commitment 
plan shall be reviewed by the 
fund level Gender expertise 
and assessed on its 
individual merits.  
If necessary, guidance will 
be provided to  concrete and 
substantiate the proposed 
commitment plan.   
I-2-6. Gender 
Mainstreaming 
Commitment 
Action Plan  ◼ Organizational (Entity -level) Gender Action Plan [Typical Template]  
Gender Commitment  Indicators & Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities 
(Department)  Costs  
Gender Commitment #1       
Gender Commitment #2


---
*Page 191*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
70 
 
Gender Commitment #3      
[…]     
 
LEVEL II: PROPOSED ENTERPRISE LEVEL  
Section II -1.  Overview of the Proposed Enterprise  
II-1-1. Description of the 
Enterprise for CTF 
application  Describe the rationale /components of the 
proposed enterprises/ budget/ implementing 
parties (& delivery parties)/Period etc.  (Specify here.)    
II-1-2. Location & Host 
communities  Any location for the facilities (Office, 
manufacturing factories etc.) & locations of 
the supply chains of the proposed 
enterprises  (Specify here.)    
II-1-3. Key stakeholders  List up the key central/local/community 
stakeholders of all types (government/non -
governmental/civil/ business etc.)  (List up here.)    
II-1-4. Key Result Areas  Indicate the relevant key result areas out of 
the GCF’s 8 result areas.  Pls tick all applicable.  
[Mitigation]  
□ Energy Generation 
and access  
□ Low-emission 
transport  
□ Buildings, cities, 
industries, and 
appliances


---
*Page 192*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
71 
 
[Adaptation]  
□ Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
□ Health and well -
being, and food and 
water security  
II-1-5. Climate technology  Specify what climate technology  it aims to 
adopt and transfer  Pls tick all applicable  
□ Renewable energy 
generation  
□ Transmission, 
distribution, and 
electricity storage  
□ Low-emission 
transport  
□ Residential and 
industrial energy 
efficiency 
technologies  
□ Agricultural 
technologies and 
practices   
□ Water management 
and treatment  
□ Waste management 
and treatment


---
*Page 193*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
72 
 
□ Ocean energy  
□ Bioenergy 
(renewable 
biomass)  
□ Small -scale 
hydropower  
□ Solar energy  
□ Wind energy  
□ Modern renewable 
off-grid energy 
systems  
□ Connection of 
isolat ed grid  
□ Battery storage  
□ Low-carbon/energy 
efficient mass 
transport  
□ EVs (e.g., e -cars, e -
motorbikes, e -
bicycles)  
□ EV infrastructure  
□ Alternative 
transport fuels (next 
generation 
advanced zero -
emission biofuels, 
green hydrogen  
□ Building energy 
modelling


---
*Page 194*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
73 
 
□ Lightin g 
□ HVAC  
□ Appliances  
□ Sustainable 
agriculture  
□ Climate -resilient 
plant/animal 
genetics/breeding  
□ Water saving and 
efficient irrigation 
methods  
□ Flood and drought 
management 
technology  
□ RE-powered 
equipment  
□ Other low carbon 
and climate -
resilient farming 
methods and 
climate -linked 
insurance products  
□ Nature based 
solutions  
□ Management of 
water resources  
□ Small -scale, 
decentralised 
wastewater plants


---
*Page 195*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
74 
 
□ Wastewater 
treatment  
□ Water treatment 
processing  
□ Water desalination  
□ Mechanical -
biological treatment  
□ Aerobic/semi -
aerobic digestion  
□ Waste to energy  
□ Composting  
□ Others:  
  
II-1-6. Climate technology 
diffusion and 
commercialization 
mechanisms  Briefly describe the diffusion and 
commercialization mechanism of the 
adopted technology  (Specify here.)    
Section II - 2. Gender Analysis  
II-2-1. Girls & women in 
host communities  Based on the answer in Section 1.2. above, 
summarise:  
2.1.1.  Key gender dimension of the 
host 
communities /locations/potential 
labour force/customers/project 
partners/participants  (with key 
socio -economic indicators (e.g. 
population/income 
level/literacy & education (esp. (Specify here.) (Or: attach a 
separate report.)  Individual JV applicant may 
approach Fund -level Gender 
expertise for guidance. (By 
written communication/ 
email or virtual meeting etc.)


---
*Page 196*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
75 
 
STEM & ICT) etc. with 
references.  
2.1.2.  Key gender -related stakeholder 
entities (e.g. women’s union s, 
women’s rights & 
empowerment advocacy & 
support groups , etc.) (Specify here.) (Or: attach a 
separate report.)    
II-2-2. Vulnerability 
Assessment  Based on the answer in Section 1.5 & 1.6 
above, summarise:  
2.1.3.  Are girls and women more 
vulnerable than boys and men 
in this sector in the current 
situation?  
□ Yes 
□ No 
□ Do not know.  (Pls elaborate.)  
For country -specific gender 
vulnerability and potential 
for gender equality and 
economic empowerment, see 
Section 3 of this Gender 
Assessment Report.   
2.2.2.  Would girls and women benefit 
more than boys and men once 
this enterprise is properly 
implemented?  
□ Yes 
□ No (Pls elaborate: What kind of 
benefits to what specific 
groups?)  
 
E.g.)


---
*Page 197*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
76 
 
□ Do not know.  Solar (and other renewable) 
facility manufacturing 
allows more women with 
employment and skill 
training opportunities, 
economically empowering 
girls and women.  
II-2-3. Barrier Analysis  2.3.1.  Would the proposed enterprise 
potentially worsen the existent 
gend er inequality between men 
and women in the country?  
□ Yes 
□ No 
□ Do not know.   
 (Pls elaborate: What aspect 
of gender inequality may 
worsen due to what 
component of the proposed 
enterprises?)  
 
E.g.)  
• Employment and 
technical 
education/training 
opportunities are 
given only to men, 
worsening 
economic equality 
between men and 
women.  
• Current green 
finance in local 
banks favours male 
entrepreneurs by 
requiring 
additional 
conditions for 
women SME 
owners (leg ally or (*Based on answers given in 
the left column, Fund -level 
Gender expertise may deepen 
the barrier identification by 
reducing it to the typical 
barrier typology (e.g. 
instit utional/policy/cultural -
customary, 
societal/economic & 
financial , etc.)


---
*Page 198*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
77 
 
customarily) (such 
as marriage 
certificate & co -
signing by male 
spouse etc.)  
Section II - 3. Enterprise -level Gender Action Plan  
II-3-1. Identification of 
Gender Actions  
 
(*A separate set of 
guidelines shall be provided 
as an attachment to this 
Format for guidance to fill 
this section.)   3.1.1.  How to strengthen the positive 
impacts of the proposed 
Enterprise on gender equality 
and women’s empowerment?  Based on the answer to 
Secti on 2.2 above, pls 
identify measures to 
strengthen the benefits to 
girls and women & reduce 
their vulnerabilities to 
climate change.  
 
(Identify here)  
◼ Gender Action #1:  
◼ Gender Action #2:  
◼ Gender Action #3:  
[…]  Fund -level Gender expertise 
may support the G AP 
establishment process by 
providing guidance to answer 
to these items. (Customized 
review and consulting as part 
of the Acceleration Program 
(Component 2), upon the JV 
candidate’s request.)   
3.1.2.  How to reduce the negative 
impacts of the proposed 
enterprise on gender equality 
and women’s empowerment?  Based on the answer to 
Section 2.3 above, pls 
identify measures to lift the 
barriers and reverse the 
worsening existent gender 
equality between men and 
women through the 
proposed enterprise.


---
*Page 199*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
78 
 
(Identify  here)  
◼ Gender Action #4:  
◼ Gender Action #5:  
◼ Gender Action #6:  
[…]  
II-3-2. Implementation 
Plan of the Gender Action  3.1.3.  Per each of the Gender Actions 
identified (#1~ ) identify 
agents/ required 
budget/monitoring and 
evaluation agent/frequency  Pls fill the GAP table below 
to the extent possible.  
 
   
II-3-3. Gender Action 
Plan  ◼ JV Enterprise -specific Gender Action Plan [Typical Template]  
Activities  Indicators & Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities 
(Agent)  Costs  
Gender Action #1       
Gender Action #2      
Gender Action #3      
Gender Action #4      
Gender Action #5      
Gender Action #6      
[…]


---
*Page 200*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
79 
 
Appendix 4. Stak eholder Consultation Activities   
Meeting Type  Date  
(Venue)  Participants*  Key Discussion Points  
Regular 
Progress 
Meeting_ 
Global 
Level  Kick -off 02 Sep 2021  
(@Online)  
GP team , 
GAIA, PwC, 
GGGI, KDB  ∙ - Overall ESMS policies & 
implementation frameworks  
∙ - Feedback from individual 
stakeholders (incl. eligibility and 
CTF investment criteria etc.)  
∙ - Alignment of ESMS and GAP with 
overall Programme management 
system etc.  Interim  09 Nov 2021  
(@KDB)  
Progress  03 Nov 2021 
(@Online)  
06 Jan 2022 
(@Online)  
18 Mar 2022 
(@Online)  
05 Aug 2022 
(@KDB)  
Country 
Level  NDA 
Consultatio
n for No 
Objection 
Letter  Aug 2021 – 
March 2022 
(@Online)  KDB, NDA, 
line ministries, 
GGGI, key 
local 
ecosystem 
stakeholders  - Inter -ministerial consultation 
arranged by the NDAs and relevant 
line ministries invited by the NDAs 
across the five NOL countries  
- Main discussion on country 
ownership  
Topical 
Meeting  ESMS 
Developme
nt 29 Oct 2021 
(@Online)  
GAIA, GGGI, 
PwC, KDB  ∙ - Validation of AE & EEs’ ESMS  
∙ - Coordination of implementation 
mechanism across Component 1, 2, 3 
& 4 08 Jun 2022 
(@KDB)  
13 Dec 2022 
(@PwC)  
29 Mar 2023 
(@KDB)  GCF, GAIA, 
PwC, KDB  ∙ - GCF Review results and 
Feedbacking on the draft ESMS  
Gender 
Assessment 
& Gender 
Action Plan 
(GA & 
GAP)  12 Nov 2021 
(@Online)  GAIA, GGGI, 
KDB  
∙ - Overall Gender assessment process 
and action plan establishment  
∙ - Consolidation of the GGGI’s and 
KDB’s review & feedback to the 
draft GA and GAP etc.  14 Jan 2022 
(@Online)  
GAIA, GGGI  21 Jan 2022 
(@Online)  
27 Jan 2022 
(@Online)  
11 Feb 2022 
(@Online)  
21 Feb 2022 
(@Online)  GAIA, GGGI, 
KDB  
* GAIA: Gaia Consult Inc./PwC: Price Waterhouse Coopers/GGGI: Global Green Growth Institute/KDB: 
Korean Development Bank


---
*Page 201*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
80 
 
Appendix 5. Sector/Technology -specific Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming for CTF 
Enterprises/Projects  
Renewable energy, agriculture , water and waste management are sectors identified with higher potential 
benefits for women through the CTF support. With the addition of the Early Warning System  (EWS) 
and Disaster Management,  the following  section s provide some of the typical gender mainstream 
actions that all the relevant JV applicants are recommended to consider and reflect  in their respective 
GA/GAP (Appendix 3 of this GA/GAP of the Programme (Annex 8 of the Funding Proposal of the 
R&DB Programme )) for submission as part of the CTF Application.  
 
Appendix 5 -1. Renewable Energy  
⚫ Renewable Energy (Solar PV)  Sector in the Five Countries  
[Cambodia]  
Situated in the ‘global sun belt’222, Cambodia is well -positioned to utilize solar energy. The government 
has provided clarity in the solar sector by allowing electricity generation for self -consumption through 
off-grid and grid -connected systems that meet specific criteria. In recent years,  start-ups focusing on 
connecting rural farms and fisheries to affordable off -grid solar solutions have increased, and key 
incubators such as the Switch to Solar Incubation Programme and Impact Hub’s DakDam Incubator 
programme are supporting the sector. Ca mbodia's updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 
to the UNFCCC includes conditional targets for the energy, industry, transport, building, agriculture, 
and waste sectors. One of the NDC's mitigation actions for the energy sector is to increase ene rgy access 
to rural areas, which requires solar home systems, DC and AC microgrids, and solar battery 
charging stations . Cambodia's NDC also includes adaptation actions such as scaled -up climate -
resilient agricultural production through increased access to  solar irrigation systems, using solar water 
pumps.  
 
[Indonesia]  
The RD&B Program prioritizes the use of solar photovoltaic (PV) technology as a key climate 
technology. In Indonesia, solar PV technology ranks as the top priority among renewable energy 
technologies in terms of cost, environmental benefit, economic impact, technology maturity, country 
ownership, and social impact. (See Table 1.B.38 of the Pre -Feasibility Study of the Program (Annex 2 
of the Funding Proposal))  
The potential of solar energy in Indonesia is vast, and the government has made significant efforts in 
the last five years to maximize the use of clean and renewable energy, particularly solar energy. Solar 
PV technology is considered the most mature commodity in terms of regulation, mark et, and technology, 
with various energy start -ups emerging to cater to the solar market.  
Solar PV technology has the potential to be utilized in remote and off -grid areas  across Indonesia, 
with direct applications in households and industries. The governm ent has also issued regulations to 
promote the use of clean and renewable energy, including the National Energy Plan and the Provision 
of Energy -Efficient Solar Lamps for People Who Have Not Accessed Electricity.  
Solar Photovoltaic (PV) to have high poten tial to be implemented in Indonesia (See Table 1.B.42 of the 
Pre-Feasibility Study of the Program (Annex 2 of the Funding Proposal)), in the form of the following 
 
222 Within 35 degrees of the Equator.


---
*Page 202*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
81 
 
technologies : Low -cost smart grid system solar PV , local industry to build components of the solar 
modules, user -friendly apps to increase solar PV investment/installation, micro -inverter solar 
panel . 
 
[Lao PDR]  
The renewable energy sector in Lao PDR is experiencing significant growth, with solar technology 
being the dominant sub -sector. The country's prospective technology needs for climate mitigation 
include solar technology for power generation and supply, and solar home systems for energy 
access  (See Table 1.C.13 of the Pre -Feasibility Study of the Program (Annex 2 of the Fund ing 
Proposal)). Priority technologies for the RD&B Program in Lao PDR include isolated home systems 
(solar home systems) and clean cookstoves .223 
 
[Philippines]  
The agricultural sector in the Philippines has potential for growth through the implementation of green 
technologies, particularly in climate -smart agriculture (CSA)  initiatives. CSA can be achieved 
through solar -powered irrigation systems, drones, and smart farms , which are cost -efficient 
compared to traditional methods. The Philippine government h as also prioritized renewable energy 
technologies in its efforts to mitigate climate change, particularly in the energy, transportation, and 
waste sectors. Renewable energy systems can also be deployed as climate adaptation actions following 
the National C limate Change Action Plan (NCCAP), particularly in agriculture and fisheries, where 
climate -related disasters have hampered development. The establishment of Competitive Renewable 
Energy Zones (CREZ) in the country can guide potential investments from proj ect developers.  
 
[Vietnam] 224  
Vietnam has made significant strides in renewable energy, particularly in wind and solar, over the past 
three years. By the end of 2021, Vietnam had over 9.5 GW of rooftop solar capacity connected to the 
national power grid system, which is a massive incre ase compared to 2019, placing Vietnam among the 
top 10 countries with the highest capacity of installed solar energy. Solar technology is predicted to 
account for USD 280 billion of the renewable energy sector's market value, which is expected to reach 
USD  714 billion. However, renewable energy development in Vietnam remains limited compared to its 
potential, with only 100 MW of wind power, 15 MW of solar power, and 10 MW of biomass power. 
As part of mitigation technologies, solar photovoltaic power plants and solar water heaters  have 
been included as priority technologies in the energy sector.  
 
⚫ Gender Perspective in Renewable Energy Sector (Solar PV)  
Among the diverse renewable energy sectors, solar PV is a globally leading sector of gender -balanced 
employment. The solar sector has about doubled women’s employment rate, compared to wind and oil 
and gas sectors, in 2021225.  
 
223 Table  1.C.16.  Lao PDR  energy  priority  technologies  and Table  1.C.22.  Summary  of sectors  and priority  technologies  
224 1.2.4 list of sectors with growing climate technology  
225 https://www.irena.org/News/pressreleases/2022/Sep/Solar -PV-Employs -More -Women -Than -Any-Renewables


---
*Page 203*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
82 
 
Globally, women’s job share in the solar PV sector can be determined as follows: administration (58%), 
non-STEM te chnical (38%), other non -technical (35%), and STEM (32%)226. This shows that more 
than half of female workforces are serving administrative work, while a few of them are involved in 
STEM -based technical jobs. However, this still takes a higher portion compared to the other renewable 
energy sectors. With the lower level of attaining STEM education of females, expect Philippines , which 
has about a similar share of STEM education participation, women are marginalized to be involved in 
the mainstrea ming skills of the industry.  
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) analysed227 the barriers that women are facing in the 
solar PV workplace. The barriers can be divided into three categories which are entry, retention, and 
advancement. For entry, ge nder role perception, limited mobility, and hiring practices of that sector 
became the obstacles; due to fair and transparent policies, maternity leaves, and flex -time, women were 
hard to be retained in the workplace; the issues that are hindering women’s advancement are glass 
ceiling, lack of mentors, and social norms. These cultural and social perceptions make it women hard 
to be skilled in the renewable energy sector, even though the solar PV sector shows a relatively higher 
level of women workforce part icipation. Compared with other renewable energy sectors, solar PV still 
hires significant portion of women workers in technical areas (mainly related to the manufacturing of 
panels). Once installed the panels and the solar PV system need to be regularly cl eaned. Often cleaning 
is conducted manually and this may prefer female labours.  
At the very first stage of solar PV development in Southeast Asia, Indonesia was one of the leading 
countries that take the majority of solar PV capacity228. After then, Philip pines started to increase solar 
energy in their energy generation shares. More recently, Vietnam became one of the largest countries 
in the world, in terms of solar PV growth. Meanwhile, there is steady growth in Cambodia and Laos. 
These show the variation s in solar PV development across the countries. Although the five countries 
have different stages in solar PV deployment, considering the general gender -biased issues in the solar 
PV sector (including renewable energy), gender -mainstreamed perspectives are  required for all stages 
of each project. In this context, the occupational environment, health, and safety (EHS) need to reflect 
gender aspects. Although all the five countries have ratified key labour -related international 
conventions, in practice, there  are limitations, especially for women workers.  
 
Recommended Gender -mainstreaming approaches  
<1> General Requirements  
All the requirements under the CTF  Investment Criteria: Gender Component (See Table 1 of the Gender 
Assessment above.) will apply to all the EWS and Natural Disaster Technology application 
projects/enterprises subject to the CTF approval. Thus “women -led enterprises” on the EWS and 
Natural  Disaster Management projects shall be prioritized. The rest of the applicant JVs shall also be 
encouraged to hire more female employ ees (with equal working conditions and remuneration as male 
employees) and improve women employees’ welfare policies.  
All the CTF Applicant JVs shall need to submit a simplified gender assessment and gender action plan 
([Appendix 3. Simplified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template)] of 
the Gender Assessment/Gender Action Plan (GA/GAP), Annex 8 of t he Funding Proposal of the 
Programme). [Section II - 2. Gender Analysis] requires you to assess the gender perspective of a specific 
 
226 https://www.irena.org/Digital -content/Digital -Story/2022/Sep/A -Gender -Perspective -on-Solar -Employment/detail  
227 https://www.irena.org/ -
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Sep/IRENA_Solar_PV_Gender_perspective_2022.pdf ?rev=61477241eb9e4db2932757698c
554dc2  
228 Sreenath et al. (2002 May). A decade of solar PV deployment in ASEAN: Policy landscape and recommendations. [Conference Paper ] 
Energy Reports 8. Retrieved from: 
https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S2352484722010691?token=B4D69AFBBD87B F3AB17F2D40DAE09500B4E6D11F6EEC29956
3683A291CEC61D4F5D733E5504F20D97D40AC81DCC5535B&originRegion=us -east-1&originCreation=20230424094303


---
*Page 204*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
83 
 
proposed JV enterprises/projects, based on which [Section II -3. Enterprise -level Gender Action Plan] 
need to be established.   
 
<2> Sector -specific Gender Mainstreaming Considerations  
Gender Action 1. Consider gender -specific occupational EHS plan  
Female workers in manufacturing panels and assembling solar PV systems, and installation may face 
differentiated types and levels of dangers and hazards. (The higher sensitivity of women to the exposure 
of particular toxic/hazardous materials such as the use of conductive pastes containing Cd, Pb, and/or 
phthalates.)  
Gender Action 2. Consider biological differences of women  
Ergonomics : Women may have different ergonomic needs than men, which can impact their comfort 
and safety in the workplace. For example, solar panel installation often requires heavy lifting and 
working at heights, which may be challenging for women who are s maller or have less upper body 
strength than their male counterparts. Heights are also one of the significant issues in occupational 
health and safety concerns. With the 2020 Fatalities for US Roofers having increased  15% as demands 
for Solar Roof Installa tions increase , this issue is deemed to have resulted in higher fatality rates for 
Solar installation projects outside the United States because of more lax safety regulations229. With 
construction being a male -dominated field, there is concern that female workers will be more 
susceptible to injuries due to infrastructure built without consideration of female -body ergonomics.   
Possible solutions include:  
➢ Conduct a gender -sensitive risk assessment: Conducting a gender -sensitive risk assessment 
can help identify potential hazards and risks for female workers and provide 
recommendations for addressing them230. (eg. Flexibility of work hours of female workers 
under the sun (due to higher proneness of heat stress of female workers231)) 
➢ Promote gendered ergonom ics in design: Ergonomics should be considered in the design 
phase of infrastructure projects to ensure that they are inclusive of all workers, including 
women. This can include designing equipment and tools that are better suited to the female 
body, such as smaller and lighter tools232.  
➢ Produce health and safety products specifically designed for female workers (e.g. PPE fit for 
average Asian female bodies, etc.)  
➢ Ensure “zero -tolerance of SEAH and GBV” in all workplaces . 
 
 
 
 
229 2020 Fatalities for US Roofers Increased 15% as Solar Roof Installations Increase | NextBigFuture.com   
230 https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ ---ed_protect/ ---protrav/ ---safework/documents/publication/wcms_324653.pdf   
231 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article /abs/pii/S0168159112002687   
232 Designing for Gender Equality in the Developing Context: Developing a Gender -Integrated Design Process to Support Designers’ 
Seeing, Process, and Space Making, Ginger Daniel (2013)


---
*Page 205*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
84 
 
Appendix 5.2. Agriculture  
⚫ Agriculture Sector in the Five Countries  
[Cambodia]  
Agriculture is a key driver of Cambodia’s economy, making up an estimated 21.1% of the country’s 
GDP in 2019. [1] The sector is highlighted as a critical focus for adaptation actions in national climate 
strategies, including the NDC, as it is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, such as flooding 
and drought. Moreover, farmers are highly vulnerable to th e rising temperatures caused by climate 
change, which can lead to lower productivity and heat stress.  
Climate -resilient agriculture technology  is the top adaptation technology priority in Cambodia, 
marking full co -benefits in terms of adaptation impacts, economic, social, environmental and gender 
co-benefits as well as country ownership (See Table 1.A.13 of Pre -Feasibility Study, Annex 2 of the 
Funding Proposal of the R&DB Programme).  
Several  programmes and initiatives are taking place including smart agri culture initiatives , supported 
by both the Cambodian government and international and local entities. Increasingly technology 
innovation in agriculture sector in Cambodia is focusing on technology and apps for farmers, assuming 
a high level of digital lite racy. Given the level of digital literacy of (esp. female) farmers, training would 
need to be strengthened. So far,  however, smart agriculture has not been extensively reached out to the 
Cambodia’s rural communities and has significant potential for upscal ing with proper incentives.  
 
[Indonesia]  
Three out of Five Indonesians live in rural areas with agriculture as their predominant occupation. Food 
sovereignty, self -sufficiency and increasing agricultural productivity are the main foci of government 
agriculture policy. While Indonesia’s 2022 -2024 National Medium -Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 
selected agriculture as one of the priority areas for adaptation, the climate technology is still in its 
nascent stage in Indonesia, and the agritech i s attracting least amount of funding thus far. (See Figure 
1.B.4 of the  Pre-Feasibility Study, Annex 2 of the Funding Proposal of the R&DB Programme).  
The c ountry’s agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to climate change -induced extreme weather 
conditio ns, such as extreme heating and flooding. Due to decreasing water availability, the country’s 
rice production is projected to decline by more than 25% in several provinces. The priority agri 
technology in Indonesia are (in order of the ranks): (1) crop(ric e) tolerance to drought and flooding ; 
(2) Technology for mariculture development ; (3) Technology of efficient irrigation (intermittent, 
SRI, PTT ); (4) cattle meat technology development among others . (See Table 1.B.35 of the  Pre-
Feasibility Study, Annex 2 of the Funding Proposal of the R&DB Programme).  
 
[Lao PDR]  
In Lao PDR, more than two -thirds of the workforce is employed in agriculture, mostly in small -scale 
farming. The country is highly exposed to climate -related hazards and is expected to get worse o ver 
time. Temperatures in Lao PDR are predicted to increase by 3.9 ˚C against baseline conditions before 
the end of the century, while agriculture yield s reduce consistently, driven by the incidence of extreme 
heat during growing seasons of stable crops such as rice. The country is also heavily exposed to flooding.  
To reduce sector GHG emission, the Lao government aims to: (1) enhance low -emission and 
environmentally friendly practices, such as smart and precise farming, feeds and feeding  and


---
*Page 206*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
85 
 
livestock manure management ; (2) adjust water management practices  in 50,000 hectares i n 
lowland rice cultivation, and ; (3) Increase animal feed by 1.4 million tonnes  by 2024, including 1% of 
feed and concentrates that reduce emissions.  (See Table 1.C.6. of the Pre -Feasibility Study, Annex 
2 of the Funding Proposal of the R&DB Programme). For enhanced adaptive capacity, the country also 
aims to: (1) promote climate res ilience in farming system s and agricultural infrastructure , and ; (2) 
promote appropriate technologies for climate change adaptation, including nature -based and circular 
economy solutions . The country is also leading trends in organic agriculture . The count ry has a great 
potential for soil carbon sequestration. To achieve this, the country needs to shift from widely -used 
burning practices to soil rehabilitation through conservation agriculture. For this awareness raising and 
training is required for the farm ing population to recognize the advance of soil carbon sequestration 
techniques .  
Through extensive consultations and prioritization exercises (incl. AHP ), the following four 
technologies in agriculture were identified as top priority for CTF support: (1) Early warning system 
and insurance;  (2) Flood and drought management technology ; (3) Livestock disease control 
technology , and; (4) Pest management/contr ol technology .  
 
[Philippines]  
The Philippines Innovation Act of 2019 (RA 11293) fosters agriculture as one of the priority areas for 
fostering innovation and internationalization activities of MSMEs. The country has also climate -smart 
agriculture (CSA)  initiatives. The country highlights climate -responsive agriculture (With 
Renewable energy -powered post -harvesting and processing equipment technology  to address 
prohibitive level of cost of farm equipment and facilities with increasing energy (mostly diesel) price 
they use, as examples) as it s NDC adaptation actions. Cropland management and precision agriculture 
are also prioritized for CTF support.  
 
[Vietnam]  
Viet Nam is an agriculture -based country, where cultivated land for farming makes up nearly 40% of 
the total land mass, and about 20 million people work in the agriculture sector (about 40% of the total 
employment), contributing 17% of the national GDP.  However, in general, the agriculture sector has 
been receiving comparatively less attention for investment until recently.  
The Vietname se government is driving initiatives for smart rural, smart village and smart agriculture 
with an aim to create more efficient and modern rural services through inclusive digital transformation. 
Priority agricultural technologies for Adaptation for CTF sup port in Vietnam include, among others: (1) 
Agricultural ecosystem -based adaptation (AEbA ); (2) Climate -smart agriculture (CSA);  (3) Local 
poultry and waterfowl species with a lower critical temperature (LCT ); (4) Convert from discrete 
and small -scale breeding into concentrated breeding ; (5) Integrated rice farming models: rice -
shrimp/fish/duck , and; (5 ) VietGAP -based breeding . (See Table 1.E.25 of the Pre-Feasibility Study, 
Annex 2 of the Funding Proposal of the R&DB Programme).   
For mitiga tion actions, (1) ICM for annual upland crop cultivation  has topped in priority, followed 
by: (2) Shifting from double/triple rice cropping system to rice -aquaculture farming system ; (3) 
Improved technologies to recycle livestock dung as organic fertilizer , and; (4 ) Reuse of 
agricultural/crop residues.  (See Table 1.E.30. of the Pre -Feasibility Study, Annex 2 of the Funding 
Proposal of the R&DB Programme).


---
*Page 207*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
86 
 
⚫ Gender Perspective in Agriculture Sector  
In many developing countries, the agriculture sector has wom en’s faces. In Cambodia and Indonesia, 
the agricultural sector is predominantly occupied by women (about 80% in Cambodia & 70 -80% in 
Indonesia respectively). More than 60% of Vietnamese women work in the agriculture sector and more 
than 50% of the farmers in Lao PDR is also women. In contrast, only less than a quarter of the 
agricultural population are women in the Philippines. The minority female farmers in the Philippines 
are concentrated  in subsistence farming and food for family consumption, whereas men  primarily focus 
on cash crops.  
With varying degrees, across the countries, climate hazards threaten the livelihoods and food security 
of millions of smallholder farmers and agribusiness who depend on agriculture in our selected countries, 
especially wome n”. Regardless of the level of participation, women farmers in all five countries are in 
disadvantageous positions compared with their male counterparts: Women’s activities are often under -
valued, the farming scale is smaller, and innovation and scale -up are often hampered by uneven grounds 
generated by socio -cultural, traditional bias and gender roles, which favours  males for land ownership, 
access to formal credit services as well as inheritances. In general, located in rural settings,  the 
agriculture sec tor is known to be a sector where male -dominated old customs are traditions are 
perpetuated more strongly than other industries.  
Given the limited education and resources available to the rural farming women in the five countries, it 
is of utmost importan ce to proactively the women farmers and agricultural entrepreneurs to the 
Programme and ensure their equal benefiting from it.   
⚫ Recommended Gender -mainstreaming approach es 
<1> General Requirements  
All the requirements under the CTF Investment Criteria: Gender Component (See Table 1 of the Gender 
Assessment above.) will apply to all the EWS and Natural Disaster Technology application 
projects/enterprises subject to the CTF approval. Thus “women -led e nterprises” on the EWS and 
Natural Disaster Management projects shall be prioritized. The rest of the applicant JVs shall also be 
encouraged to hire more female employ ees (with equal working conditions and remuneration as male 
employees) and improve women employees’ welfare policies.  
All the CTF Applicant JVs shall need to submit a simplified gender assessment and gender action plan 
([Appendix 3. Simplified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template)] of 
the Gender Assessment/Gender Action Plan (GA/GAP), Annex 8 of the Funding Proposal of the 
Programme). [Section II - 2. Gender Analysis] requires you to assess the gender perspective of a specific 
proposed JV enterprises/projects, based on which [Section II -3. Enterprise -level Gender Ac tion Plan] 
need to be established.  
 
<2> Sector -specific Gender Mainstreaming Considerations  
Gender Action 1: To the extent possible, aim to set the women ’s participation targets as 
proportionate to the women’s share of sector participation.  
In countries  with predominantly higher level of participation of women in agriculture such as Cambodia 
(about 74%), Indonesia (70~80%), and Lao PDR (more than 50 %) the Programme shall aim to increase 
the country -specific targets for women’s participation (in terms of : 1) the number of selected local 
applicant agricultural startups and firms which are “women -owned” (in Component 1), and/or 2) 
number of (local) female employments as part of the Gender Mainstreaming Commitment Plan 
(GMCP).


---
*Page 208*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
87 
 
- In Component 1, the Programme shall set a more ambitious target for country  (local) 
“women -led” startup s/firms’ participation in the  agriculture sector.  
 
- In Component 2, the Programme shall set more ambitious targets for a JV applicant’s 
gender mainstreaming action plan (GMCP). (e.g., by setting hire women 
employment/participant rates. & overall outcome targets of women beneficiaries etc.)  
 
Gender Action 2: Proactively tap into the women farmers’ insights for innovation and 
identification of the  appropriate farming technologies.  
By sheer size of women occupying their hands -on experiences in the farming sector, women are a 
reservoir of the traditional and indigenous agricultural technologies and practices: While male farmers 
are more dominant in machine -based, large -scale commercial scale monoculture (e.g., simple crop/fruit 
plantations), informal and small -scale, subsistence farming ha s been similar with mixed farming, 
agroforestry and aquaculture -rice production combination styles. Thus, women farmers should be the 
leading participants from the very planning and design stage of the project preparation.  
- In Component 2, in the JV enterprise preparation stage, the Programme shall ensure the 
consultation activities have more or equal number of  female participants than males at 
community -level. Also in future stakeholder engagement plan, the JV enterprise for CTF 
application shall ensure more or equal representation of women in consultation groups.  
 
Gender Action 3: Consciously posit women as th e prototype participants and beneficiaries of the 
funded enterprises/activities.  
Given the majority of farmers are women in most countries (except the Philippines), it is advisable that 
whatever business plans and designs of concerned enterprises/business es under CTF support, should 
assume women ’s group as a prototype users and beneficiaries. Sounds truism though, this assumption 
needs to be clearly and consciously articulated due to our deeply entrenched perception positing (often 
while adult) males as a standard and model for the general humankind from the very proposal and 
conceptualization state. This will provide gendered technology innovation.  
➢ In Component s 2 and 3, the JV enterprises in  the agriculture sector shall explicitly posit 
women in the target country(ies) as a prototype target group for technology application s 
and beneficiaries. As appropriate the JV enterprises shall consider “gendered” designing 
and planning. Such approaches shall  be explicitly reflected in the plan of the JV enterprises 
(in the proposal document) during CTF application.  
 
Appendix 5.3. Water  
⚫ Water Sector in the Five Countries  
[Cambodia]  
Cambodia remains a largely agrarian country with its high population dependent on subsistence farming 
for their livelihoods which leaves them highly vulnerable to climate shocks.  ADB (2021) mentions in 
its report on the great potential for the application  of new water and agricultural technologies,


---
*Page 209*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
88 
 
including drip irrigation, water harvesting, biomass and rural energy .233 In this sense , water 
resource management technology  remains highly relevant as the prioritized adaptation technologies, 
critical for maint aining ‘the fertility of productive agricultural lands for food production, fisheries, and 
other biodiversity resources’234. 
 
[Indonesia]  
Indonesia identifies water resource management as  one of the priority sectors for the adaptation 
technology for NDC achievements235. In addition, water harvesting (well & infiltration pond)  is 
selected as the highest in its prioritized adaptation technologies in the water sector, which results in 
improving health and  well-being, and food and water security.  
 
[Lao PDR]  
Lao PDR is a country, rich in water resources. Flooding is a major cause of climate change -related 
disasters in Lao PDR, and it affects the quality of water, the loss of lives, and the livelihoods. The most 
vulnerable areas to flooding are the plain along the Mekong River in the central and southern parts236. 
75% of Lao PDR’s population relies on agriculture for their livelihood, and food security could be 
endangered if water demands for the agriculture sector that cannot be met. The food security -water 
nexus is also broadly recognised in the country's climate strategies in its latest NDC237, Lao PDR has 
set a conditional target for the agriculture sector to develop 50,000 hectares of adjus ted water 
management practice . Resilience of water infrastructure to climate change can be approached both 
from a climate -resilient infrastructure  angle and a water resource/water security angle.238 
The R&DB Programme highlights investment priority on water shed management technology, 
hydropower dam technology, and climate -resilient water supply technology  to enhance the 
resilience of the water resources sector in Lao PDR.  
 
[Philippines]  
In the Philippines, the gap between the available water supply and dema nd continues to widen. About 
12.40 million people are limited to getting water from unsafe sources. Some areas do not have water 
service providers (WSPs) and most WSPs are neither financially nor technically capable of delivering 
the required services to a  growing population. In addition, only 515 or 68.9 percent of the country’s 748 
water districts (WDs) are operational at varying levels of efficiency and coverage.239 As a consequence, 
the effects of climate change exacerbate the country’s water challenges.  In this context, small -scale 
RE-powered water desalination and mobile RE -powered water treatment  as referred in the R&DB 
Programme are highly relevant for the supply of fresh water, particularly in water -scarce regions240 as 
one of the prioritized adaptati on technologies.  
 
233 “Sector Assessment, Strategy, and Road Map ,” ADB.  
234 “Sector Assessment, Strategy, and Road Map,” ADB.  
235 See Table 1.B.11. of Demand -Driven Pre -Feasibility Study (Annex 2) of the Programme by KDB and GGGI.  
236 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/lao -pdr/vulnerability   
237 See Table 1.C.9. of Demand -Driven Pre -Feasibility Study (Annex 2) of the Programme by KDB and GGGI.  
238 See ‘Climate Technology Needs Assessment’ in Demand -Driven Pre -Feasibility Study (Annex 2) of the Programme by KDB and GGGI, 
pg.221.  
239 National Economic and Development Authority, Philippine Water Supply and Sanitation Master Plan 2019 -2030, 15 September 2021, 
https://neda.gov.ph/wp -content/uploads/2021/09/120921_PWSSMP_Main -Report.pdf   
240 “Is Small Scale Desalination Coupled with Renewable Energy a Cost -Effective Solution,” Applied Sciences, 2021, 
https://www.mdpi.com/2076 -3417 /11/12/5419/pdf .


---
*Page 210*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
89 
 
[Viet nam] 
In the water sector, there is a high demand for adaptation technologies in Viet Nam.  R&DB  Programme 
highlights that further actions must be taken to address the impact of climate change on water resources, 
such as implementing integrated water resource management in river basins, monitoring and 
protecting water resources, ensuring reservoir sa fety, improving water usage efficiency, 
enhancing adaptive capacity and resistance to climate change, managing the coastal strip and 
coastal protection zones in an integrated manner, and spatial planning for the sea and the islands . 
In view of this,  water resource management  has been  identified as prioritize d adaptation technologies 
for the R&DB Programme.   
 
⚫ Gender Perspective in the Water Sector  
In most developing countries, women and girls are the primary provider s, managers and users of water 
at household levels but their roles seldom go beyond.  
Traditionally, the grid -connected, large -scale water supply, distribution and wastewater treatment 
infrastructure development was heavily male -dominated areas due to its e ngineering/technical 
requirements and (perceived or real) intensity of the physical labour . Having said, that, in urban setting, 
women (of low -income households) comprised bottom -most parts of the physical labourers  (with more 
precarious working condition s often without formal labour contracts, in informal sectors) of the 
construction and associated business activities (food stalls, street peddlers selling drinks and snack 
nearby the construction sites , etc.)  
In the context of developing countries, a signi ficant share of a country’s population still remains without 
access to clean and sufficient processed water through modernized water supply and treatment system, 
neither they are in the protection of their health and hygiene through proper wastewater treat ment 
systems. Lack of sufficient and clean and safe water provision is more acute in remote rural and isolated 
locations.  
In these settings, it is often girls and women who spend more time for water access at household levels: 
Women and girls spend a subs tantial amount of time collecting and transporting water for household 
activities, contributing to a situation of ‘time poverty’ 241, deepening gender inequality in development. 
Moreover, women and girls face an increase in vulnerability and Gender -Based Vio lence (GBV) at 
water points and while walking to collect water 242 due to the long distances to and isolation at water 
sources, etc. In this regard, a meaningful engagement of women as water service beneficiaries such as 
in gender -mainstreaming/sensitive app roach will not only promote women’s rights but also improve the 
access to safe water and improved sanitation.  
 
⚫ Recommended Gender -mainstreaming approach es 
<1> General Requirements  
All the requirements under the CTF  Investment Criteria: Gender Component (See Table 1 of the Gender 
Assessment above.) will apply to Water Management Technology application projects/enterprises 
subject to the CTF approval. Thus “women -led enterprises” on Water Management projects shall be 
prioritized. The rest of the applicant JVs shall also be encouraged to hire more female employ ees (with 
 
241 https://eugender.itcilo.org/toolkit/online/story_content/external_filea2qs/TA_Water&sanitation.pdf   
242 World Bank, Toolkit for Mainstreaming Gender in Water Operations, March 2016, 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/922021536852796350/pdf/Toolkit -for-Mainstreaming -Gender -in-Water -Operations.pdf


---
*Page 211*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
90 
 
equal working conditions and remuneration as male employees) and improve women employees’ 
welfare policies.  
All the CTF Applicant JVs shall need to sub mit a simplified gender assessment and gender action plan 
([Appendix 3. Simplified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template)]  
of the Gender Assessment/Gender Action Plan (GA/GAP), Annex 8 of the Funding Proposal of the 
Programme). [Section II - 2. Gender Analysis] requires you to assess the gender perspective of a specific 
proposed JV enterprises/projects, based on which [Section II -3. Enterprise -level Gender Action Plan ] 
need to be established.  
 
<2> Sector -specific Gender Mainstrea ming Considerations  
Gender Action 1: Involve women in the development and maintenance of community -level water 
system  
Water projects designed and implemented with full women’s participation in all phases of planning, 
decision -making, and management of water and sanitation are more sustainable and effective243. As 
women continue to bear the primary responsibility for the food, care, and health of the household, 
women have consequently accumulated considerable knowledge about current water so urces and needs. 
As such, placing women as the key players in designing, operating and maintaining the water systems 
especially in community levels (in non -technical or non -engineering sector) will not only change the 
cultural concept and social norms, but  also help to transform into women -friendly water systems that 
reflects their needs and preferences as the sector’s primary customers.  
With built -in interest, women (and girls) who are often the caretakers and guardians of their 
families, have great poten tial to become capable and responsible managers and operators for sustainable 
water management at the community level. In many cases, externally financed water supply and 
treatment systems and facilities such as water purifiers, septic tanks, etc. often sh ort-lived due to the 
failure of institutionalization of a community -based sustainable water management governance on the 
ground. In this regard, involving women in  the maintenance of water system will not only foster 
women’s self -esteem but also economic e mpowerment by providing technical guidance and financial 
support which will overall contribute to women’s empowerment.  
- Contract women as national and provincial level staff in the field of water and sanitation 
management; Provide equal opportunity to wome n staff along with men, for upgradation of 
skills through training and opportunity to both males and females in management of water 
and sanitation system.  
 
Gender Action 2:  Engage women, especially the vulnerable and low -income, for monitoring and 
Surveillance of drinking water sources and treatment facilities.  
Water -borne illnesses such as diarrhea, cholera  and typhoid are common in developing countries. 
As women typically are the ones that ensure the quality and quantity of water for the entire families, 
proper water treatment through monitoring and surveillance of drinking water sources by women would 
improve the quality of water for consumption, improved access, and economic and environmental 
 
243 Women for Water Partnership, With  Women Better Results In Water M anagement, 2022, 
https://www.womenforwater.org/uploads/7/7/5/1/77516286/20220722_women_for_water_p artnership -
with_women_better_results_in_water_management.pdf


---
*Page 212*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
91 
 
benefits as well. Involving women in water quality management and monitoring such as water quality 
testing will contribute to improving the quality of water.  
Unlike external companies that conduct regular or quarterly visits, regular/frequent/permanent physical 
presence of the women  residents  at the community water facilities would ensure  constant monitoring 
of the performance of the water facilities  while nimbly addressing any malfunctions.  
- Mobilize and institutionalize women’s group s (or female students) and provide training and 
education programs for women to gain the necessary technical and managerial skills for 
their active water management and monitoring.  
 
Gender Action 3:  Improve safe and convenien t access to water and sanitation facilities for the 
vulnerable  
In many cases in developing countries, location of the water supply facilities does not ensure equal 
access to all community members, especially socio -economically vulnerable and politically 
marginalized group s. In (increasingly) acute water shortage situation, the water facilities may be subject 
to illegal appropriation by the elite groups, excluding the vulnerable.  
- When designing and locating the water and sanitation facilities, give special consideration 
to the vulnerable group, particularly women and girls who are at higher risk of gender -based 
violence as well as people with specific needs such as the elderly and persons with disabilities . 
 
- Consider offering collective asset ownersh ip of water utilities and facilities at community -
level to avoid the risks of corruption and elite capture; Locate water and sanitation facilities 
close to dwellings ( e.g., through social mapping), in a secure environment and along safe 
access paths.   
 
Appendix 5.4. Waste Management  
⚫ Waste Management Sector in the Five Countries  
[Cambodia]  
Waste Management Technologies are recognized as priority climate mitigation and adaptation 
technologies in Cambodia. (See Table 1.A.12 and Table 1.A.13  of the Demand -Driven Pre -Feasibility 
Study (Annex 2 of the Funding Proposal) of the RD & B Programme)  
The waste sector is responsible for approximately 2.1% of GHG emissions in Cambodia, as of 2016. 
Solid waste and wastewater management is an ongoing challenge in the country with increasing levels 
of waste generation. Waste composition is also changing with an increasing share of non -degradable 
waste such as plastics, metals, and electronic wastes. There is a need for additional waste segregation, 
treatment and reuse infrastructure and management systems. Rapid economic and urban development, 
combined with a growing middle class, has had a substantial impact on waste generation in Cambodia's 
major cities and waste collection and management is increasingly recognized as a major issue in the 
country. Currently, households , local companies and factories frequentl y dispose of their waste by 
burning it or dumping it in public places, streams, and deserted locations, posing public health threats 
and soil, water and other environmental pollution risks.  
While there is a general lack of data on the actual amount of recy cled waste in Cambodia, recycling 
activities of limited scale  are observed in Phnom Penh. Several private companies are exploring the


---
*Page 213*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
92 
 
business potential targeting both organic and inorganic waste . Both men and women have a low 
level of awareness about  the waste sector.244   
 
[Indonesia]  
Every year, Indonesia generates 65.8 million tons of solid waste from households and industries. The 
rate of trash production is expected to rise as the population expands, reaching 70.8 tons per capita by 
2025.  
According to the Ministry of Environment an d Forestry (2017), only 2.2% of the waste generated is 
being recycled or processed into other resources, while 66.39% of trash produced in Indonesia is 
landfilled and 19.62% is unmanaged. The flow of recyclable materials in Indonesia is heavily dependent 
on the informal sector from street recycling pickers which collect recyclable materials from the streets.  
Among the various waste management technologies related to climate change mitigation, mechanical 
and biological waste treatment (MBT) and in -vessel com posting (ICV) technologies rank the highest 
priorities for CTF investment. Followed are Low -solids anaerobic digestion (LSAD) and high -solids 
anaerobic digestion. (See Table 1.B. 41 of the Demand -Driven Pre -Feasibility Study (Annex 2 of the 
Funding Proposa l) of the RD & B Programme).  
 
[Lao PDR]  
To achieve the national GHG emission reduction target, the Lao government aims to implement 500 -
tonne -per-day sustainable municipal solid waste management project (Lao PDR NDC 2020).  
There is an absence of waste treatment systems that meet the required en vironmental standards in many 
of the factories that are located in larger cities. In general, suitable technologies and sustainable waste 
management are lacking. In addition, regulatory  approval procedures for private sector investment are 
often lacking pr edictability and gate fees are rather low that often the operations are not commercially 
viable. In Lao PDR, Municipal solid waste management has the potential to deliver various sustainable 
development co -benefits, including environmental, climate, public  health and sustainable cities benefits.  
Priority technologies in waste treatment areas are: mechanical and biological waste treatment (MBT) , 
Biogas and biofuel technology , Gasification treatment , Methane recovery from sanitation 
landfills . In the waste d isposal area, top priorities are: Landfilling technology  and semi -aerobic 
landfilling system .  
 
[Philippines]  
Waste is one of the t hree climate change mitigation sectors identified in the Technology Needs 
Assessment for Climate Change Mitigation (CCC, 2018), together with energy and transportation. In 
terms of waste heat recovery (WHR), power generation from landfill methane recovery  is included 
as technology option in the country’s NDC.  
[Vietnam]  
 
244 GIZ. (2019). Partnership Ready Cambodia: Waste management. Retrieved from 
https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/GBN_Sector%20Brief_Kambodscha_Waste_E_WEB.pdf.


---
*Page 214*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
93 
 
In recent years, Viet Nam has installed a number of solid waste treatment facilities that utilise cutting -
edge technology and procedures. Innovative techniques, such as combustion and compos ting 
technologies , are used in conjunction with landfilling to reduce the need for landfill treatment 
technologies while increasing organic treatment. Power generation from waste incineration, Anaerobic 
waste treatment with biogas recovery for power genera tion and compositing are three technologies 
prioritized for the RD&B Programme in Vietnam. (See Table 1.E.35 of the Pre -Feasibility Study of the 
Program (Annex 2 of the Funding Proposal))  
 
⚫ Gender Perspective in the Waste Management Sector  
In the wider informal waste management sector, women are primarily found in the lower tier, working 
in waste picking and separating at landfill sites. Traditionally , men dominate the higher -income and 
decision -making roles, whether  as truck drivers, scrap dealers, repair shop workers, or in buying and 
reselling recyclables. This, again, reflects the gendered division of labour in society but also means that 
women are often excluded when waste management activities are formalized, mi ssing out on 
protections and benefits, such as social security or higher wages.   
 
[Cambodia]  
In Cambodia, informal female workers as garbage collectors and dismantlers in urban areas, such as 
Phnom Penh, are the key actors in waste recycling in a sector largely lacking central organization.  
While this provides previous income generation opportunities to low -income Cambodia women, lack 
of segregation of toxic and hazardous materials, and unregulated unhygienic recycling practices pose 
serious threa ts to occupational safety and health.  
 
[Indonesia]  
In Indonesia, In the informal waste collection, segregation and recycling sector, women’s roles are 
limited: Informal garbage collection work is often dangerous and invites gender -based violence and 
cultur ally women should avoid contact with strangers. If any, women’s participation in this sector is 
concentrated in small -scale, localized scavenging activities of lower -value recyclables, leaving heavier 
and more valuable materials to their male counterparts,  resulting in low remuneration than males. At 
the household level, however, Indonesian women play an active role in the disposal, sorting, and 
segregation of residual waste and recycling materials and they are responsible for the household’s trash 
manageme nt.245 Women who are directly involved in the activities of their community organization can 
reduce the amount of food waste and improve the overall community waste management. However, 
waste management at the community level is still influenced by the community  authorities' stereotypes 
on women and major decision -making and managerial roles are given to men.246 
 
[Lao PDR]  
 
245 The role of gender in waste managemen t- GA Circular. (2021). Retrieved from GA Circular website: 
https://www.gacircular.com/publications/  . 
246 Gumilar Hadiningrat. (2020). Women’s Role in Food Waste Management in Indonesia (Study Case in Bandung). Retrieved from 
ResearchGate website: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347432275_Women’s_Role_in_Food_Waste_Management_in_Indonesia_Study_Case_in_Bandun
g.


---
*Page 215*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
94 
 
Like in Cambodia, Lao women also take part in dangerous and unhygienic waste picking and also 
segregation activities to sell them to the collec tion centres . They pick waste both at the streets and at 
the end -points  (at dump sites). A recent report indicates that the livelihoods of the waste pickers are 
worsening with increasing competition and the structural change in processing (from direct selling to 
the collection factory in the country to, having to sell to the middlemen, as recyclables are being 
imported to Thailand and Vietnam.)247 Nearby Vientiane , about 150 households are reported to reside 
in informal settlement (Ban Naphasuk) whose livelihoods are associated with the garbage collection 
work at the dumping si tes248. Inadequate waste management and sanitation have consequences on the 
health and well -being of communities and the local environment.  
Currently waste management in Vientiane  are both being implemented by private and public entities. 
With the Thailand  partnership etc. private waste collection and recyclable segregations are taking roots 
in a collective and formalized manner with the intervention of private capitals249. Still however the 
upstream garbage collections (from door to door, on the streets) re main informal and individualized, 
largely taken care of by low -income poor individuals.  
Part of the waste management modernization projects are taking place where involved entities and 
players are taking actions to improve the conditions of the upstream w aste pickers  for instance,  
In collaboration with UNDP and bilateral development cooperations, Lao government (MONRE and 
MPWT) is carrying out Lao Environmental and Waste Management Project (P175996). GAP has been 
established as part of the implementation plan, including the following, among others:  
(1) With Partnership with Lao Women’s Union (LWU) conduct gender -specific education 
and training Programme including, GBV components and gender -sensitive IEC 
material development, and’  
(2) Promotion of female employment  by the Contractor and strengthened Labour  
conditions, Code of Conduct, OHS measures  
 
[Philippines]  
There are gender differences with respect to both the management of, and attitudes towards, waste 
management. Women and men play different roles in the management of household waste, 
recycling, and the education of children in environmental protection.  Given women’s primary 
responsibility for cleaning, food preparation, family health, laundry, and domestic maintenance, women 
and men may view domestic waste and its disposal differently. In some urban centres , solid waste 
management has evolved into an organi zed system of collection, trade and recycling.  
Women are less likely to be employed in official rubbish collection by truck or comparable vehicles, 
mostly due to the fact that the task requires them to travel fairly away from home and are 
underrepresented  in the category of recycling collectors (8.3%).  Moreover, women included in the 
 
247 https://laos.oxfam.org/latest/stories/relying -one-another -saving -groups -informal -workers -informal -workers   
248 https://www.nicholasbosoni.com/vientiane -waste -pickers?pgid=k8pe0mqp -055bf8b3 -1e36 -4388 -9cbc -2347c93ca29a  & https://think -
asia.org/bitstream/handle/11540/1733/Volume%202_No%201_Oct%202005_05.pdf?sequence=1   
249 “Currently, UCSC, the Lao Garbage Company, and Chanthabouly Cleansing Pvt.  Company (also private) are jointly handling city waste 
in Vientiane. One nongovernment organization (NGO), the Lao Women’s Union, is conducting educational and training programs fo r waste 
pickers in the city with support from the SWM for Vientiane Poor Pr oject. The programs focus on topics such as how to handle hazardous 
waste in the waste stream and how to add value or generate income from collected wastes.” (Source: https://laoepf.org.la/wp -
content/uploads/2022/11/20221114_EWMP -P175996_SEP_Draft -Rev4 -Clean.pdf )


---
*Page 216*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
95 
 
waste and recycling sector are mostly informal workers,  and it is quite common for Filipinas to operate 
in junk shops (36%).250 
Introducing waste management technologies, could  also be considered a priority sector for women in 
the Philippines. Lack of waste management and segregation of industrial, toxic, and hazardous materials 
endangers mostly low -income households and economically and socially vulnerable women and men, 
exposi ng them to major public health risks and pollution. Women are found to be key agents in the 
household’s waste management while underrepresented in the category of recycling collectors.  
The Programme should target Filipino women to promote waste recycling a nd management inside and 
outside the household. Education and technical capacity building activities on “how to recycle” 
targeting women should also be implemented aside from clean waste technologies and infrastructure.  
 
[Vietnam]  
Waste management could also be considered a priority sector for Vietnamese women. Women represent 
35-40% of formal waste collectors while they dominate the informal sector with a 65% participation 
rate, often living and working under dangerous and unhealth y conditions. In this sector, men have higher 
paid professions in the informal waste economy, being dealers and owners of recycling activities, but 
also in the formal waste economy, such as truck drivers and managers. 251 
Women usually are the decision -maker s concerning domestic food purchases, and thus have a great 
influence on household waste management and separation but  given the weak participation in 
community decision -making about waste disposal, men are more likely to take part in the community 
consultation processes and therefore take decisions about the community waste management. 252 
Investment in recycling technolog ies and infrastructure in Viet Nam could contribute to the female 
labour migration from the informal to formal sector, improving their income generation and work 
conditions. The Programme should target female garbage collectors and recyclers who have been 
engaging in the previously informal waste industry by providing them with the required skills in a clean 
and modernized system.  
 
⚫ Recommended Gender -mainstreaming approach es 
In Cambodia, Lao PDR and the Philippines, women constitute significant parts of th e information and 
highly dangerous and unhygienic occupation of garbage collects and waste pickers at door -to-door level 
 
250 “While less likely to be employed in formal waste collection by the use of truck or similar vehicles (5%), women are often eng aged as  
street sweepers (37%) within the category of formal employment. Also challenged by the requirements of domestic work, the wom en in 
recycling either support their family members or operate on a very small scale and as a result are not adequately represente d within the 
category of recycling collectors (8.3%). The owning and operating of junk shops by women is quite common (36%) and representa tive of 
the general trend of this form of employment, i.e. the operation of small businesses. “/ Global Platform for S ustainable Cities. The Role of 
Gender in Waste Management. (2021, October 13). Retrieved from https://www.thegpsc.org/knowledge -products/gender -and-cities/role -
gender -waste -management .  
251 The role of gender in waste management - GA Circular. (2021). Retrieved from GA Circular website: 
https://www.gacircular.com/publications/ . & “Between 10,000 and 16,000 waste workers work every day in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. 
Known as  dong nat , nhom nhua  or ve chai , they buy and collect waste from households to resell to recyclers. The majority of t hem, women, 
earn less than their male counterparts, and 9 per cent of waste pickers are said to be children.” & “UNDP’s Wiesen emphasised , “Here in 
Vietnam, over 60 per cent of the workforce in the informal waste management sector are women. They often wor k in precarious situations 
and are exposed to harmful substances and chemicals along the value chain. Disproportionally impacted by plastic pollution, t hey also have 
direct exposure to toxic gases and emissions from waste burning and cooking fuels and can suffer from heat -related diseases and 
skyrocketing air pollution levels.” ( https://vir.com.vn/fostering -a-just-and-sustainable -future -for-vietnams -female -waste -workers -
92838.html )  
252 The State of Gender Equality and Climate Change in Viet Nam (EmPower – Women for Climate Resilient Societies). Retrieved from 
https://asiapacific.unwomen.org/ -
/media/field%20office%20eseasia/docs/publications/2021/05/empowerpolicy %20brief%20for%20stakeholdersstate%20of%20gender%20eq
uality%20%20climate%20change%20viet%20nam.pdf?la=en&vs=119 .


---
*Page 217*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
96 
 
(upstream of the value ch ain of the urban solid waste management sector) and at the endpoint dumping 
site. Their jobs are collecting th e primary waste (unprocessed and non -segregated) from the source 
points and sell them to the “middlemen” (to export the recyclables and some parts to neighbouring 
countries, as in the case of Lao PDR exporting to Thailand and Vietnam), or to garbage collec tion 
/segregation and recycling centres .  As in the case of  
Often,  they constitute the lowest -income level segments of the urban population whose alternative 
livelihood and alternative lifestyles  simply cannot be a viable option. Without an effective gender action 
plan, recognizing the informal waste pickers groups as le gitimate partner s for the improvement of the 
urban solid waste management system, substantial social costs (including immediate loss of jobs and 
uprooting of livelihoods, leading to deepening impoverishment of the already poor societal groups.  
 
[Best Pract ice Example]  
In the follow ing project (See table below), UNIDO’s technical expertise aims to substantially advance 
gender equality in waste management. The project aims to help overcome gender inequality, empower 
women and break down the gender division of labour in the waste management sector by offering 
women secure and stable jobs.  
Table  5-3-1: Example of Best Practice for Gender Mainstreaming Assistance Program  in the W
aste Management Sector  
Project Name  Supporting The Socio -Economic Inclusiveness of Women and Youth 
by Waste Management  
Project Management  United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)  
Country  Guinea  
Project Period  Year 2011 - 2015  
- Phase 1 (2011 – 2013)  
- Phase 2 (2014 – 2015)  
Purpose  • Supported the socio -economic inclusiveness of 
women and youth through waste management activities  
Main Project Activities  (a) waste collection from households in different 
locations in Conakry and 03 regional localities;   
(b) establishment of community -based waste recycling 
centres on plastics and organic waste;  
(c) information dissemination and awareness raising on 
solid waste managem ent. 
Outputs  [Phase 1]  
• the capacity -building on solid waste collection and 
recycling of more than 3,200 youth and women organized in 84 
associations;  
• the establishment of community -based solid waste 
recycling centres in Conakry, Kindia and Labé  
 
[Phase 2]  
• the capacity of more t han 5,000 women and youth 
on waste collection and recycling and to enable more than 500 
women and youth to generate revenues through economic 
initiatives related to waste management  
 
<1> General Requirements


---
*Page 218*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
97 
 
All the requirements under the CTF Investment Criteria: Gender Component (See Table 1 of the Gender 
Assessment above.) will apply to all the waste management technology -related projects/enterprises 
subject to the CTF approval. Thus “women -led enterprises” on the waste management projects shall be 
prioritized. The rest of the applicant JVs shall also be encouraged to hire more female employ ees (with 
equal working conditions and remuneration as male employees) and improve women employees’ 
welfare policies.  
All the CTF Applicant JVs shall need to submit a simplified gender assessment and gender action plan 
([Appendix 3. Simplified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template)]  
of the Gender Assessment/Gender Action Plan  (GA/GAP), Annex 8 o f the Funding Proposal of the 
Programme). [Section II - 2. Gender Analysis] requires you to assess the gender perspective of a specific 
proposed JV enterprises/projects, based on which [Section II -3. Enterprise -level Gender Action Plan ] 
need to be establish ed.  
 
<2> Sector -specific Gender Mainstreaming Considerations  
Women and men play different roles in waste management and recycling. often living and working 
under dangerous and unhealthy conditions. In this sector, men have higher paid professions in the 
informal waste economy, being dealers and owners of recycling activities, but also in the formal waste 
economy, such as truck drivers and managers.  
In terms of the providers of services, employment opportunities tend to be different for women and men, 
with women occupying lower -grade positions than men.  
As the waste sector modernizes and applies new technologies that may require greater education and 
training, it is essential that women are included in this process. It can lead to the di ssolution of the 
informal sector related to the employed workforce, which can lead to job loss, accelerated poverty, 
and threat to livelihood, and can cause various social conflicts in the transition process.  
Women waste pickers/garbage collectors need to be recognized as legitimate and valuable partner 
for the improvement of the overall urban waste management sector by following recommended 
actions:  
- Gender Action 1: Directly/Indirectly contract/employ the female waste pickers groups as 
delivery partners, provide formal and secure employment contract  (with standard HSE and 
legal labour contracts) to them to secure them with decent jobs and safe and standard work 
conditions, preventing them from any types of abuses and often (gender -based) violence s.  
- Gender Action 2:  (Related to Gender Action 1) Capacitate them to organize and modernize 
their practices (by establishing properly registered enterprise/for -profit entities etc.) 
through various business and garbage collection -related skill trainings.  
- Gender Action 3: When JV enterprises involve construction and operation of a sizable waste 
treatment (or Waste to Energy) facility development, ensure the contractor includes local 
employment component prioritizing the local female employees with the relev ant 
experiences (including informal waste collection works) . If possible, consider setting a 
certain target (xx%) of the non - and semi -skilled jobs as well as working level management 
positions reserved for women waste pickers/garbage collectors or those w ith associated works 
(waste segregation centre work, etc.) for their smooth transition to formal waste management 
sector.


---
*Page 219*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
98 
 
Appendix 5.5. Early Warning System (EWSs) and Disaster Management  
⚫ EWS  & Disaster Management Sector in the Five Countries  
Disaster management entails both structural (such as dykes, embankment and ground elevation for sea 
level rise & tsunami prevention) and non -structural (such as climate change and hydrometeorological 
moni toring and forecasting, early warning, planning, mangrove and breakwater tree planting, and urban 
planning.).  
As part of a non -structural solution for climate change -related natural disaster management technologies, 
early Warning System (EWSs) are a cruci al component of many countries’ climate change adaptation 
strategies and objectives. The aim of an EWS is to avoid or reduce damages inflicted by natural disasters. 
As such, EWS is designed to disseminate messages and warnings effectively to ensure that co mmunities 
are in a permanent stage of readiness and to enable early action when disaster strikes. In this sense , an 
EWS can only be effective if consensus is reached on its benefits by local communities253. 
Early warning systems, which use integrated commun ication networks to assist communities in getting 
ready for dangerous climate -related occurrences, are an adaptive response to climate change. A 
successful EWS fosters long -term sustainability by preserving people, employment, land, and 
infrastructure254.  
Following are the key priority climate technology areas in each of the countries, assessed by the KDB 
and GGGI for the R&DB Programme (Annex 2 of the Funding Proposal of the Programme):  
 
[Cambodia]  
Cambodia includes a “National end -to-end early warning system with a focus on effective 
dissemination to population at risk” as its National Adaptation Action within its NDC255. 
 
[Indonesia]  
Indonesia’s public health is significantly affected by climate change -related extreme weather and 
natural disasters. In this context, the following two human health sector technology areas were identified 
to have the highest relevance considering various f actors (costs, environmental benefits, economic 
impacts, technology maturity, country ownership, social impacts): 1) Early warning & information 
systems to prevent outbreaks (daily reporting system), and; 2) health bio metering  of climate change 
disease te chnologies. In particular, the R&DB Programme highlights investment priority on the 
technologies on upgrading the hydro -meteorological information & information system/map for 
climate -related disease (dengue, malaria and pneumonia) to early warning to loca l action system.  
[Lao PDR]  
Being a predominantly agrarian country, Lao PDR’s EWS is related to the overall climate resilience 
building and adaptation strategies of the rural communities and agricultural sector. Early warning 
system and insurance in livest ock industry is one example , as such. The communities would need to be 
 
253 The most content and the following analyses are directly quoted or indirectly referred from: Demand -Driven Pre -Feasibility Study 
(Annex 2) of the Programme by KDB and GGGI.  
254 https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/climate -solutions/early -warning -systems  
255 See Table 1.A.10. of Demand -Driven Pre -Feasibility Study (Annex 2) of the Programme by KDB and GGGI.


---
*Page 220*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
99 
 
mobilized at a village level and in this context, establishment of multipurpose community centers could 
function as EWS hub and evacuation areas.  
Also rich in water resources, Lao PDR has the greatest need for EWS in flood prevention area s. 
Developing EWS in flood and drought management  is highly relevant. The deployment of effective 
EWS can help to reduce the impacts of flash flooding by preventing loss of life and damage to properties  
of affected areas of the country. In this conte xt, the Lao government aims to develop end-to-end EWSs  
to provide timely, accurate and effective warnings and to enhance the response capacity of all 
communities that are at risk of rain -induced natural disas ters.  
 
[Philippines]  
It appears the Philippines has relatively advanced level of EWS in place: The country’s Integrated 
Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) system includes the development of early warning and 
response systems for climate -sensitive he alth risks. The country also has an approved national health 
adaptation strategy and has conducted a national assessment of climate change impacts and 
vulnerability and adaptation for health.  
 
[Vietnam]  
Natural disaster prevention and management through st rengthened EWS is one of the priorities in 
Vietnam. Consultations with various stakeholders in the country identified that the EWS technology 
application in the following sectors were found to be in high relevance and demand: (1) EWS in Forestry 
for fire p revention and management; (2) Early warning and decision -making support system (DSS) 
including AI -enabled DSS.  
 
⚫ Gender Perspective in EWS and Disaster Management  
In general, girls and women worldwide are reporte d to be more vulnerable to the dam ages of climate 
change -related natural disasters and extreme weather condition s such as Tsunami, flood and severe 
droughts. Higher casualties and incident rates of the girls and women are partly explained by their 
physical frailties (compared with boys and men, pa rtly biological attributes but also due to 
girls/women’s poorer food intakes) but also partly due to their limited access to the disaster alert and 
critical information.  
Women typically do not receive disaster  notifications since men are the only ones who  inform them of 
potential threats. In many cases, due to societal norms  and barriers, women were still hesitant to take 
part in the planning for disaster response and capacity building .256Warning information dissemination 
impacts differ based on gender disp arities, due to the different levels of educational attainment, reading 
levels, and digital literacy, in terms of recognizing, understanding, and acting. People of different 
genders might have varying degrees of access to formal and unofficial channels of information 
transmission, differing communication preferences (influenced by gender norms), and unique 
difficulties in accessing and acting on an early warning257. 
 
256 Shah et al. (2022) Gender perspective of flood early warning s ystems: People -cantered  approach. Water 14(14). Retrieved from: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/w14142261  
257 https://wrd.unwomen.org /sites/default/files/2021 -11/GENDER~1_1.PDF


---
*Page 221*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
100 
 
Disaster vulnerability is exacerbated by social marginalization and gender inequity. Women an d gender 
minorities suffer more during and after a disaster as they have had less economic, political, and cultural 
power. The vulnerability of women and gender minorities during a disaster can be increased by 
traditional gender norms (such as the idea tha t males make decisions), stereotypical gender roles, and 
gender -based violence258.  
However, there are glimmers of changes: Shared experiences of severe disasters can often lead to a 
wake -up call for a community’s self -mobilization and women’s bottom -up lea dership as an active agent 
for disaster management, as shown in the Thua Thien Hue Province after a tragic havoc by a tropical 
typhoon Even in 1999259.  
Except for the Philippines (with relatively equal share of women taking engineering career), the 
remaini ng four countries, has put the (hard infrastructure -based) structural solution to Disaster 
management not an area for high potential for women’s participation in the short -term. While the overall 
STEM education and engineering training for girls and women should continue to be promoted steadily, 
this Programme would need to focus on more immediate and direct intervention points for women’s 
empowerment and equal benefit sharing of the Programme.  
 
⚫ Recommended Gender -mainstreaming approach es 
<1> General Requirements  
All the requirements under the CTF Investment Criteria: Gender Component (See Table 1 of the Gender 
Assessment above.) will apply to all the EWS and Natural Disaster Technology application 
projects/enterprises subject to the CTF approv al. Thus “women -led enterprises” on the EWS and 
Natural Disaster Management projects shall be prioritized. The rest of the applicant JVs shall also be 
encouraged to hire more female employ ees (with equal working conditions and remuneration as male 
employee s) and improve women employees’ welfare policies.  
All the CTF Applicant JVs shall need to submit a simplified gender assessment and gender action plan 
([Appendix 3. Simplified Gender Analysis (GA) & Gender Action Plan (GAP) (General Template)]  
of the Gend er Assessment/Gender Action Plan  (GA/GAP), Annex 8 of the Funding Proposal of the 
Programme). [Section II - 2. Gender Analysis] requires you to assess the gender perspective of a specific 
proposed JV enterprises/projects, based on which [Section II -3. Enter prise -level Gender Action Plan ] 
need to be established.  
 
 
 
<2> Sector -specific Gender Mainstreaming Considerations  
 
258 https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/bulletin/gender -equality -context -of-multi -hazard -early -warning -systems -and-disaster -risk 
259 This is a good example of climate disaster response action of a women -led community in Vietnam. In 1999, a tropical typhoon Even hit 
the coastal line of Vietnam, the region pounded due to rainfall more than a monthly average of its. The flooding continued  for a couple of 
days, and the villages in Thua Thien Hue province were almost destroyed. A villager reached the local branches of the Vietnam  Women’s 
Union to overcome the dangers of rising sea levels. They started to plant Mangroves because they can surv ive in the saltwater and generate 
breeding grounds for fish and help to prevent floods from the sea. For the entire process of this project, women, especially the Vietnam 
Women’s Union, made plans, implemented, and extended the activities with community re sources. ( https://qz.com/1758547/how -
vietnamese -women -are-fighting -back-against -climate -change )


---
*Page 222*
---

Gaia Consult Inc.  
101 
 
Gender Action 1: Diversify the communication modalities to ensure inclusiveness and 
accessibility by various groups including minority segm ents of the population.  
Setting up an App or an Internet  platform based EWS is important but may become urban/high 
incomer/educated/male -biased. Effective EWS and disaster management practices requires going 
beyond the system, as the public need s to be abl e to take early actions once they receive early warning. 
Linking the system to the locally actionable mechanism remains a challenge in Indonesia and other 
countries. The public’s understanding and awareness on the EWS and its technologies and applications 
remain to be limited.  
To reach out to the entire population of the country that are subject to such disasters and risks often 
requires special consideration of identifying and deploying viable communication methods and 
modalities for specific segments of the population whose access are largely challenged (due to their 
remoteness, as in the case of remote or isolated (as in the case of islets), or due to physical disabilities, 
such as blind people and the elderly , etc.) communities, often without electricity/Internet/Mobile phone 
penetrations. In urgent disaster outbreak situations, targeted language (local dialects for ethnic 
minorities, or visual signs for illiterate/low level of literacy group) and communication  methods (e.g., 
physical disaster communication network set in the community level for those not connected through 
Internet, or without mobile phone network , etc.)  
As there is a difference in educational attainment across gender, mostly women have lower d igital 
literacy. To implement complementary actions at the community level, traditional and offline 
communication methods must be used  in a parallel manner260. In addition, considering the literacy levels 
of the population, voice messages also need to be ut ilized when delivering warnings. As women’s voices 
are more effective in delivering urgent information, for instance, women can take the role of providing 
voice messages under an early warning system261. 
- Formulate a communications plan, develop knowledge pr oducts and information, education 
and communication (IEC) materials, in easy -to-understand, gender -neutral language(s). 
Ensure specific communication strategies for marginalized populations (inc. different 
communication modes (for the blind, with those wit h hearing impairments, illiterate or low -
educated people). Ensure both digital/non -digital methods of communications.  
 
Gender Action 2: Strengthen community -based climate disaster preparation and management 
System with equal/heightened roles of the women’ s groups.  
Community -driven climate risk resilience projects are crucial for disaster preparedness and responses. 
As in the case of Thua Thien Hue province, Vietnam, shown above the Community’s self -mobilization 
and its facilitation need to be strongly pro moted and supported. This is one of the types of ecosystem -
based adaptation (EbA), which is appropriate for bottom -up approaches. Local communities have ample 
knowledge (including know -how) on their local environments, so they are proper actors in utilizin g 
community -based resources. Community -driven bottom -up approach, once carefully and appropriately 
supported, will identify the optimum solution to the problems.  
- In case a proposed JV enterprises target specific locations/communities as beneficiaries and/or 
delivery partners,  understand the community governance dynamic and esp. role of 
community girls and women with their potential as active agents. Assess their needs and 
willingness to participate (as well as their concerns associated). Assess the gaps in their 
 
260 https://public.wmo.int/en/our -mandate/focus -areas/natural -hazards -and-disaster -risk-reduction/mhews -checklist/warning -dissemination -
and-communicati on 
261 Edworthy et al. (2003). The use of male of female vices in warning systems: A question of acoustics. Noise & Health 6(21). pp . 39-50. 
Retrieved from: https://www.noiseandhealth .org/text.asp?2003/6/21/39/31683


---
*Page 223*
---

Gaia Consult Inc. 
102 
capacity and identify measures to fill such gaps. As necessary,  include the culturally 
appropriate and feasible capacity -building programme for the girls and women as 
sole/leading or equal participants of the proposed enterprise/ac tivities.  
-If necessary, assist mobilization and organization of girls ’ and women’s group s.  Structural
engagement of women (esp. of the host communities) as an institutional partner for project
preparation and execution would invite women as an equal partner for climate actions by
empowering them. Gradually, this will shift the cultural perception that women are passive
recipient s of the decisions and actions made by men in society, generating ripple effects of
socio -cultural changes in the count ry262.
Gender Action 3: Strengthen the consultation of girls and women throughout the project cycle 
and empower them.  
-Early warning systems and climate monitoring businesses can be made of diverse forms of
activities. Maintain a gender -sensitive perspective at all stages of the execution of the JV
enterprises/business, from the planning to the operation stage to the exten t possible.  ■
262 https://www.oecd.org/derec/adb/tool -kit-gender -equality -results -indicators.pdf  __________