=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20240624172924+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
/ModDate: D:20240624172924+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
15 – 18 July  2024  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 10  GCF/B.39/0 2/Add.10 
24 June 2024 
Consideration of funding proposals  -
Addendum X 
Funding proposal package for FP23 5 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven  parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled “Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador ”;
b)No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or foc al
p
oint(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat ’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

        
 
GCF/B.39 /02/Add.10  
Page b 
    
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  100  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  102  
Secretariat’s assessment  106  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  121  
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  128  
Gender documentation  131


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Project/Programme title:  Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community  
Partnerships for Mitigation and A daptation in Ecuador  
Country(ies):  Ecuador  
Accredited Entity:  Conservation International Foundation  
Date of first submission:  2023/ 05/01   
Date of current submission  2024 /06/05 
Version number  V.12


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANNEXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60.  Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.   
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name] -[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
 Acronyms and Abbreviations  
 
AAE Asesoramiento Ambiental Estratégico  
AGB  Aboveground biomass  
ASC Aquaculture Stewardship Council  
ASOTEP  Asociación de Terminales Portuarios Privados del Ecuador (Association of 
Private Port Terminals of Ecuador)  
AUSCEM  Acuerdos para el Uso Sostenible y Custodia del Manglar (Agreements for 
Sustainable Use and Custody of the Mangrove Ecosystem)  
BGB  Belowground biomass  
BUR  Biennial Update Report  
CAF Corporación Andina de Fomento (Andean Development Corporation)  
CBD  Convention on Biological Diversity  
CI Conservation International  Foundation  
CI-E Conservation International’s Ecuador country program  
CIIFEN  Centro Internacional para la Investigación del Fenómeno de El Niño 
(International Research Centre for El Niño Phenomenon)  
CITES  Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna 
and Flora  
CLIRSEN  Centro de Levantamientos Integrados de Recursos Naturales por 
Sensores Remotos (Center for Integrated Survey of Natural Resources by 
Remote Sensing)  
COA  Código Orgánico del Ambiente (Organic Environmental Code)  
CSS Climate Smart Shrimp  
dbh Diameter at Breast Height  
DW Deadwood  
EFU Estuary Field Unit  
ENF Evaluación Nacional Forestal (National Forest Inventory)  
ENSO  El Niño -Southern Oscillation  
ERU  Emissions Reductions Unit  
ESL Extreme Sea Level  
FIAS  Fondo de Inversión Ambiental Sostenible (Sustainable Environmental 
Investment Fund)  
FPIC  Free, Prior and Informed Consent  
FREL  Forest Reference Emissions Level


---
*Page 6*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
 GAD  Gobierno Autónomo Descentralizado (Autonomous Decentralized 
Government)  
GAP  Gender Action Plan  
GCF  Green Climate Fund  
GEF Global Environment Facility  
GHG  Greenhouse gas  
GMA  Global Mangrove Alliance  
INEC  Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos (National Institute for Statistics 
and Census)  
INOCAR  Instituto Oceanográfico y Antártico de la Armada (Oceanographic Institute 
of the Navy)  
ITCZ  Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone  
IUCN  International Union for Conservation of Nature  
KPI Key Performance Indicator  
MAA TE Ministerio del Ambiente , Agua  y Tansición  del Ecuador (Ministry of 
Environment , Water  and Transition of Ecuador)  
MTOP  Ministerio de Transporte y Obras Públicas (Ministry of Transport and 
Public Works)  
MRV  Monitoring, Reporting and Verification  
NAP National Adaptation Plan  
NCA  National Chamber of Aquaculture  
NDA  Nationally Designated Authority  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contributions  
NRT Near Real -Time  
PA Protected Area(s)  
Project Management Unit  Project Management Unit  
PAN-Manglares Ecuador  National Action Plan for the Conservation of the Mangroves of Continental 
Ecuador  
PAR-Manglares  Regional Action Plan for the Conservation of Mangroves in the Southeast 
Pacific  
PDOT  Plan de Desarrollo y Ordenamiento Territorial (Development and Land 
Use Plan)  
PECC  Programa Ecuador Carbono Cero (Ecuador Zero Carbon Program)  
PUCESE  Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador Sede Esmeraldas ( Pontifical 
Catholic University of Ecuador Esmeraldas Extension)  
RBP Results Based Program


---
*Page 7*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
 
 RCP  Representative Concentration Pathway  
RE Reserva Ecológica (Ecological Reserve)  
REM  REDD Early Movers  
RPF Reserva de Producción de Flora y Fauna (Flora and Fauna Production 
Reserve)  
RVS Reserva de Vida Silvestre (Wildlife Refuge)  
REDD+  Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and 
fostering conservation, sustainable management of forests, and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks  
SATA  Sistema de Alerta Temprana Ambiental  
SBP Programa Socio Bosque (Forest Partner Incentive Program)  
SC Steering Committee  
SDG  Sustainable Development Goals  
SGMC  Subsecretaría de Gestión Marina y Costera (Undersecretariat of Marine 
and Coastal Management)  
SLR Sea Level Rise  
SM Socio Manglar (Mangrove Partner)  
SNGR  Servicio Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos y Emergencias (National Service 
for Risk Management and Emergencies)  
SOC  Soil Organic Carbon  
SOF Althelia Sustainable Ocean Fund  
SPA South Pacific Anticyclone  
SSP Sustainable Shrimp Partnership  
SUIA  Sistema Único de Información Ambiental (Unique Environmental 
Information System)  
TULSMA  Texto Unificado de Legislación Secundaria Ambiental (Unified Text of 
Secondary Enviornmental Legislation)  
UNCCD  United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification  
UNDP  United Nations Development Programme  
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
UOCV  Unidades Operativas de Control y Vigilancia (Operational Units for Control 
and Surveillance)  
VMAP  Viceministerio de Acuacultura y Pesca (Viceministry for Aquaculture and 
Fisheries)  
WB World Bank  
WRI World Resources Institute


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 1 
  PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
 
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total    
☐  Energy generation and access   
☐  Low -emission transport    
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances    
☒  Forestry and land use  41 % 100 % 
Adaptation total    
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  29.5 %  
☐  Health and well -being, and food and water security    
☐  Infrastructure and built environment    
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  29.5 %  
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced,  avoided or 
removed / sequestered)   4,609,470 tCO 2e 
over 20-year project 
lifespan2; 732,111 tCO 2e 
by the end of the 
implementation period.  A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  Indicate total number of direct  and 
indirect  beneficiaries  
89,600 direct 
beneficiaries  3.4 million  
indirect 
beneficiaries  
1.8% of 
population of 
coastal 
provinces ; 0.6 % 
of Ecuador’s 
population  44.7%  of coastal 
provinces ; 20.1% 
Ecuador’s 
population  
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  $45.9 million  USD   
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  $36.4 million  USD  
 
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF 
contribution (i.e ., GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity ) to implement the project or programme described in the 
funding proposal.  
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the investment are 
expected to be effective. This is different from the project/programme implementation period.  
3 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 2 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒  Grant  36.4 million USD   
☐  Loan   
☐  Guarantee   ☐  Equity        
☐  Results -based payment     
A.11. Implementation 
period  6.5 years  A.12. Total 
lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
12/31/2023  
 A.14. ESS 
category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
The CN was included within 
the application for PPF -009  A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF  
support been 
used to prepare 
this FP ? Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes  4    No  
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence   
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Conservation International Foundation (CI) 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 pages ) 
 
4 Ecuador has not yet prepared a GCF Country Programme, but does have a pipeline of expected projects, in which this project is  included.


---
*Page 10*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 3 
  
Impacts of c limate change5 
 
Climate change is projected to create unprecedented changes in conditions along Ecuador´s coast, including 
increases in sea level, extreme El Niño- Southern Oscillation events, higher intensity and variability of precipitation, 
and increased atmospheric temperatures. The combination of these changes is expected to cause significant and more frequent coastal flooding, which will damage local communities and economic activity. Recent flood events 
have caused death, homelessness , increased disease risk and  over US$1 billion of damages  and economic losses  
(EM-DAT, 2021)
6. Mangroves serve as natural structural barriers that reduce coastal erosion and provide important 
flood -control functions, by dissipating wave energy and storm damage. Current mangrove cover directly provides 
flood protection for coastal populations and is estimated to prevent approximately US$250 million in losses annually 
from flooding in Ecuador’s coastal region. Conversely, ongoing deforestation of mangroves in proximity to coastal 
populations magnifies exposure to climate- related flood risks and other c limate impacts. Nearly 25% of Ecuador’s 
mangroves have been deforested since 1969  with co nversion to shrimp farms as the largest driver . As of 2018, 
there were 156,633 hectares ( ha) of mangrove remaining in mainland Ecuador , with  an average of 990 ha of primary 
mangrove forests lost each year.  
 
There are opportunities  to consolidate recent mangrove conservation successes and for mangrove restoration that 
would strengthen natural flood protection while also providing other ecosystem service co- benefits (especially 
supporting artisanal fisheries ). Ecuador’s mangroves have been identified as part of the world’s irrecoverable 
carbon stock – stores of carbon in nature that are vulnerable to release from human activity but, if lost, could not 
be restored by 2050 when the world must reach net -zero emis sions to avoid the worst impacts of climate change 
(Noon et al., 2021) . Protecting these carbon stocks and harnessing the long- term ability of mangroves to sequester 
carbon will provide important global climate change mitigation benefits.  
 Despite recent stabilization of net mangrove coverage, in large part due to one- off restoration efforts during 2008-
2012 and community -based mangrove management, mangrove areas are expected to be a net source of emissions 
from lost biomass and soil carbon for decades to come (see Annex 2). This project aims to transform the situation 
by coordinating public sector, private sector and community efforts to protect and restore mangroves, thereby reducing mangrove loss , resulting in  a reduction of  4.6 M tCO
2e of greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions7, and 
accelerating Ecuador’s mangrove recovery to maintain and enhance flood protection for 89,600 people8 from 
annual flooding risk and enhanc e the livelihoods of 41,500 people  to increase their resiliency .   
Proposed interventions  
The current paradigm underestimates climate risks and undervalues the ecosystem services provided by 
mangroves, augmenting both exposure to climate risk and greenhouse gas emissions. By fully valuing the 
adaptation and mitigation benefits of mangrove ecosy stems and integrating these into governance and economic 
frameworks across Ecuador’s coastal region, the project will shift this paradigm with an innovative approach that 
will create public, private and community partnerships to reduc e GHG emissions and improv e the livelihoods of 
some of the country's most vulnerable people.  
If local communities are provided with knowledge and resources  for mangrove management and livelihoods 
development , and if  the private sector and government actively collaborate on mangrove protection and restoration, 
and the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened,  then  coverage and quality of mangrove 
ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coastal populations, 
increased economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions because healthy and more extensive mangroves 
reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon.    
By integrating the participation of local communities, private sector businesses,  Ministry of Environment , Water  and 
Ecological Transition  (MAATE ) and subnational governments, the project will deliver  mutually reinforcing, multi -
scale actions across the three project components to address key barriers . 
Component 1.  Mangrove areas under effective and climate- adapted management increased, including 
through community -based management (AUSCEMs) and protected areas (PA s) implementing climate 
adaptation plans.  This component focuses on engaging local communities to strengthen community management 
of mangroves,  restore mangroves,  increase the area of mangroves under protection by local community 
stakeholders, and improve community economic sustainability.  
Component 2.  The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions 
and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for 
other coastal populations.  This component focuses on engaging the private sector, particularly shrimp 
aquaculture, to become transformational agent s for change, reversing their previous role as an agent of mangrove


---
*Page 11*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 4 
 loss, by integrating climate -smart production practices to increase climate resilience, reduce pressures for 
mangrove deforestation, and restore mangrove ecosystems, as well as catalyzing new sources of financing for 
long-term sustainability  of mangrove conservation.  An endowment  of US$4 million  is requested from GCF to build 
up a dedicated financial mechanism (the recently created Socio Manglar  subaccount of the Socio Bosque  Fund9) 
to provide long- term support to communities managing mangroves through the Agreements for Sustainable Use 
and Custody of the Mangrove Ecosystem (AUSCEM ) model.  The US$4 million w ill be held in an interest -bearing 
account and the interest used to fund community incentive payments. Alongside this, CI and MAATE will seek 
additional financial contributions to build up the capital of the investment account of the Socio Manglar subaccount . 
These a dditional contri butions for community management of mangroves  will be sought from the private sector 
during the project as part of innovative Government of Ecuador programs to encourage private investment  in climate 
and nature conservation initiatives10. The project will promote more sustainable shrimp production methods but will 
not invest directly in shrimp farms . Investment on shrimp farms to implement more sustainable production methods 
will be financed by the private sector and will not use GCF funds.  
Component 3.  Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and 
increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, 
coastal management policies, and legal enforcement. This component focuses on creating the enabling 
conditions  to increase adaptation and mitigation, through improved governance and the generation of timely, 
targeted information, which are the scaffolding supporting mangrove conservation, planning, and regulation.  
The project will contribute to achieving the GCF’s Strategic Plan (2024- 2027) through its impact on the following 
four GCF ‘targeted results’ for climate mitigation and adaptation efforts.  
1.  T1 Readiness (GCF Strategic Priority on Country Programming) : National Climate Plan implementation. 
Ecuador will be directly supported to advance implementation of its Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC)  as set out in the national NDC implementation plan (which also currently serves as the 
implementation plan for the new (2023) National Adaptation Plan regarding adaptation interventions). The project will support Ecuador’s conditional GHG reduction goals and adaptation goals to increase the cover 
of mangrove and expand the use of community -based management of mangroves through AUSCEM. The 
project is expected to reduce national GHG emissions by 730,000 tCO
2e over the project implementation 
period and 4.6  MtCO 2e over the project lifespan. The project will strengthen management of 70 ,000 ha of 
mangroves under community management through establishing new areas under management and 
strengthening existing ones as part of the Socio Bosque program (SBP)11. Ecuador’s current NDC goal is 
to increase the forest area in the SBP by 127,500 ha, including mangroves . As part of strengthening 
mangrove management , the project will establish an additional 10  community -held AUSCEMs covering 
mangroves , in addition to strengthening the existing 59 community associations with AUSCEM 
agreements . (Ecuador’s current NDC goal is to establish 30 new AUSCEM agreements covering mangrove 
areas .)  
2. T4 Food ( GCF Strategic Priority on Food) . Mangroves provide a range of ecosystem services that directly 
and indirectly contribute to the livelihoods and food security of local people. In addition to the flood 
protection services that provide important climate change adaptation benefits, mangroves  serve as 
important nurseries and breeding grounds for species of fish, shrimp, crabs and clams that support artisanal 
and commercial/industrial fisheries. 41,500 people are expected to benefit from low -emission, climate 
resilient fisheries management prac tices that underpin their livelihoods.     
3. T5 Ecosystems ( GCF Strategic Priority on Ecosystems) . The project will contribute to the protect ion and  
sustainable management of 15 6,633 ha of mangrove ecosystems. This will be achieved through a 
combination of increasing the area under community management, strengthening PA  planning to integrate 
climate change adaptation, improved coastal land- use planning and strengthening the capacity of 
government agencies and local government to enforce existing regulations designed to protect mangroves.  
 
5 This section summarizes key information presented in more detail, along with references, in Chapter 2 of Annex 2, the Feasibility Study.  
6 Full references for citations in the Funding Proposal Document can be found in Annex 2, the Feasibility Study  
7 The 4.6 M tCO2e emissions reductions are projected  over the 20-year life span of the project. A total of 732,000 tCO2e  are projected to be 
achieved during the 7- year implementation period.  
8 This is the number of people expected to benefit annually from reduced flooding risk due to project interventions (see Annex 25 )  
9 The Socio Manglar subaccount of the existing Socio Bosque Fund will be used to provide incentive payments to  AUSCEM associations 
who are part of the Soco Manglar  program, which is an extension of the existing Socio Bosque program to promote long- term management 
of mangrove areas . 
10 Specifically , we are referring to the government’s “Program Zero” /PECC (https://www.ambiente.gob.ec/programa- carbono- cero-se-pone -
en-marcha- en-el-ecuador/ ) and the “ Doble Deducibilidad”  Program  (https://www.ambiente.gob.ec/beneficio- de-la-doble- deducibilidad/ ) 
11 the project will support the Socio Manglar program, which is the part of the Socio Bosque program focused on mangroves.


---
*Page 12*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 5 
 4. T6 Infrastructure (GCF Strategic Priority infrastructure target ). The project adopts a nature -based 
solutions approach to infrastructure because mangroves are expected to provide flood protection benefits 
that reduce risks of coastal flooding and related damage. The maintenance and improvement of 156,633 ha of mangrove ecosystems will be through conservation, sustainable use and restoration activities.  
5. T9 Adaptation and locally -led action (GCF Strategic Priority on Adaptation proposals ). The project will 
promote locally  led adaptation action through community management of mangroves and action by the 
private sector to reduce deforestation and support mangrove restoration.  The project will also support 
locally -led adaptation  through the support to land- use planning processes included in Component 3 of the 
project.   
In addition to the project’s contributions towards advancing national climate change adaption and mitigation plans, 
the project will also contribute to the aims of the Global Mangrove Alliance (GMA)12, which brings together a global 
community of practitioners to halt mangrove loss, restore lost mangroves and secure mangrove protection. CI is a 
founding member along with other international organizations and the project will contribute in two ways to the GMA’s work : 
 
1. The project will contribute to knowledge sharing through the GMA, especially related to mangrove 
restoration and “blue carbon”  information. One of the functions of GMA is as a knowledge hub to share 
information between practitioners engaged in mangrove conservation and restoration. The mangrove 
restoration approach is informed by GMA toolkits and best practice guides. Data collec ted under activity 
3.1.1 will also be shared with the GMA as a matter of course (through the Mangrove Restoration Tracker 
Tool and Global Mangrove Watch).  
 
2. The project itself makes an important contribution to the ‘Mangrove Breakthrough’, an initiative launched 
by the GMA and the UN Climate Change high level Champions during the UNFCCC COP27. This high-
level initiative aims to secure the future of 15 million ha of mangroves globally (through conservation, 
restoration and securing long- term financing of mangrove protection). This project alone represents about 
1% of this goal.  
 
 
 
12 https://www.mangrovealliance.org/


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 6 
   
  PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
B.1.1 Overview of Ecuador’s Coast (further detail and full references  for citations  are provided in Annex 2, the 
Feasibility Study ) 
1. Ecuador’s complex coastal geography comprises 3,631 km of coastline, which  is home to seven million people 
and Ecuador’s largest city, Guayaquil.  Mangroves extend along 36% of Ecuador’s continental coastlines and 
play a central role in sustaining both export -oriented industries and local livelihoods by providing habitat to 
commercial fish species  and maintaining healthy  coastal zones . The coast is where a significant portion of the 
nation’s economic output is concentrated, much of which is directly dependent on coastal and marine resources, 
especially shrimp and small -scale fisheries.  
 
Figure 1 . Ecuador’s coastal region : 5 provinces (with 35 municipalities) and m ain urban centers and 
mangrove areas (in 2018) . Data sources: Towns from IGM (2018), p rovinces boundaries from  CONALI 
(2016), mangroves from MAAE (2018).


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 7 
   
  
13 See Annex 2 (Feasibility Study) for references  
14 Assuming family size of four people.  
15 https://sealevel.nasa.gov/ipcc -ar6-sea-level-projection- tool  The SLR range cited is based on projections for scenario SSP2- 4.5 (lower 
estimate) and SSP3- 7.0 (higher estimate).  2. Shrimp: Ecuador is the world's second largest exporter of farmed shrimp, with approximately 174,000 ha of 
shrimp ponds and annual exports of 1 ,060,000 MT worth US$ 6.653 billion (Cámara Nacional de Acuacultura, 
2022)13. The volume of exports has more than doubled in the past 10 years. Production is dominated by small 
and medium producers who constitute 97% of farms and 76% of the total area (GPS, 2020). Ecuador is 
recognized in the market for slightly higher quality shrimp, due in part to lower production intensities , but there 
is still substantial room for intensification and modernization.  Demand for certified shrimp is strong in the North 
American and European markets  – while price premiums are not always present, environ mental certification is 
often seen as a requirement to access these markets.  
3. Small scale fisheries: Based on the most detailed national data, there are 28,399 artisanal fishers in Ecuador, 
organized into 420 associations (Vice Ministry of Aquaculture and Fisheries (VMAP), 2013 ), with an estimated 
113,596 people directly or indirectly dependent on artisanal fishing14. These fishers have low incomes ; in the 
Gulf of Guayaquil, 74% of fishers and gatherers earn less than US$400 per month, and 37% have monthly 
incomes less than US$200  (Herrera et al., 2017).  
B.1.2 Current and projected climate change impacts in the coast of Ecuador  (see Annex 2, Feasibility Study  
for more information ) 
4. In the continental coastal region of Ecuador, the climate is strongly influenced by the ocean. During the rainy 
season from December to May, the air temperatures are slightly higher due to the warming of the sea (intensification of the Panama current). The dry season coincides with the intensification of the South Pacific 
Anticyclone, which in turn strengthens the Humboldt Current and the cold waters in the region. In the north-central region, rainfall exceeds 2,000 mm annually, and air temperatures are between 25 °C and 39°C. Further 
south, the coastal zone is under the influence of the Humboldt Current, so its precipitation values are between 300 and 1,000 mm per year, and the average temperatures are between 24°C and 26°C.  
5. Climate change is projected to create significant changes in local environmental conditions along Ecuador's 
coast  including increases in sea level, increased intensity of El Niño -Southern Oscillation events, 
increased intensity and variability of precipitation, and atmospheric temperatures , all of which will affect 
Ecuador’s vulnerable populations and economy.  
6. By 2100, mean sea level  is projected to rise an additional 49- 64 cm on Ecuador's coast
15. An increase in mean 
sea level will also be compounded by increased frequency of extreme sea level (ESL) events (storm surge and 
tidal flooding), which are expected to occur annually by mid- century  in low -lying coastal areas (IPCC, 2019). 
Increases in sea level rise ( SLR) and ESL are expected to increase the risks of coastal flooding and 
consequently impact rural and urban populations, and aquaculture in coastal areas, especially when 
compounded by periodic El Niño event s.  
7. El Niño -Southern Oscillation (ENSO ) is a phase of a large- scale, recurring climate pattern associated with 
above average sea surface temperatures in the eastern Pacific, which contributes to increased sea levels and 
extreme rainfall events in Ecuador. El Ni ño events have already led to observed ocean warming and dramatic 
SLR due to seawater expansion (Cai et al ., 2014; Wang et al., 2019). During the 1997- 98 season, sea surface 
temperatures off the coast of Ecuador increased by 5°C above normal and sea level increased up to 42 cm (CAF, 2000). In the equatorial Pacific region, sea levels can deviate from the global mean sea level by  as much 
as 40 cm because of El Ni ño (Walsh et al ., 2012). ENSO may be considered a natural climatic driver, and the 
effect of climate change on future ENSO dynamics is unclear although rainfall variability is very likely to increase over the east -central tropical Pacific (IPCC, 2014; 2021). There are indications that extreme El Niño events may 
increase in frequency due to climate change (McPhaden et al ., 2020).  
8. Between 1960 and2016,  the average annual precipitation  for the coast of Ecuador increased 33% ( INAMHI, 
from Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador, 2017). Some models project signifi cant increases in annual 
precipitation for coastal Ecuador ( 9-10% under RCP  4.5 by 2071- 2100) . Analysis focused on the Santa Elena 
peninsula by García- Garizábal et al . (2017) document ed increasing temperatures (0.038ºC/year) and 
precipitation (0.196 mm/year) for the period 1982- 2011 with modeling (ECHOG A2) predicting increases in 
temperature (+2.7ºC) and precipitation (+8,2%) by 2100. Other analyses indicate that while total annual rainfall 
is not expected to increase significantly, greater variability is projected, with heavier localized rains (up to 15 
more days per year of extreme rainfall events) and periodic dry spells expected to increase (Ministerio del


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 8 
   
  
19  Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members , are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities 
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s 
mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the act ual number of 
people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associat ions 
(Zambrano, N.  pers. comm. ). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers 
(INEC 2010).  Ambiente de Ecuador, 2019; UNDP, 2013), increasing the risk of flooding and drought (Ministerio del Ambiente 
del Ecuador, 2012).  
9. From 1960- 2016, average temperature  for Ecuador´s coast increased 0.6°C, and an increase in atmospheric 
temperature of 2.2°C -2.9°C is expected by 2100 under RCP  4.5 and RCP  8.5, respectively. Though outside the 
scope of this project, these temperature increases may affect livelihoods from agricultural activities and increase 
health risks in project areas adjacent to or outside of mangroves. This variable is included for reference 
purposes but i s not directly expected to impact flood risks, which are the climate change adaptation focus of 
this project.  
10. Analyses conducted for this project by the International Research Center on El Niño ( CIIFEN ) indicate that 
dissolved oxygen, primary production and chlorophyll would have reductions in their values under projected climate change scenarios (RCP 4.5 and 8.5). The hydrogen potential off the coast of Ecuador would be reduced, 
showing signs of possibl e ocean acidification, which could impact fisheries and associated livelihoods .  
Climate -related flooding events in Ecuador  
11. Flood risks are a significant concern for Ecuador's coast  and in the last 45 years, the coastal provinces have 
suffered the highest degree of flooding  in the country . Guayas has been the most affected, with more than 100 
floods  occurring where water levels exceed ed the drainage canals designed to convey stormwater runoff  and 
thus inundated adjacent lands (Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos  (SNGR ), 2018). Augmented sea 
level, coupled with the exceptionally high precipitation and associated with El Niño in coastal Ecuador, limits 
the discharge of river systems into the ocean, leading to inland flooding. This results in impacts to drainage 
throughout the coas tal zone , which  are not fully captured in existing coastal and river flooding models. Under 
current assessments, 39% of areas within 5 km of Ecuador’s coastline are already at high risk of annual flooding 
(SNGR, 2018).  
12. Flooding events registered since 1965 on the coast of Ecuador have affected over 1 .8 million people and caused 
over US$1.5 billion in damages and economic losses, of which 96% occurred during El Niño events  (EM-DAT, 
2021).  During those flooding events, 97,031 people became homeless  and 836 people were killed (EM-DAT, 
2021; see Figure 6). Those numbers, even if considered the best available, are underestimated as only events that have impacted more than 100 people, and have killed more than 10 people, are recorded.  
13. Historical El Niño events provide a reference point for the scale of future climate- related damages for Ecuador’s 
coast. The El Niño event in 2015 generated damage to infrastructure and economic activities associated with agricultural production. Ecuador’s  agricultural  losses were estimated at US$3.5 million, with more than 2, 000 
small - and medium- sized enterprises and 27,000 people affected by landslides and flooding (CIIFEN, 2017) . 
Limited  government preparation and response to previous El Niño events, in areas such as land- use planning, 
management, and decision making, are indicative of inadequate adaptive capacity in the face of climate change.  
14. Extreme El Niño events, related precipitation variability on regional scales and increases in sea level will likely 
intensify (Pachauri et al ., 2015) . Combined with the expected increase in SLR  due to climate change but 
unrelated to ENSO events, flooding of coastal areas is expected to increase. Future El Niño events may  become 
more frequent and more intense (Magrin et al ., 2007; Wang et al., 2019; McPhaden et al, 2020), but even an 
El Niño of similar magnitude to historical events will affect larger areas and more people as its flooding impacts are compounded by SLR. These conclusions are based on several models that project flood risks under diverse future scenarios and assumptions (see Section B 1.6 below).  
B.1.3 Mangroves in Ecuador  
Mangrove Ecosystem  
15. Ninety -eight percent (98%) of Ecuador’s mangroves are concentrated along the shores of four main estuaries 
- Cayapas Mataje, Muisne Cojimíes, Guayas and Jambelí (Figure 2), which spread across  eight  municipalities 
within the project  area,  with over 1,000 ha of mangrove each, in three  provinces16. These municipalities are


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 9 
   
  
19  Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members , are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities 
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s 
mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the act ual number of 
people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associat ions 
(Zambrano, N.  pers. comm. ). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers 
(INEC 2010).  
19  Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members , are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities 
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the act ual number of 
people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associat ions 
(Zambrano, N.  pers. comm. ). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers 
(INEC 2010).  home to approximately 3.4 million people, with very high rates of poverty17 (see Table 1). Of  this total population, 
over 2.18 million people live within 5 km of mangroves (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos -  INEC, 
202218), with significant vulnerable populations living in poverty (49% of urban population, 95% of rural).   
 
Figure 2. Principal Mangrove Areas of Ecuador . Data sources: Provinc ial boundaries from CONALI (2016), 
mangroves from MAAE (2018).  
 
Table 1. Municipalities of Coastal Ecuador with >1,000 h ectares of Mangrove  
Province  Municipality  Estuary  Population1 % Poverty2 Mangrove Area 2018 (ha )3 
El Oro  El Guabo  Jambelí          59,536  74%     1,377  
El Oro   Machala  Jambelí       306,309  56%  3,434  
El Oro   Santa Rosa  Jambelí      80,299  56%  10,164  
Esmeraldas   Eloy Alfaro  Cayapas Mataje           46,305  94% 10,454  
Esmeraldas   Muisne  Muisne Cojimíes          36,426  98%  1,507


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 10 
   
  
19  Mangrove management associations (AUSCEM), with 4,556 registered members , are almost exclusively dedicated to fisheries activities 
in mangrove areas (Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador, 2020). These management associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s 
mangroves and do not include unaffiliated ‘independent’ fishers who are not part of these associations, implying that the actual number of people fishing and gathering shellfish from mangroves is likely more than double the number of registered members in associat ions 
(Zambrano, N.  pers. comm. ). Total estimated beneficiary numbers are based on 4.04 family members dependent on each of these fishers 
(INEC 2010).  
20 Data from the more recent 2014- 2018 period also allows for classification of post -deforestation land use: an additional 13% was 
converted to other agricultural use, 22% converted to open water (due to natural dynamics of estuarine areas), with the remai nder 
transformed for infrastructure, scrub and other vegetation, and land without vegetation (e.g. beaches and mud flats).  
21 And 1,730 ha in fragments outside these estuaries and on coastal islands.  
22 Acuerdos de Uso Sostenible y Costodia del Ecosistema Manglar   Esmeraldas   San Lorenzo  Cayapas Mataje        48,391  84%   10,296  
Guayas  Guayaquil  Guayas       2,746,403  47% 90,059  
Guayas   Naranjal  Guayas       83,691  74%       22,774  
Total     3,407,360   150,065  
Sources: 1Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos -  INEC. 20 22;  2 Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos -  
INEC. 2010   3Ministerio del Ambiente del Ecuador 2020 
Importance of mangroves for livelihoods of Ecuador’s coastal populations  
16. Mangroves  provide many valuable ecosystem services that contribute to human well -being, including provision 
of timber and fuelwood, breeding and nursery grounds for fisheries and protection from coastal flooding and 
erosion. People in these mangrove areas, includin g both urban and rural dwellers, are highly reliant on fishing 
and gathering shellfish. The total population dependent on mangrove fisheries is approximately 42,000 people, 
most of whom live in the project area19. This number does not include the larger coastal open- water fisheries 
and associated economic activity , which are indirectly dependent on mangroves´ ecological function as critical 
nurseries for a variety of economically important fish species. It is estimated that the national market for fish 
and seafood products generated by small -scale fisheries is approximately US$200 million per year (Monnier et 
al., 2020).  
Historical changes to the area of mangrove land cover  
17. Mangroves have experienced significant losses in Ecuador , which has resulted in GHG emissions from the 
trees’ lost biomass and through the release of soil carbon. The most extensive losses have been linked to the 
conversion of the intertidal land to shrimp aquaculture, an industry that was first introduced in 1968  and quickly 
led to large scale deforestation.  This trend has been consistent over time, and shrimp farms continue to be the 
prominent driver of mangrove loss, with shrimp ponds during 2008- 2018 ac counting for 51% of mangrove loss20 
(CIIFEN -MAE, 2020). As of 2018 (the date of the last national forest cover assessment) there were 156,633 ha 
of mangrove remaining in the four key estuaries of mainland Ecuador21. 
18. Recent years have seen growth in new mangrove areas replacing other land uses, with a total net gain in mangrove area of 15,258 ha from 2008- 2018. Despite gross gains of 15,161 ha in mangrove coverage,  there 
is also significant ongoing gross loss  of mangroves, totaling an area of 9,903 ha lost during 2008- 2018, resulting 
in the overall 5,258 ha net gain. The ongoing loss of mangroves in these areas is the result of illegal logging of 
mangroves  (mostly for shrimp ponds  but also for agriculture and building) , which continues to occur due to weak 
application of environmental regulations and poor territorial planning for mangrove conservation by local 
governments. Mangroves are one of the nine forest strata included in the Forest Reference Emission Lev el 
(FREL ) and referenced in the REDD+ Action Plan.  
Community -based management of mangroves  and effectiveness for mangrove conservation and 
restoration  
19. Strengthening community management of mangroves has been an important pillar of Ecuador’s approach to 
mangrove conservation for twenty years. S trengthening the capacity of local mangrove users as a strategy for 
climate change adaptation has been highlighted by local studies  and is an important priority in Ecuador’s climate 
change strategies ( see D.5 ).  
20. While coastal mangroves are legally public lands, AUSCEM
22, first established in 2000, grant traditional 
community users formal rights linked to conservation commitments, allowing them to benefit from improved 
livelihoods activities and living conditions.  These agreements grant use rights and stewardship responsibilities


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 11 
   
  
23 https://sociobosque.ambiente.gob.ec/   to organized groups of traditional mangrove users to restrict open access and overuse, reduce deforestation 
and illegal extraction, and increase the ability of local users to realize economic benefits from conservation 
actions.  Community control and participation in conservation of mangrove areas, as well as national PAs , have 
proven effective tools for mangrove protection. Gross deforestation rates under AUSCEMs and PAs are 86% 
lower than areas without these protections ; while  mangrove areas without community stewardship or PA status 
(totaling 36,186 ha or 23% of total mangrove area) account for 69% of all recent mangrove deforestation.  The 
coverage of mangrove areas under community -based management is , however,  still insufficient. AUSCEM s 
currently only cover  60,217 ha of mangroves (Figure 3 and Table 2), this means that significant mangrove areas 
and their traditional users are not covered by active AUSCEMS, leaving them at risk of encroachment and 
uncontrolled resource exploitation.  
21. In addition, approximately one quarter of the areas under AUSCEM have lapsed due to lack of support and 
technical assistance for legal proceedings and management activities, leaving these mangrove areas without 
effective protection. Furthermore, despite most mangrove residents, being highly dependent on natural 
resources and ecosystems, they have limited awareness of climate change. Training, participatory planning 
and strengthening of livelihoods alternatives in mangrove areas can therefore contribute to enhancing climate 
change resilience.  
Table 2. Area and deforestation rates of mangroves by land -tenure and use category  
Category  Total 
Mangrove 
Area 
(2008)  Total 
Mangrove 
Area 2018 
(ha) % National 
total 
mangrove 
area (2018)  Gross 
Loss 
(ha) Gross 
Gain 
(ha) Net 
Change 
(ha) Net 
Change 
(%) 
Protected Areas (PAs)1 62,339  64,916  41% 1,733  4,309  2,577  4.13%  
AUSCEM, active June 
20202 56,522  60,217  38% 1,389  5,084  3,695  6.54%  
No Protection3 36,956  36,186  23% 6,868  6,099  -770 -2.08%  
Overlap AUSCEM and 
PAs -4,441  -4,686  -3%         
Total  151,376  156,633  100%         
1   Includes 4,441 ha (2008) and 4,686 ha (2018) of mangrove in AUSCEM overlapping with PAs . 2018 data includes 10,589 ha of 
mangrove in AUSCEM, inactive/pending renewal as of June 2020. 
2  Includes  4,441 ha (2008) and 4,686 ha (2018) of mangrove in AUSCEM overlapping with PAs . 
3    Includes 3,307 ha (2008) and 3,640 ha (2018) of mangrove in AUSCEM, inactive/pending renewal as of June 2020.  
22. The Socio Manglar program (meaning “Mangrove Partner”) builds on AUSCEMs  and was established by 
Ministerial Decree No. 198 on  July 9, 2014, by the Ministry of the Environment, as part of the Socio Bosque 
program  (SBP) of conservation incentives, which has been transformative within Ecuador as a mechanism for 
engaging local communities in the stewardship of native forests23. The Socio Manglar  program is designed to 
provide direct economic payments to beneficiary AUSCEM groups to support the conservation of mangroves and supplement communities’ income.  The objective of the Socio Manglar  program is to complement and 
consolidate the results achieved through the AUSCEMs granted to communities and ancestral groups of users, to guarantee the conservation of mangroves while improving the living conditions of the population dependent on fisheries resources.  (Note:  Socio Manglar  payments are only used in the protection of mangroves, it is not 
financial support for shrimp cultivation.)  
23. In 2020,  Socio Manglar  payments by the MAATE to AUSCEM s totaled US$379,563. Current Socio Manglar   
payments  come from MAATE’s core budget and contributions from the REDD Early Movers program supported 
by the German government  (see Annex 2, Appendix 12)
. Currently only 33,467 ha of mangroves under 25 
AUSCEM s receive Socio Manglar  incentive payment agreements, leaving significant scope for expansion within 
remaining active AUSCEMs (26,750 ha) as well as in potential new AUSCEM areas.  
24. Expanding the coverage of AUSCEMs, Socio Manglar  incentives and enhancing the economic viability of 
sustainable community enterprises have been identified by stakeholders as interventions that would contribute 
to further reducing deforestation and strengthening of mangrove stewardship. The Socio Manglar subaccount,


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 12 
   
 a subaccount of the existing Socio Bosque Fund, has been established in preparation for this project and as a 
mechanism for developing the long- term financial sustainability of the Socio Manglar  Program.  The Socio 
Manglar  subaccount is managed as part of the Socio Bosque Fund with the intent that it operates  as an 
endowment , with the interest and investment income from its investments used to pay for incentives to 
AUSCEMs . Component 2 of the project includes a request for $4 million from GCF to help capitalize the Socio 
Manglar  subaccount . The GCF funds will be kept separately from the other Socio Manglar  subaccount funds in 
an interest -bearing account , while other funds will be kept in an investment account and invested according to 
the investment strategy of the fund manager , Fondo de Inversion Ambiental Sostenible (FIAS) , which is 
Ecuador’s Environmental and Sustainable Investing Fund. Additional contributions will be sought for the Socio 
Manglar subaccount from private sector companies operating in Ecuador  as part of project activities in 
Component 2 .    
25. While there have not yet been evaluations of the Socio Manglar  program, due to its recent establishment , 
several evaluations of the SBP highlight that deforestation rates are lower on land included within the SBP and 
that communities gain important monetary and non- monetary benefits  (Arriaga et  al. 2018, Peraf án and Pabón, 
2019) . The most important impacts identified by the evaluations were increased land and rights -use, security, 
economic development, and organizational support. Communities also reported non- monetary benefits due to 
collective decision making and social cohesion from working together to achieve a common goal. However, the 
evaluations  noted the need to strengthen financial sustainability of the program and the need to address 
conflicts that can arise if some communities receive incentive benefits while others do not  (Etchart et al., 2020 ). 
In the case of mangrove areas, there is a stronger possibility to monetize the traditional economies because 
the economic value of non- timber pro ducts (i.e., from fisheries) is much higher than for terrestrial forests.  
 
Figure 3. C overage of current AUSCEMs and Mangroves in Ecuador, indicating significant scope for 
expansion to mangrove areas currently outside active AUSCEMs Source of data: M angrove cover from 
MAAE (2018) , AUSCEMs areas from MAAE (2020) .


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 13 
   
  
24 Gobiernos Autónomos Descentralizados  26. This project will scale and expand the results and lessons learned from previous initiatives , including 
complementarity with GEF projects . As included in table 25  of Annex 2 , five GEF projects have contributed to 
the creation of capacities and field experience on marine protected areas ( MPA ), enforcing local associations, 
local planning and financial sustainability. Conservation International –  Ecuador ( CI-E) is also currently 
implementing a project with the GMA  that seeks to create networks  among organizations working with mangrove 
ecosystem s and support AUSCEMs  in the management of fisheries .  
National Protected A reas 
27. Forty -one percent of all mangroves of mainland Ecuador lie within the boundaries of nine PAs, making these 
an important strategy for mangrove management and conservation. These nine PAs cover three different 
categories of PAs: i ) Ecological Reserves ( Reserva Ecológica – RE); ii) Flora and Fauna Production Reserves 
(Reserva de Producción de Flora y Fauna – RPF) ; and iii) Wildlife Refuges ( Reserva de Vida Silvestre – RVS).  
28. Four PAs, prioritized for inclusion in the project contain 94.6% of mangroves in PAs : 
● Reserva Ecológica Manglares Cayapas Mataje (includes 20,012 ha of mangrove)  
● Reserva Ecológica Manglares Churute (includes 28,467 ha of mangrove)  
● Reserva de Producción de Flora y Fauna Manglares El Salado (includes 11,659 ha of mangrove)  
● Reserva de Vida Silvestre Manglares Estuario del Rio Muisne (includes  1,295 ha of mangrove)  
Mangrove reforestation and restoration  
29. Ecuador has established and executed successful mangrove reforestation efforts. Techniques for mangrove reforestation are well -proven in Ecuador , and from other sites around the world ( see Annex 2, Feasibility 
Study ). An effective policy intervention that led to an increase in mangrove cover was Executive Decree 1391  
in 2008,  which required many shrimp farms that  had been illegally established in public coastal areas, to restore 
significant areas of mangrove on or adjacent to their farms , and allowed a three- year grace period for 
registration and starting  reforestation activities , before legalization of the shrimp farms . This resulted in a surge 
in mangrove restoration  (totaling 3,110 ha)  immediately following its issue. Unfortunately, since the policy 
ended,  no new areas are being registered and reforested under this mechanism.  Sustaining or increasing the 
rate of mangrove recovery now depends on other regulatory instruments and on voluntary actions, which are 
the principal focus of this project.  
30. Conservation International (CI) has identified over 10,000 ha of land in the four  estuaries appropriate for 
potential reforestation based on criteria including size, form, connection with remaining mangroves, and 
vulnerability of populations. Of these areas, 4,850 ha will be restored as part of the GCF project (see Annex 2 
for further details of the prioritization and restoration methods) to provide long- term flood protection benefits, 
carbon sequestration and ecosystem service co- benefits in the form of improved fisheries for vulnerable people.   
B.1.4 Governance  
Planning and zoning  
31. Local governments are known as Decentralized Autonomous Governments (GADs24) in Ecuador and include 
subnational entities at the provincial, municipal (or cantonal) and parish levels with a degree of administrative 
and regulatory autonomy. GADs  need to play an important role in climate governance and, in coordination with 
the national government, collaborate on integrated coastal management . A fundamental instrument for planning 
and investment of the GADs are Development and Land Use Plans ( Planes de Desarrollo y Ordenamiento 
Territorial  - PDOT). PDOTs are a key tool to ensure that decision- making processes are based on information 
collected at the territorial level , and the implementation of measures that reduce the impact of climate threats 
on planned programs or projects is considered. PDOTs also provide the opportunity to ensure a strong marine 
and coastal spatial planning approach in the mangrove zone of the coastal region of Ecuador. These PDOTs 
can be complemented, under Ecuadorian law (Organic Code for the Environment – CODA), by M anagement 
Plans for Beaches and the Coastal Strip addressing the specific needs and characteristics within and across 
multiple GADs. Three municipalities have so far established such plans. Mangrove areas and climate change 
vulnerabilities are generally not currently adequately addressed in PDOTs.  
Enforcement 
32. Legal enforcement has faced a series of setbacks when trying to enforce mangrove conservation measures 
with shrimp farm owners who expanded shrimp farms without prior authorization from the National


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 14 
   
 Environmental Authority.  Although regulatory frameworks are in place, enforcement is inadequate for protection 
and restoration of mangroves by public, private and community -based actors.  
33. Operational Control and Surveillance Units (UOCVs – Unidades Operativas de Control y Vigilancia) were piloted 
for detection and law enforcement of illegal activities affecting mangroves as part of the Program for the 
Management of Coastal Resources project. A s a joint effort between the Navy, MAATE, Vice- ministry of 
Aquaculture and Fisheries  (VMAP) , NGOs and the National Chamber of Aquaculture (NCA) , the UOCVs’ main 
goal was to avoid and control the clear -cutting of mangrove forest areas through the cooperation of public, 
private and NGO entities involved in this environmental issue.  
34. The application of sanctions for environmental crimes under the Organic Code for Criminal Processes ( Código 
Orgánico Procesal Penal ) is also limited by gaps in knowledge about regulations, including administrative 
procedures and fines. When environmental crimes and sanctions are taken up by the courts, there is frequently 
a lack of knowledge on the part of prosecutors and judges regarding marine and coastal laws and regulations,  
and a lack of coordination and collaboration between prosecutors and the MAATE.  
B.1.5 Private sector initiatives: Shrimp aquaculture  
35. Shrimp farming has historically been the single biggest driver of mangrove deforestation in Ecuador and 
continues to account for around half of anthropogenic mangrove loss. In 2020 , there were 3,933 registered 
shrimp farms in Ecuador operating on 216,000 h a (Seafood Watch , 2021 ). Effectively engaging with the shrimp 
aquaculture sector, through better enforcement and through voluntary action, is an important element of 
effective mangrove conservation and restoration.  
36. Shrimp aquaculture in Ecuador is recognized for using low stocking density production (extensive production)  
to decrease disease risks, although the sector remains GHG intensive.  The low stocking density strategy, widely 
adopted after disease outbreaks in the 1990s severely impacted national production but does  produce a high- 
quality product with lower environmental impacts. Overall growth of the sector has increased from about 50,000 
Mt in 2000 to 700,000 Mt in 2020 (Chase, 2021).  Shrimp production intens ity averages 1.92 t/ha/y in Ecuador, 
which is significantly lower than intensive production seen in Thailand (18.2  t/ha/y) and below production 
intensity averages of China, India, and Indonesia (4.5 t/ha/y, 3.6  t/ha/y, and 3.3 t/ha/y, respectively) (CEA 
Consulting, 2018).  
Opportunities for engagement with the private sector  
37. The shrimp aquaculture industry has had limited engagement with mangrove conservation, despite the role of 
mangroves in protecting their vulnerable coastal infrastructure, regulatory requirements for reforestation, and 
increasing market demand for sustainable production. Increasing private- sector participation is constrained 
mainly by lack of information about the benefits of mangroves, limited technical capacity to identify and adopt 
practices that restore or conserve mangroves, and in the case of small shrimp farmers, limited access to 
affordable finance for all aspects of their operations. However, previous efforts by aquaculture companies to 
restore mangroves following Decree 1391 were generally successful and survival rates of mangrove seedlings 
were high despite localized problems (Pesante & Rosero, 2020). These  previous experie nces of mangrove 
restoration in Ecuador mean there is capacity to expand restoration efforts.  
38. Beyond the need for legal compliance, market opportunities and barriers are also driving a shift within Ecuador’s 
shrimp aquaculture sector. Voluntary, market -facing certif ication and labeling schemes are drawing increasing 
attention as a way to differentiate Ecuadorian shrimp as sustainable, healthy and good for the environment. 
Depending on the retailer, certification is seen as: i) a requirement for sourcing (without additional pricing), or 
ii) a value- added product that retailers and consumers concerned with environmental sustainability and social 
responsibility are willing to pay more for on a per k ilogram basis. While there has been growing interest in 
sustainable practices in the shrimp aquaculture sector, less than 1% of all shrimp farms in Ecuador currently 
operate under certification schemes that align with climate resilience and emissions reductions.  Several 
complementary i nitiatives are underway  that present an opportunity for scaling and improving practices,  
including Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) certification and the Sustainable Shrimp Partnership (SSP ). 
39. ASC provides a certification standard to minimize unintended social and environmental impacts of aquaculture production around the world. ASC certified shrimp farms must minimize impacts on their neighboring ecosystem 
in several ways, such as the partial restoration of lost mangrove forest, the development and implementation of 
a biodiversity -focused environmental impact assessment (B -EIA) and ensuring farms are not sited in critical 
habitats. Furthermore, s ince shrimp farming often occurs along coastal areas, a permanent coastal barrier must 
be in place between the farm and the coastline.  Ecuador has one of the largest area s of shrimp farms certified 
under ASC ; approximately 15% of production  is certified, with a total volume (including shrimp and tilapia) of


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 15 
   
  
25 https://www.sustainableshrimppartnership.org/   75,000 M t sold in 2020 . Currently , 15 companies are participating in ASC with 28 certified farms (49 sites)  in 
Ecuador . Products from ASC -certified farms and chains of custody can display the ASC logo to  improve market 
access and the perceived value to consumers of their products.  
40. The NCA has also been working on the development and implementation of the national SPP initiative to create 
a brand to differentiate the Ecuadorian product in the global seafood market. The SSP is an industry led initiative 
that builds on the ASC criteria adding additional criteria, including a neutral impact on water25.. With 
approximately 3,000 shrimp farms in Ecuador, there is significant scope for growth for both the ASC and SSP, 
leveraging market access and differentiation to achieve environmental outcomes, including carbon neutrality 
and mangrove restoration and protectio n; with their requirements to eliminate mangrove deforestation, the ASC 
and SSP can contribute directly to reducing emissions from mangrove conversion if widely adopted (see Annex 
2 Feasibility Study  for further details).  
41. CI’s Climate -Smart Shrimp (CSS) initiative  provides a model for climate change adaptation within the sector. 
CSS is complementary to the ASC and SSP standards  and is a novel set of practices that prevent deforestation 
and incentivize mangrove restoration while also increasing the amount of shrimp a farm can produce. CSS involves working with shrimp pond farmers to sustainably intensify shrimp production, constr uct treatment 
wetlands, and restor e coastal ecosystems, while securing buyers for the ‘ CSS’ produced (Figure 4). For small 
and medium farmers, the primary incentives to participate are access to capital and technical assistance, while 
for larger farmers, who often already have access to capital and expertise, the incentive is  connections to 
sustainability -oriented buyers in North American and European markets who preferentially source responsibly 
produced shrimp. The CSS approach can realize climate change resilience and adaptation benefits while also 
increasing production and  profitability to meet development goals.  
42. Establishing the shrimp industry as a partner in mangrove restoration will increase funding for restoration and expand the number and diversity of stakeholders conserving, protecting, and rebuilding natural infrastructure at 
scale, and eliminat e pressures for deforestation. The project includes activities with Ecuadorian shrimp 
producers to expand the use of ASC/SPP certification, directly restore mangroves and generate additional financial contributions for the Socio Manglar  Program that will support community -
based mangrove 
conservation and management beyond the implementation period of the project.     
 
Figure 4. A visual comparison of the “gray” alternative to intensification (middle) versus applying a green -
gray climate adaptation approach to sustainably intensify shrimp production using the CSS model (right).  
Conditions for private sector engagement 
43. To promote CSS or any type of certification, a key element is ensuring that adequate  and accessible  financing 
exists to address the needs of shrimp farmers. An important barrier to access finance is the lack of technical


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 16 
   
  
26 https://www.ecobusiness.fund/en/   
27 https://www.climatefinancelab.org/ideas/climate- smart -shrimp -fund/   
28 The CSS Fund is being developed as a blended finance vehicle, with approximately 30% concessional finance and 70% commercial 
finance. The fund's long- term goal is to make the case to local financial institutions that they can/should make CSS loans. The pur pose of 
the CSS Fund is to create a track record of successful CSS loans (as defined by loan repayment at commercial rates, farm prof itability, and 
mangrove restoration) that show the attractiveness of making CSS loans to commercial investors (including local financial institutions).  
29 For the Menendez model, the term “people impacted by flooding” refers to people who live in areas where the water height is estimated to 
reach higher than 0.5m above the land height.  
30 The exact figure from the calcul ation is  3,465 but has been rounded down to 3.400.    knowledge within financial institutions about the industry and its sustainability pathways. Establishing 
partnerships that allow access to information, training and implementation of demonstration cases facilitates 
the learning curve so that the shrimp sector becomes more attractive and less risky for financial institutions. 
This is the approach of  the eco.business Fund26, a US$390 million fund that provides financial services to 
financial intermediaries in the Latin America region, in support  of green economy transformation. The fund has 
ambitious targets for the aquaculture sector in Ecuador ; and helps financial institutions develop tools, skills and 
demonstration cases for key investments. Alliances with key stakeholders , including CI and its model of CSS, 
ASC and SPP,  are critical to strengthen ing the content  and scientific approach and influencing the target 
audience for those trainings.  
44. Besides lack of knowledge, there are other important barriers to access finance, such as early -stage companies 
with unstable cash flows or lack of collateral to access traditional funding sources like the banking system. 
Investment funds fill some of these gaps with a diversity of instruments such as debt and equity that can adapt 
to specific needs and business stages.  To further fill this gap, CI is developing a fund with a specific focus on 
supporting adoption of the C SS approach. The Climate Smart Shrimp Fund (CSSF)27 will provide loan 
packages, supported by a technical assistance facility, that will enable shrimp farmers to transition to more 
sustainable and efficient production systems while simultaneously restoring mangrove ecosystems. The initial 
objective is to create a US$100 million fund28 with a focus on supporting CSS in Indonesia, Ecuador and the 
Philippines. Pilot testing of the CSSF is currently underway with a  company in Ecuador.  
Other o pportunities to work with the private sector  
45. In addition to Ecuador’s shrimp sector, there may be opportunities to work with international companies whose 
interest in investing in mangrove conservation and restoration is driven by their own Environmental, Social, Governance strategies. CI will seek out such opportunities to build long term support for community -based 
conservation and forest restoration (see project activity 2.2.1).  
B 1.6 The impacts of coastal floodi ng events in the project area  
46. Based on review of local data sets and a series of models that were applied to Ecuador´s coast (see Appendix 
6 of Annex 2 , Feasibility Study ), the project will reduce flood risk for at least 89,600 people:
 
• In coastal mangrove areas, approximately 198,000 people are exposed annually to high flood risks from 
either coastal or riparian flooding (SNGR, 2018).  Of those, approximately 22,400 are estimated to have 
an annual risk of flooding from coastal storm surges even with current mangrove cover (based on the 
methodology of Menéndez et al ., 2020; see below and Annex 2 5 for more details).  
• Without the protective functions of the current mangrove cover, an additional 86,200 people would have 
an annual risk of flooding29 due to coastal storm surge event s (based on the methodology of Menéndez 
2020; see Annex 2 5 for more details of calculations). These 86,200 people will benefit from the project 
since it will strengthen the protection of existing mangroves  and therefore ensure that the flood protection 
continues .  
• By ensuring that current mangrove areas are conserved, deforestation due to shrimp farming is reduced 
by 50% and mangrove coverage is expanded by 4,850 ha through restoration, the project will benefit an 
estimated 3,4 0030 of the 22,400 people currently exposed to annual flood risk (see Annex 25 ). The figure 
of 3,4 00 is based on a calculation of the average number of people that derive flood protection benefit 
from one hectare of mangroves  in Ecuador. The project will therefore provide improved flood protection 
to 89,600 people (assumed  to be 50% female, 50% male).   
Demography of the population in the project area (See Annex 2, Feasibility Study  for further detail on the 
demographics in the project area  and the Gender Assessment and Action Plan  (Annex 8) for specific gendered 
uses and management of mangroves. ) 
47. Three million , four hundred thousand people live in the municipalities of the estuaries targeted by the project. 
The sex ratio is 50.9% males; 49.1% females. The population is 83% urban , due to the inclusion of some urban


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 17 
   
  
31 https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/73- ecuador/CF  , accessed February 2022.  areas of Guayaquil and smaller towns in the project area. Poverty levels average 72% . Unstructured, rapid 
urbanization in Ecuador’s coastal towns and cities have pushed poor urban dwellers into low -lying areas around 
waterways that are the most prone to flooding, leaving them highly vulnerable to climate change.  Across all 
project sites, women and men depend on the natural resources they obtain from the mangroves, including fish 
and shellfish such as crabs and mollusks (especially black clam). In exceptional circumstances, such as during the closed fishing season,  men find they need to earn an income outside the home. Further information on 
specific gendered uses and management of mangroves is detailed in the Gender Assessment and Action 
Plan  (Annex 8 ). 
The impacts of flooding events on local communities and key economic sectors 
48. The hazard level of coastal flooding in all areas of the project is classified as the highest hazard level, by the 
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), meaning that potentially damaging waves are 
expected to flood the coast at least once in the next ten years31. The southern coastal region of Ecuador (the 
region of the two southern estuaries included in the project) has been identified as the location with the highest 
coastal risk in the Latin America and Caribbean region due to a combination of coastal hazards,  geographic 
exposure, and socio- economic vulnerability (Calil et al ., 2017).   
49. Flooding events have become more frequent over the last 30 years ; and are particularly acute during El Niño 
events in which rainfall can rise as high as 3, 500 mm per year. The Borbor -Cordova et al. (2020) study 
recommends that coastal cities in Ecuador must recognize that they are part of larger scale ecosystems and 
that they need to integrate coastal ecosystem services from mangroves and other wetlands into urban and 
landscape design.  
50. In a global assessment, Ecuador’s shrimp production has been highlighted as having the highest vulnerability 
to climate change of the world´s brackish aquaculture producers, based on exposure (temperature, water 
balance, population density, precipitation change, flood risk, drought risk and cyclone risk), adaptive capacity 
and sensitivity (Handisyde et al., 2017). Eighty -two percent of shrimp farms along Ecuador’s coast are sited in 
areas classified as high flood risk under current conditions ( MAP , 2018; SN GR, 2018), risks which will increase 
dramatically with increased sea level and intensified precipitation projected due to climate change. During the 
1997- 98 El Niño event , flooding, disruption of supply chains and damage to transport infrastructure affected the 
shrimp aquaculture sector; around 4,500 ha of ponds were severely damaged (CAF, 2000). Heavy rains and 
flooding can also affect the harvest cycle, causing shrimp to molt early, resulting in up to a 20% drop in yields 
per pond (Sackton, 2016) , while  severe weather events can cause partial or total loss of harvest . These 
damages have direct consequences in the form of loss of income.  The shrimp aquaculture sector should 
therefore have an incentive to support measures and adopt practices that help reduce current and future flood 
risk. 
Table 3. Project populations at risk of flood and other climate -change related impacts in the project area 
(see detailed  explanation and calculations in Annex es 22 and 2 5). 
  Description  Number of 
people  Flood and other climate change -
related impacts  
Fishers  Fishers and families 
directly dependent on 
mangrove resources  ~41,500 Loss of income and food insecurity 
due to disrupted logistics, changes in fish populations and distribution  
  
Property loss due to flood damage  
  
Displacement and disruptions to 
transport  
  
Increased risk of infectious disease


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 18 
   
 Populations 
directly at risk of  
annual flooding  
during storm surge 
events in 
mangrove coastal 
zone  Populations in flood -
prone areas currently at high risk of annual 
flooding events 
(people with annual expected risk of 
flooding as defined by 
Menendez et al., 
2020; see below and Annex 2 5)  
108,600 in areas 
where mangroves 
reduce flood risk  
(22,400 already at 
annual risk and 
86,200 at risk 
without current 
mangrove cover)  
 Loss of food security and income 
from fisheries, agriculture and 
tourism  
  
Property loss due to flood damage  
  
Displacement and disruptions to 
transport  
  
Increased risk of infectious disease  
B 1.7 Importance of mangroves in providing coastal protection benefits against  flooding and climate 
change  
51. While mangroves provide a diversity of ecosystem services, their value for coastal protection and the reduction of flood risks is particularly well documented and relevant for Ecuador’s coast. The use of "green infrastructure" 
in the form of natural ecosystems to reduce the effects of climate change hazards, for example to dissipate 
wave energy and reduce the intensity of storm surges, has been well documented (see additional detail in 
Annex 2) . For example, mangrove species have dense roots to reduce wave energy and height (Figure 5)  such 
that wave height is decreased as the waves travel through the mangroves. Several studies highlight the 
importance of re- establishing wide and intact tracts of mangrove to maximize their coastal flood protection 
benefit. Storm surges can raise water levels on the coast for long periods  (hours or days), compared to waves 
that come from normal winds or tides and that last for shorter times (seconds or minutes).  This further highlights 
the importance of having wide tracts of mangroves to reduce storm surges . 
 
Figure 5. Key factors contributing to wave attenuation. Source: McIvor et al., 2012b  
Modelling the flood protection benefits of mangroves  
52. To model the flood protection benefits of mangroves we applied the ‘avoided damage’ valuation approach 
described by Menéndez et al. (2020), which uses the cost of damages prevented by mangroves to estimate 
their value. (see Appendix 6 of Annex 2). The ‘avoided damage’ analysis  using the Mené ndez model does not 
evaluate future climate scenarios, nor does it directly estimate benefits of adding mangroves, only the damage 
caused if existing mangroves are removed. However, it does provide per hectare estimates of the value of 
mangroves in terms of annual expected risk of flooding and reduced damage, which has been used in the 
preparation of this project to estimate the benefits of increasing mangrove cover.


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 19 
   
  
32 Or, more precisely 1 hectare of mangrove provides protection for 0.58 people on average.   
Figure 6. Projected f looding in Ecuador with (in blue) and without (in red) mangroves for a 1 in 25 -year 
storm event based on the methodology of Men éndez et al. (2020).  
 
53. The Mené ndez model analysis concludes that based on current conditions, 22,400 people have an annual 
expected risk of coastal flooding caused by storm surge (16,900 in urban areas and 5,500 in rural areas) . Under 
these current climate conditions, but without the protections that mangroves provide, approximately 86,200  
more people would be at annual risk of coastal flooding in the project area. The analysis also shows that the 
mangroves prevent approximately US$250 million of property loss from flooding annually . Based upon 
mangrove coverage in Ecuador from 201 8 (approximately 156 ,633 ha), every hectare of mangrove prevents 
approximately US$1, 600 of property loss from coastal flooding every year in Ecuador. Property loss in this case 
includes both industrial and residential stock where damage and property loss values increase with increasing 
flood depth.  Based on these figures, approximately one person has reduced annual expected flood risk for each 
two hectares of mangrove in Ecuador32. As noted above, currently urban areas account for most of the people 
at risk and therefore concentrating mangrove protection and restoration efforts between the sea and urban 
areas will have the most impact. This is particularly the case in the Gulf of G uayaquil, where most urban 
inhabitants reside.


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 20 
   
  
33 Assess the impact , that is the effects on natural and human systems of extreme weather and climate change events. Impacts generally 
refer to effects on lives, livelihoods, health, ecosystems, economies, societies, cultures, services, and infrastructure due to the interacti on of 
climate changes or hazardous climate change events occurring within a specific time period and the vulnerability of an exposed  society or 
system.   
34 Clark Labs data estimates the presence of 1,571,298 km2 of aquaculture ponds in Ecuador in 1999 (source: 
http://www.aquaculture.earth/coastal/index.html)  
35 Other estimates for the shrimp industry reference 100,000 -  220,000 directly or indirectly employed.  54. In preparation of the project, an alternative modelling approach has also been used (using the Aqueduct Flood 
model, which does include future climate change related flooding risk) and is presented in Annex 2, Feasibility 
Study . This alternative model concurs with the Menéndez et al.  (2020) in projecting that most people and 
property impacted by annual coastal floods in Ecuador live in Guayas. The important conclusion from this model 
is that with climate change, the relative value of mangroves to reduce coastal flooding increases. The two 
modelling approaches used also converge on a similar number of people being currently affected by coastal 
flooding during storm surges. Neither of the models includes potential changes in population due to migration 
patterns, which would include an additional large degree of uncertainty in the estimates for the future population 
at risk of flooding. We have therefore assumed for the purposes of this project, that the figure of 89,600 people 
with reduced annual expected risk from coastal surge flooding is a conservative estimate of the number of people benefitting from the additional coastal flood protection that the project will achieve by reducing forest loss and increasing mangrove cover through restoration.  
Summary of Climate Change Hazards and Risk/Impacts  
Hazard : 1. Increase in flooding  
Coastal Ecuador is already exposed to frequent flooding from both riparian floods due to high rainfall 
and coastal surges associated with storms. The frequency  of coastal surges will increase as sea 
level rise increases (see Hazard 2 below) and extreme El Ni ño events  (see Hazard 3 below) 
exacerbate the impacts of storms . 
Risk/  
Impact33: In coastal mangrove areas, approximately 198,000 people are currently exposed annually to high 
flood risks from either coastal or riparian flooding (SNGR, 2018).  
By ensuring that current mangrove areas are conserved, deforestation due to human pressures (mostly shrimp farming)  is reduced by 50% and restoration expanding mangrove coverage by 4,850 
ha, the project will benefit at least 89,600 by protecting them from flood risk from coastal surges  
(see Annex 25).  
Hallegatte  et al. (2013) estimated the relative risk of vulnerability to flooding (economic average 
annual losses/city’s GDP) in 136 coastal port cities, by assessing city -level flood risk and a database 
of urban coastal protection in 2005 and showed that the city of Guayaquil (which is protected by the mangroves included in the project) is ranked number four globally for flood risk. When future socio-economic changes are included, as well as a modest sea level rise scenario (20 cm increase), the 
assumption of adapta
tion measures by 2050, the increase in the economic average losses 
increases by 13%, putting the city of Guayaquil within the top 14 of flooding- related economic losses 
expected between 2005 and 2050 (Hallegatte et al., 2013)  
Ecuador’s shrimp production has been highlighted as having the highest vulnerability to climate 
change of the world´s brackish aquaculture producers in a global assessment, based on exposure (temperature, water balance, population density, precipitation change, flood risk, drought risk and 
cyclone risk), adaptive capacity and sensitivity (Handisyde et al., 2017). Eighty -two percent of 
shrimp farms along Ecuador’s coast are sited in areas classified as high flood risk under current 
conditions (Ministerio de Acuacultura y Pesca, 2018; Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos, 
2018), risks which will increase with increased sea level and intensified precipitation projected due to climate change. During the 1997- 98 El Niño, flooding, disruption of supply chains  and damage to 
transport infrastructure affected the shrimp aquaculture sector and around 4,500 ha of ponds were 
severely damaged34 (CAF, 2000). Heavy rains and flooding can also affect the harvest cycle, 
causing shrimp to molt early, resulting in up to a 20% drop in yields per pond (Sackton, 2016). These damages have direct consequences for the more than 60,000 people employed (approximately 0.45 
jobs/ha of shrimp farm) in shrimp aquaculture farming and processing (Yahira Piedrahita, 2018) 35.


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 21 
   
  
36 https://sealevel.nasa.gov/ipcc -ar6-sea-level-projection- tool  The SLR range cited is based on projections for scenario SSP2- 4.5 (lower 
estimate) and SSP3- 7.0 (higher estimate).  Direct consequences include loss of income from lower production or when severe weather events 
cause partial or total loss of harvest.  
See section 2.2.3 “Communities at Highest Risk from Flooding” in Annex 2: Feasibility Stu dy for 
more details.  
Hazard:  2. Sea Level rise  
Sea Level Rise (SLR) will have significant direct impacts on Ecuador’s coast and its increase is a 
climate -change driven phenomenon. By 2100, mean sea level is projected to rise an additional 49-
64 cm on Ecuador's coast36 depending on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) scenario 
(see Table 6;  Annex 2: Feasibility Study ). Measured mean sea lev el increased at an average 
annual rate of approximately 0.8 cm (1990- 2009) based on the tide gauge of La Libertad (Alavera 
& Nath, 2013), implying that these projections are conservative (Figure 7; Annex 2: Feasibility 
study ). 
An increase in mean sea level will also be compounded by increased frequency of extreme sea level (ESL) events (storm surge and tidal flooding), which will become common by the end of the 
century and occur annually mid- century in low -lying coastal areas (I PCC, 2019).  
Risk/  
Impact : Increases in SLR and ESL are expected to increase the risks of coastal flooding and consequently 
impact rural and urban populations, and aquaculture in coastal areas, especially when compounded 
by periodic El Niño events. Celemin (2018), in an analysis of Ecuador´s northern coastal province 
of Esmeraldas, posited extensive damage related to a 5 m increase in mean sea level, though this extreme scenario is outside the range of most other projections.  
Hazard:  3. Extreme El Niño Events  
El Niño events have already led to observed ocean warming and dramatic rises in sea level due to 
seawater expansion (Cai et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2019). During the 1997- 98 season, sea surface 
temperatures off the coast of Ecuador increased by 5°C above normal, and sea level increased up 
to 42 cm (CAF, 2000). In the equatorial Pacific region, sea levels can deviate from the global mean 
sea level by as much as 40 cm because of El Nino (Walsh et al., 2012).  
ENSO is a natural climatic driver, and it is very likely that rainfall variability related to ENSO will be amplified by the second half of the 21st century under the SSP 2- 4.5, SSP 3 -7.0 and SSP 5- 8.5 
scenarios (IPCC, 2021). There are indications that extr
eme El Niño events may increase in 
frequency due to climate change (McPhaden et al., 2020). Future El Niño events are likely to become more frequent and more intense (Magrin et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2019), but even an El 
Niño of similar magnitude to hist orical events, will affect larger areas and more people as its flooding 
impacts are compounded by sea level rise.   
Risk/  
Impact : Historical El Niño events provide a reference point for the scale of future climate -related damages 
for Ecuador’s coast. The Dartmouth Flood Observatory registered 22 major flooding events since 
1987, with over 506,000 people displaced ( DFO, 2020). Flooding events were particularly severe 
during El Niño events of 1972/73, 1982/83, 1997/98, as well as in 2008 and 2012, with 184,000-
222,000 ha flooded (Ocles  Padilla, 2018). Flooding events registered since 1965 on the coast of 
Ecuador have affected over 1,822,704 people, who required immediate assistance during those 
events, with 68% of those occurring during El Nino years. During those flooding events, 97,03 1 
people became homeless. Flooding events recorded since 1965 have killed 836 people, with 622 of those occurring during El Nino years (Em- DAT, 2021). Those flooding events led  to over US$ 1.5 
billion in damages and economic losses, of which 96% occurred d uring years when El Niño events 
occurred (EM- DAT, 2021). Furthermore, one quarter of  the total coastal population  was exposed to 
increased health risks in the form of infectious diseases such as malaria, diarrhea and cholera, which are associated with floods and damages to sanitary infrastructure caused by the 1997/98 El 
Niño event (Vos et al ., 1999) .


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 22 
   
  
37 https://sealevel.nasa.gov/ipcc -ar6-sea-level-projection- tool with 2100 range calculated based on the SSP2- 4.5 and SSP3- 7.0 scenarios.  
38 The recovery is in part due to short -lived regulatory measures adopted in 2008 that no longer apply.   B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)  
Current Conditions and Trends  
55. Current trends and drivers of emissions and vulnerability are described in greater detail in section B1 and Annex 
2, but key points for the Theory of Change are summarized here for clarity.  
 
56. Sea level rise (~ 12 cm by 2040 and 49- 64 cm by 2100)37, increased impacts of El Niño events, and augmented 
intensity and variability of precipitation due to climate change are projected to increase flood frequency, intensity 
and damages, thereby threatening coastal infrastructure, settlements and economic activities.  
 
57. Flood impacts are concentrated in recurring El Niño events and other extreme sea level events. SLR will magnify 
El Niño damages.  
 
58. In addition to maintain ing biodiversity and many ecosystem services, mangroves play a dual role,  both in 
reducing climate change vulnerability of coastal communities to flooding events, and in increasing carbon 
storage. Although mangrove areas are slowly recovering and increasing (+0.35% per year )38, an average of 
990 ha of primary mangrove forests are still lost each year.  Areas under community management and PAs  are 
gaining mangrove coverage while unprotected areas continue to have net loss of mangrove.  
 
59. Nearly 96% of all mangrove areas are concentrated in a subset of eight municipalities providing important flood 
protection for people and assets . With measures to protect and restore mangroves , the current flood protection 
benefits will be secured for the future and 89,600 people are expected to benefit annually by the end of the 
project (see Annex 25) . The project is also expected to provide more resilient livelihoods for 41,500 climate -
vulnerable direct beneficiaries. CI conservatively assumes that all these  41,500 people will be included within 
the 89,600 direct beneficiaries and therefore, to avoid double counting, estimates the overall number of direct 
beneficiaries of the project to be 89,600.  
 
60. Shrimp aquaculture , which account ed for half of mangrove los s this past decade , also  accounted for US$6.2 
billion  in exports  in 2022 (MercoPress, 2023) . Increasing recognition of the threats that climate change poses 
to the sector and growing demand for sustainably produced shrimp have created an opportunity for shrimp 
aquaculture operations to play a pivotal role in protecting and restoring mangroves. Other private sector actors, 
including investors and companies seeking to become ‘carbon- neutral’, creat e additional opportunities for 
private sector finance for mangroves.


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 23 
   
  
Figure 7. Carbon storage in healthy and degraded mangroves showing that carbon is seques tered in both 
woody biomass and into the soil.  
 
Barriers  
61. Accelerating the rate of mangrove recovery at a pace commensurate with growing climate risk, after decades 
of deforestation, requires a coordinated multi -pronged approach, involving diverse instruments and 
stakeholders, to overcome key barriers .   
 
Barrier 1:  Communities lack legal rights, capacity and economic alternatives for effective mangrove conservation 
and management, potentially hindering their engagement.  
62. There are gaps in coverage, legal recognition, and organizational capacity to ensure that proven community -
based management strategies and PAs continue to sustain, conserve and restore mangroves. While c ommunity 
-based management and PAs, have proven effective tools for mangrove protection , their coverage is still 
insufficient. Although there has been mangrove recovery in unprotected areas, there was a total net loss of 770 ha in these areas between 2008 and 2018. Furthermore, many AUSCEMS are constrained by  limited 
management capacit
ies and lack of economic alternatives that reinforce mangrove conservation and 
management , leaving these mangrove areas without effective protection.  
 Barrier 2 : Insufficient incentives and investments for practices by communities and businesses that enhance climate 
resilience and reduce emissions. Activities in Component 1 address this barrier.  
 
63. The GCF  exists because nations recognized this barrier to climate change resilience and mitigation. Other 
programs that will also address this barrier in Ecuador ’s mangrove areas  are still quite young ( e.g. the Socio 
Manglar  Program) and are not yet able to provide the level of incentives and investment needed to truly abate 
and mitigate climate change. Although some local financial institutions cater for businesses , high transaction 
costs to access loans and loan rates can be prohibitive for small busines ses and climate resilient business 
models are often novel and therefore perceived as higher risk . There are very few opportunities for early -stage 
community initiatives t hat address climate resilience beyond ad hoc  projects .     
 Barrier 3:  Insufficient long- term, stable financing to support community mangrove conservation efforts. Activities in 
Components 1 and 2 address this barrier.


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 24 
   
 64. The current conservation payments incentive program, currently covers only 44% of active AUSCEMs and 
longer -term financing mechanisms are needed to sustain the Socio Manglar  program. There is also insufficient 
access to financial incentives, both public and market -based, to incentivize communities ’ continued commitment 
and private- sector action, particularly in shrimp aquaculture, to decisively drive a model of economic 
development that reinforces mangrove conservation and recovery.  
 
Barrier 4:  Businesses, communities and local governments lack information or access to technical support needed 
to adopt practices to reduce emissions and/or exposure to climate risks. Activities in Component 2 address this barrier.  
 
65. Weaknesses in governance, including gaps in knowledge of legal and regulatory instruments, limited 
institutional capacity, poor inter -institutional coordination and lack of articulated stakeholder engagement, allow 
for the continued illegal destruction of mangroves and hinder proactive planning, enforcement and policy 
formation.  
 
Barrier 5:  Insufficient finance targeted at sustainable aquaculture production methods due to lack of knowledge 
among financial institutions and demand from producers. Activities in Component 2 address this barrier.  
 
66. Prior to the development of this project, significant resources from the private sector , most notably the shrimp 
aquaculture industry  had not yet been mobilized to support mangrove conservation and restoration Although 
there has been growing interest in sustainable practices in the shrimp aquaculture sector, less than 1% of all 
shrimp farms in Ecuador currently operate under certification schemes that include actions leading to climate 
resilience of coastal communities and emissions reductions objectives.  As part of the project, the NCA  will work 
with CI to roll out the SSP approach, which includes a no- deforestation requirement, and to promote CSS  
production methods that includes mangrove restoration.  
 
Barrier 6:  Regulatory frameworks and enforcement are inadequate for protection and restoration of mangroves. 
Activities in Component 3 address this barrier.  
 
67. There is a lack of enforcement that allows the drivers of mangrove deforestation (Shrimp Aquaculture sector, 
small scale land clearance for crops or pasture) to continue. Also, information for climate resilience is deficient 
and poorly integrated into decision- making and planning across all structures and scales of governance.  
 
68. Governance, knowledge of regulatory frameworks and enforcement are inadequate for protection and restoration of mangroves by public, private and community -based actors . Detection of mangrove deforestation 
often lags far behind the occurrence of events and usually depends primarily on ground- based observation from 
government agents and complaints filed by citizens. MAATE field staff are limited and there is poor coordinati on 
among overlapping government agencies, which means that relatively few deforestation events are identified, 
and action taken.  Despite the high rates of ongoing clearing of mangroves, only 13 judicial and administrative 
proceedings were processed for deforestation in 2011- 2016, and of these only three had been resolved by 
2017.  The lack of effective enforcement and sanction has been emphasized by community stakeholders during the FPIC process of this project.  
 
69. Overall, businesses, communities and local governments do not have information or access to technical support needed to adopt practices to reduce emissions and/or exposure to climate risks. Growing awareness of the 
importance of mangroves for the economies, populations and infrastructure of the coast has led to changes in 
public policies (including the Socio Manglar  incentive program and legal requirements to restore mangroves), 
which has contributed to more recent net gains in mangrove coverage. Many key stakeholders, including the general public, still lack information about laws and regulations, the economic value that mangrove ecosystem 
services provide, and technical aspects of conservation, rest oration and resource management.  
 
70. Proposed project activities will address these barriers to achieve the overarching goal of the project.  
 
Goal Statement: If local communities are provided with knowledge and resources  for mangrove management and 
livelihoods development,  and if the private sector and government actively collaborate on mangrove protection and 
restoration, an d the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened, then  coverage and quality of 
mangrove ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coastal 
populations, increased economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions because healthy and more extensive 
mangroves reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon.


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 25 
   
 Outcomes  and the project contribution : 
Outcome 1. The area of mangroves under effective climate- adapted management is increased. The project will 
expand the mangrove areas under effective community management, support adaptation planning in existing PAs 
and strengthen management of other areas through support for improved land- use planning by local government and 
improved application of existing regulations on mangroves. The project targets 156,633 ha of mangroves under 
effective climate- adapted management by the end of the implementation period .  
Outcome 2. Flood risks associated with climate change are reduced by expanding mangrove areas under 
effective climate- adapted management.  The project will i ncrease mangrove cover through reduced deforestation 
and restoration activities , which will result in reduced flood risk for an estimated 89,600 people.  
Outcome 3. GHG emissions from deforestation are reduced and carbon sequestered by expanding mangrove 
areas under effective climate- adapted management, including mangrove restoration.  Reduced deforestation 
and restoration activities will result in an estimated net reduction of 732,000 tCO 2e over the project implementation 
period and expected 4.6 MtCO 2e over a 20-year project lifespan period.  
Outcome 4. Institutional framework for mangrove protection and coastal planning  is strengthened. Project 
activities will result in improved regulatory systems or incentives for climate resilience and their effective 
implementation at the level of the national government, nine subnational governments and 60 AUSCEM- holding 
groups . 
Co-benefit 1. Biodiversity and ecosystem service benefits  are increased. The increased forest cover from 
reduced deforestation and restoration will provide additional habitat for biodiversity ( 5,725  ha) and increase the 
ecosystem services from the area gained. While the project does not propose to try and directly measure th e value 
of ecosystem co-benefit s (due to the complexity and methodological challenges involved) , global estimates of the 
biodiversity ecosystem service value of one hectare of mangroves  average US$21,100 per hectare per year (in 2018 
prices) according to a recent review of 250 attempts at valuing the ecosystem services of mangroves  (Getzner  et al., 
2020) , highlighting the importance of mangrove habitat.  See also D.3 and Annex 3 for further discussion of ecosystem 
service value.  
Co-benefit 2. Economic resilience of coastal communities  is increased. Project activities to secure mangrove 
management rights for local communities, including for fishing rights, to improve livelihood activities and to support 
small -scale community businesses will result in increased economic resilience for 41,500 people from coastal 
communities.   
Co-benefit 3. U ptake of sustainable shrimp production practices  is increased. The project will contribute to 
international and national initiatives to increase sustainability of shrimp production practices  and to increase adoption 
of nationally and internationally recognized aquaculture standards and/or improved practices that include 
commitments to no deforestation covering at least 20,000 ha of shrimp farms.   
Co-benefit 4. Economic  value of fisheries for artisanal fishers is increased . The increased forest cover from 
reduced deforestation and restoration (5,725 ha) will provide additional habitat  for fisheries areas and nurseries. 
Based on average estimates of catch, sale value and production, the additional habitat will increase the economic 
value of artisanal fisheries by US$12. 6 million per year (see Annex 3  for fisheries value calculations).   
Project Components  and Project Results  
Project Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate- adapted management increased, 
including through community -based management (AUSCEMs) and PAs  implementing climate adaptation 
plans.  
Output 1.1. Reduced exposure to flood risk for vulnerable people and reduced GHG emissions from 
mangrove restoration are achieved by strengthening community -based management through AUSCEMs and 
PAs. 
Output 1.2. Improved livelihood activities and more economically productive community businesses enable 
local people to become more resilient to climate change and incentivized to participate in, and maintain, mangrove conservation and restoration.  
Project Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG 
emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal populations.


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 26 
   
 Output  2.1. Shrimp aquaculture farms adopt practices and production standards that require elimination of 
deforestation and active reforestation in coastal and mangrove areas.  
Output 2.2. Sustainable management of mangroves is improved through agreements with the private sector, 
including direct financial support for mangrove conservation and restoration.  
Project Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation 
and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, 
coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.  
Output 3.1. Decision making for mangrove management by national government agencies and local 
governments is based on generation and provision of accurate and up- to-date data on mangrove condition 
and socio- economic information on mangrove dependent communities.  
Output 3.2. Legal and regulatory frameworks at local and sectoral level are harmonized and include climate 
resilience and mitigation strategies and enforcement.  
 
71. The interventions also need to be designed in a way that minimize potential technical risks that could arise from 
the proposed interventions. The main risks to address within the design of technical interventions are:  
• Some community members might not benefit equally from the project, exacerbating inequalities ; and,  
• Poorly implemented project activities could create tensions between different stakeholders who may 
have conflicting interests regarding mangrove protection.  
 
72. In addition, socio- political disruption, health risks and natural disasters could cause interruptions to activities 
and changes in local, regional or national priorities. Other more general project risks and associated mitigation 
measures are explained in section F.1.  
 
73. The project ’s theory of change also relies on the following assumptions (all are important but the most important 
have been highlighted in bold):  
• Community associations feel sufficiently incentivized by project activities to engage in 
mangrove conservation and restoration.  
• When community associations have resource rights over mangroves , they are more likely to implement 
sustainable practices.  
• Equipping community associations with the necessary knowledge and skills for mangrove management and restoration will enhance their ability to implement effective conservation 
practices.  
• There are sufficient business opportunities for mangrove community associations that can be 
developed as part of incentives for better mangrove management.  
• Exposure of private sector actors to market drivers and climate risks motivates increased 
investments in mangrove protection and climate smart practices.  
• Commercial bank lending rates remain at levels that would not discourage investment in sustainable 
aquaculture practices.  
• Local governments will make use of improved data availability in their decision making and land- use 
planning.  
• Government agencies will have at least their current resources and capacities to support the 
project.  
• There will be political will to strengthen the application of legal and regulatory frameworks 
during and after project implementation.


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 27 
   
  
 
Figure 8. Simplified Theory of Change diagram for the P roject  
 
 Goal 
statement
Outcomes and 
Co-benefits
Outputs
ActivitiesIflocal communities are provided with knowledge and resources for mangrove management and livelihoods development , and if the private sector and 
government actively collaborate on, and finance, mangrove protection and restoration , and the enabling environment for mangrove protection is strengthened,
then coverage and quality of mangrove ecosystems will be increased, resulting in reduced climate change impacts on vulnerable coas talpopulations, increased 
economic resilience, and reduced GHG emissions because healthier and more extensive mangroves reduce flood impacts and sequester carbon. 
Component 1 (community focused):
Project Output 1.1 Strengthened community  and 
protected areas management of mangroves.  
Project Output 1.2 Improved livelihood activities 
and more economically productive community 
businesses.Strengthened 
institutional frameworkGHG emissions 
reduced (MRA4)Flood risks to 
communities 
reduced (ARA1) 
Component 1 activities
1.1.1 Strengthen and expand community -based 
mangrove conservation and management.
1.1.2 Develop mangrove protected area climate 
change adaptation strategies .
1.2.1 Develop community livelihood and micro 
business activities.
1.2.2 Financial support of mangrove community 
associations enterprises. Increased economic 
resilience of  coastal 
communities (ARA1)Increased biodiversity 
and ecosystem 
service benefits
Increased cover of mangroves under improved 
management (ARA4)
Component 2 (private sector focused):
Project Output 2.1 Mangrove restoration and 
eliminating deforestation adopted on “early 
mover” shrimp aquaculture farms.
Project Output 2.2 Finance contributed by p rivate 
sector for mangrove conservation and restoration.Component 3 (enabling environment):
Project Output 3.1 :   Data on mangrove condition 
and socio -economic information available to 
decision makers.
Project Output 3.2 Strengthened planning and 
enforcement to support coastal climate resilience 
and mitigation strategies.
Component 2 activities
2.1.1 Promote climate -smart shrimp aquaculture 
practices.
2.1.2 Facilitate investment in shrimp farms for 
climate -smart aquaculture.
2.2.1 Establish agreements with businesses, to 
contribute to mangrove restoration and financial 
sustainability of the Socio Manglar Program.Component 3 activities
3.1.1 Monitor mangrove condition and socio -
economic impacts.
3.2.1 Support local governments to improve 
and/or implement land use planning.
3.2.2 Provide trainings to s trengthen regulatory 
framework and law enforcement.Increased sustainability of 
shrimp productionIncreased 
fisheries 
value
Activities, barriers, risks and assumptions
Barriers and 
Risks
•Community associations feel sufficiently incentivized by project activities to engage in mangrove conservation and restoratio n.
•When community associations have resource rights over mangroves they are more likely to implement sustainable practices.
•Equipping community associations with the necessary knowledge and skills for mangrove management and restoration will enhance their ability to implement 
effective conservation practices. 
•There are sufficient business opportunities for mangrove community associations that can be developed as part of incentives f or better mangrove management.
•Exposure of private sector actors to market drivers and climate risks motivates increased investments in mangrove protection and climate smart practices.
•Commercial bank lending rates remain at levels that would not discourage investment in sustainable aquaculture practices.
•Local governments will make use of improved data availability in their decision making and land -use planning.
•Government agencies will have at least their current resources and capacities to support the project. 
•There will be political will to strengthen the application of legal and regulatory frameworks during and after the end of pro ject implementation.Activities Component 1 activities Component 2 activitiesComponent 3 activities
Barrier 1:
Communities lack legal 
rights , capacity and 
economic alternatives for
effective mangrove
conservation and 
management , potentially
hindering their engagement .
Barrier 2:
Insufficient incentives and 
investments forpractices by
communities and 
businesses that enhance
climate resilience and 
reduce emissions .Barrier 3:
Insufficient long -term , stable
financing tosupport
community mangrove
conservation efforts .Barrier 4:
Businesses , communities and 
local governments lack
information oraccess to
technical support needed to
adopt practices toreduce 
emissions and/ orexposure
toclimate risks .
Barrier 5:
Insufficient finance targeted 
at sustainable aquaculture 
production methods due to 
lack of knowledge among 
financial institutions and 
demand from producers.Risk 2:
Poorly implemented project 
activities could create 
tensions between different 
stakeholders who may have 
conflicting interests 
regarding mangrove 
protectionRisk 3:
Socio -political disruption, 
health risks and natural 
disasters could cause 
interruptions to activities and 
changes in local, regional or 
national priorities
Risk 1:
Some community members 
might not benefit equally 
from the project, 
exacerbating inequalities.Barrier 6:
Regulatory frameworks and 
enforcement are 
inadequate forprotection
and restoration of
mangroves


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 28 
   
  
 
 
  Figure 9: Linkages between project components and activities  
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries , 
appliances  MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2 
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1.  
The area of 
mangroves 
under 
effective 
climate -
adapted 
management 
is increased.  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 2.  
Flood risks 
associated 
with climate 
change are 
reduced by 
expanding ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 29 
   
 mangrove 
areas under 
effective 
climate -
adapted 
management.  
Outcome 3.  
GHG 
emissions 
from 
deforestation 
are reduced 
and carbon 
sequestered 
by expanding 
mangrove 
areas under 
effective 
climate -
adapted 
management, 
including 
mangrove 
restoration.  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 4.  
Institutional 
framework for 
mangrove 
protection 
and coastal 
planning is 
strengthened . This outcome maps to core indicator 5 (enabling environment) of GCF’s IRMF : Degree to which GCF investments 
contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks for low -emission climate -resilient development 
pathways in a country -driven manner.   
 
 
Co-benefit number  Co-benefit  
Environment
al Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
1. Biodiversity and 
ecosystem service 
benefits are 
increased  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐  
2. Economic 
resilience of coastal communities is 
increased  ☐  ☒   ☐ 
3. Uptake of 
sustainable shrimp production practices 
is increased  ☒ ☐  ☐   
4. Economic value 
of fisheries for artisanal fishers is 
increased  ☐  ☒ ☐  ☐ 
 
 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 30 
   
  
39 732,000 tCO2e over the 7- year project implementation period  B.3.1 Overview  
74. Mangroves are among the planet’s most important habitats for carbon sequestration and Ecuador’s mangroves 
have been identified as important stocks of irrecoverable carbon – carbon that once lost cannot now be 
recovered before 2050 when the world must reach net -zero emissions to avoid the worst impacts of climate 
change (Noon et al., 2021). At the same time, because mangroves sequester carbon into the soil over centuries, 
mangrove restoration is an important nature- based solution over both the short - and long-term. Mangroves also 
provide essential functions for coastal protection and reduction of flood risks for vulnerable populations with a high incidence of poverty as well as for vital economic sectors for Ecuador’s economy, principally shrimp 
aquaculture,  of which 97% are small and medium producers. Mangroves also provide a suite of ecosystem 
services that support livelihoods, particularly due to their importance in natural fisheries, making their conservation and restoration multi -benefit, no- regret approaches to a ddressing climate change.  
 
75. As described in section B1, loss of Ecuador’s mangroves has slowed in the last decade, but unprotected areas 
continue to lose mangroves annually. This project will transform the situation by consolidating the recent gains 
in community managed areas, addres s remaining drivers of deforestation and scale- up mangrove restoration 
by catalyzing partnerships  between community, private and public sector actors , and long- term incentives to 
protect mangroves will be provided to AUSCEM through the  Socio Manglar  progra m.  
 
76. Reducing gross deforestation rates of mangroves by 250 ha per year (50% of man- made deforestation) and 
restoring 4,850 ha of mangroves are the principle direct strategies for generating flood- protection benefits for 
89,600 people (coastal flood protection from mangroves), livelihoods benefits and economic resilience for 
41,500 people from mangrove- dependent communities, achieving net emissions reductions and sequestration 
of 4.6 MtCO2e over 20 years
39, and integrating climate- change adaptation strategies into regional development 
plans and policy instruments for 3.4 million people.  
 
The project will focus on a combination of measures relating to reducing mangrove deforestation and increasing 
reforestation, centered on community -based conservation approaches, increased private- sector engagement 
and improved government agency and public -sector capacity centered on three  main Components and six 
project Outputs as described in Section B.2., the Theory of Change. Specific Project Results and Activities are 
summarized below, with additional detail provided in Section 5.4.3 of Annex 2  and in Section E.6 of this 
proposal (Log Frame, Activities).  
Component 1  focuses on actions to increase both the area of mangrove under protection by local community 
stakeholders, their economic sustainability and the quality and effectiveness of management for these areas, as well as national PAs, to reduce flood risks and provide multiple benefits.  
Component 2  focuses on engaging the private sector, particularly shrimp aquaculture, to become a transformational 
agent for change, reversing its previous role as an agent of mangrove loss . This component will promote the 
integrati on of  climate- smart production practices to increase climate resilience and reduce pressures for mangrove 
deforestation as well as catalyz e new sources of financing for the long- term sustainability  of community -led mangrove 
conservation.  
Component 3  focuses on creating the enabling conditions, through improved governance and the generation of 
timely, targeted information, which are the scaffolding supporting mangrove conservation, planning, regulation and 
benefits to the broader coastal and national communities.  
77. Each component addresses critical barriers; none is sufficient alone to produce the desired climate outcomes 
of maintaining mangroves to reduce vulnerability, especially to floods, and to reduce emissions. Local action by 
communities requires responsive public institutions, reliable information, accessible finance and constructive 
relationships with the private sector. For the private sector, realizing sustainable growth opportunities and 
contributing to recovery of mangroves cannot be achieved in atomized fashion, but requires clear and consistent 
regulation, and its application, as well as supportive government action to position the country’s shrimp sector as a pioneer in climate- smart production.  
 
B.3.2 Outcomes’ contribution to GCF Integrated Results Management Framework (IRMF)


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 31 
   
  
40 Including 60,217 ha in active AUSCEMs and an additional ~10,000 ha to be added.  
41 the project will support the Socio Manglar program , which is the part of the SBP focused on mangroves  78. A detailed description of project impacts and outcomes with regards to the GCF IRMF is included in sections 
E.3 and E.4 of the Logical Framework. The project outcomes will be measured according to the core indicators 
of the GCF IRMF and the project’s contr ibution to the IRMF indicators is briefly summarized here:  
 
ARA 1 Most vulnerable people and communities  
79. All three components, by working synergistically to conserve and expand mangrove cover to reduce flood risk, contribute to reducing the impact of coastal flooding for 89,600 vulnerable people, 68% of whom live in poverty. 
Component 1 specifically targets work with 41,500 people whose livelihoods directly depend on mangroves, primarily through artisanal fisheries.  
 
ARA4 Ecosystems and ecosystem services  
80. All three components of the project, with convergent activities reinforcing sustainable management, 
conservation and restoration, contribute to improved resilience of 156 ,633 ha mangrove ecosystems, by 
ensuring maximum contiguous coverage and sustainable practices that do not undermine the ecological and 
structural integrity of the ecosystem. Community -based approaches will directly focus on a total of 70,000 ha40, 
PAs on 64,916 ha (Component 1), while private sector and governance- oriented approaches (Components 2 
and 3) ensure the overall enabling conditions reducing pressures on mangroves in coastal Ecuador.  
 MRA 4 Forestry and land use  
81. All three components converge on a primary goal of reducing mangrove deforestation by 250 ha per year. 
Components 1 and 2 will result directly in 4,850 ha of mangrove reforestation in priority areas, which, over time, 
will also reduce risk s for populations in their areas of influence. These combined mangrove- based mitigation 
activities will result in 4.6 MtCO2e in emissions reductions over 20 years (732,000 tCO2e by end of project 
implementation).  
 
82. Additionally to the IRMF, the project contributes to the GCF USP2 Targets, as follows:  
 
Strategic Priority  Description  Contribution  
Country 
Programming  More than 100 developing countries 
directly supported to advance NDCs, 
NAPs or LTS  NDC and NAP:  
Ecuador will be directly supported to advance implementation of its NDC as set out in the national 
NDC implementation plan (which also currently 
serves as the implementation plan for the new (2023) 
National Adaptation Plan). The project will support 
Ecuador’s conditional GHG reductions goals and 
adaptation goals to increase the cover of mangrove 
and expand the use of community -based 
management of mangroves through AUSCEMs . The 
project is expected to reduce national GHG 
emissions by 732 ,000 tCO 2e over the pr oject 
implementation period and 4.6 MtCO 2e over the 
project lifespan. The project will strengthen management of 70
,000 hectares of mangroves under 
community management as part of the SBP41. 
Ecuador’s current NDC goal is to increase the forest 
area in the SBP by 127,500 hectares, including 
mangroves. The project will establish an additional 10 community -held AUSCEMs covering mangroves 
in addition to strengthening the existing 59 
community associations with AUSCEMs (Ecuador’s 
current NDC goal is to establish new 30 AUSCEMs 
covering mangrove areas).


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 32 
   
 Food  190 to 280 million beneficiaries 
adopting low -emission climate -
resilient agricultural and fisheries  89,600  people.  
Mangroves provide a range of ecosystem services 
that directly and indirectly contribute to the 
livelihoods and food security of local people. In 
addition to the flood protection services that will 
provide important climate change adaptation benefits  
to 89,600 people, mangroves serve as important nurseries and breeding grounds for species of fish, 
shrimp, crabs and clams that support artisanal and 
commercial/industrial fisheries. 41,500 people are 
expected to benefit from low -emission, climate 
resilient fish eries management practices that 
underpin their livelihoods. Note that CI is 
conservatively assuming that the 41,500 people are 
included within the 89,600 beneficiaries of flood 
protection.     
Ecosystems  120 to 190 million hectares of 
terrestrial and marine areas 
conserved, restored or brought under 
sustainable management  156,633  hectares  
The project will contribute to the protect ion and 
sustainable management of a total of 15 6,633 ha of 
mangrove ecosystems  by increasing the area under 
community management, strengthening PA  planning 
to integrate climate change adaptation, improved 
coastal land- use planning and strengthening the 
capacity of government agencies and local 
government s to enforce existing regulations 
designed to protect mangroves.  
 Total (no double -counting)  156,633 ha (excludes restored areas)  
 1.Sustainable management (sub -
total) 91,733  ha 
 2.Conserved/protected (subtotal)  64,900 ha  
 3.Restored/natural regen/agroforestry 
etc (subtotal)  4,850 ha  
Infrastructure  45 to 60 developing countries 
develop climate resilient 
infrastructure; including ecosystem-
based approaches  Mangroves will provide flood protection benefits that 
reduce risk of coastal flooding and related damage.  
Adaptation and 
locally- led action   40-70 approved proposals for 
adaptation projects, including for 
locally -led adaptation action.  The project will promote locally led adaptation action 
through community management of mangroves and 
action by the private sector to reduce deforestation 
and support mangrove restoration.  
 
 
Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthened institutional and regulatory frameworks for 
low-emission climate -resilient development pathways in a country -driven manner.  
 
83. Strengthening institutional and regulatory frameworks is the primary goal of Component 3, working particularly with local (municipal and par ish-level governments) as well as national -level institutions responsible for 
planning, regulation, enforcement and information. Nine subnational governments and a variety of national 
government institutions (e.g., MAATE and the Judiciary) will be strengthened through project activities, including 
training, regulatory reform, technical support for planning, and improved inter -institutional coordination. At the 
grassroots level, 60 mangrove- based associations will benefit from training and technical support to strengt hen 
their capacity for climate- responsive planning and development. The project also addresses current barriers 
and deficiencies by supporting the capacity of government entities to monitor and report mangrove forest cover 
and carbon stock information to enhance national mitigation efforts.


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 33 
   
  
42 Note that an additional 250 ha of mangrove restoration is also planned under Activity 2 .2.1 to be supported directly  by shrimp 
farms/ aquaculture companies.   84. All three components contribute to maintaining and expanding mangrove coverage as a strategy to reduce flood 
risks through mangrove protection for 89,600 people.   
 
85. Three million and four hundred thousand people living in the eight priority municipalities will be reached as 
indirect beneficiaries by risk reduction measures established as part of PDOTs, public investments and other 
policies and programs adopted by these subnational governments.  
 
B.3.3 Project Description (see Annex 2; Section 5.4.3 for additional detail ; please see E.5. 
Project/programme for a chart on specific outputs and their results ) 
Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate- adapted management increased, including 
through community -based management (AUSCEMs) and PAs  implementing climate adaptation plans.  
86. Legally recognized, community -based stewardship, despite having demonstrated its effectiveness in protecting 
mangroves (see Table 3), still has significant gaps in coverage that can be resolved through outreach and 
assistance in organizing, planning and a strengthened relationship with the government programs that 
recognize AUSCEM. For existing AUSCEM associations, ensuring that they have the organizational capacity 
to sustain their stewardship and renew their management plans and legal agreements is critic al to ensuring that 
effectiveness of management is maintained.  
 
87. These community -based mechanisms are also frequently economically precarious. Generating stronger local 
economic benefits based on mangrove conservation, in the form of both public incentives (from the  Socio 
Manglar  Program), finance for restoration activities, and local sustainable enterprises and livelihoods activities 
is indispensable to ensuring that sustainable management and conservation of mangroves is economically 
viable and contributes to dignified, equitable livelihoods.  
 
88. Restoration of 4,600  ha under community stewardship will contribute to enhancing mangrove coverage and 
associated benefits42. 
 
89. By ensuring that AUSCEMs, as well as national PAs, grow both quantitatively (in area covered) and qualitatively, 
in terms of robust management that integrates climate- change resiliency, mangrove areas will provide flood -
protection benefits for 8 9,600 vulnerable people, as well as directly benefiting communities who are dependent 
on mangrove resources.   
 
Output 1.1 . Reduced exposure to flood risk for vulnerable people and reduced GHG emissions from mangrove 
restoration are achieved by strengthening community -based management through AUSCEMs and PAs. 
Activity 1.1.1.  Strengthen and expand community -based mangrove conservation and management to reduce 
deforestation and increase mangrove restoration.  
 90. CI and PUCESE  (Pontifical Catholic University of Ecuador Esmeraldas Extension)  will provide training, 
exchanges, and targeted material support as key tools to strengthen the inclusive governance of existing AUSCEMs, focusing on a variety of topics and tools that will empower these associations to better protect mangroves at risk of deforestation, enhance t heir livelihood benefits and adapt to climate risk. As a result, at 
least 60 associations, representing 4,600 families (24% with women- headed  households), will have stronger 
human, organizational and operational capacity reflected in Management Capacity As sessments and the 
effective maintenance or renewal of AUSCEM agreements.  
 
91. Existing  AUSCEM groups  will receive  ongoing  technical assistance from CI Ecuador or PUCESE for the 
management, renewal and reporting of  their agreements with the MAATE (Undersecretary of Natural Heritage), 
including support for preparing semiannual reporting to MAATE and development and/or updating of 
management plans for the mangrove areas under their responsibility. In each of the southern estuaries, CI will have two project staff: one Mangrove Specialist and one Social Specialist responsible for daily ac tivities in the 
field. For the two northern estuaries, PUCESE will employ a Project Coordinator, a Mangrove specialist, a Social 
Specialist and 10 community agents to support work in the field.


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 34 
   
  
43 There is one association in Jambeli  Estuary that only has women as active members, the others are mainly formed by men.  92. CI and PUCESE will provide training sessions in the field with all association members and the fishers’ spouses 
interested in participating in the trainings43. For the leaders of the associations, follow -up sessions will be 
implemented to reinforce knowledge.  
 
93. To ensure that the AUSCEMs can carry out their mangrove management and protection role, CI will also provide 
equipment via in- kind grants to support community patrols, threats and environmental monitoring and to assist 
with reporting infractions. To this end, the associations will be provided with basic monitoring equipment (for 
measuring fish sizes as part of mangrove fisheries monitoring), GPS  devices  and demarcation signage.   
 
94. As shown in section B.1., mangrove areas without AUSCEMs are at high risk of deforestation and this activity 
is designed to increase community protection of mangroves. The areas prioritized for expansion of AUSCEMS 
are those that are most likely to contrib ute quickly to the project’s deforestation reduction targets because they 
have high threat, larger areas with good existing or potential governance structures ; and areas most likely to 
shield human settlements from coastal flooding. CI and PUCESE will supp ort groups  that have a lapsed 
AUSCEM agreement  with MAATE to renew their agreements (13,000 ha). In addition, for 10,000 ha of 
mangroves not yet under AUSCEMs, CI and PUCESE will support community associations to establish new 
AUSCEM in close collaboration with MAATE (Undersecretary of Natural Heritag e) for the selection of the new 
areas and the enforcement of the authority in the field. Technical support will be provided to the community 
associations to develop the management plans and legal documents needed for the AUSCEM application process and to undertake a community consultation process that ensures FPIC . These activities will start in the 
second year and continue until the end of Y ear 5.  
 
95. CI and PUCESE will also provide technical assistance to current and new AUSCEM groups to prepare and apply for  Socio Manglar  incentive  payments , with the aim of expanding coverage from the current baseline of 
33,467 ha of mangroves under 25 AUSCEM groups  receiving incentive payments to 62,243 ha during  the 
project  implementation. In preparation for the application process, support will be provided to develop an 
investment plan, and financial accounting training will be provided to ensure adequate capacity for managing 
funds received from the Socio Manglar  program  (including verification that necessary bank accounts and legal 
documents are in place). For successful applicants, CI and PUCESE will provide follow -up training on budgeting 
practices and on requirements for monitoring and reporting to MAATE. The trainings and technical support will 
also include diversity, equity and inclusion trainings with a particular focus on gender, governance and decision making, accountability, financial planning, tax report ing and legal procedures for the associations and models 
for investing the incentive in economic alternatives. This technical assistance will be provided in Years 2- 5 of 
the project.  
 96. GCF funding (targeting 4,600 ha restored) will be invested to cover costs of mangrove restoration with 
AUSCEMs’ involvement, for which CI will enter into a combination of grant agreements with the associations and service agreements with service providers for restoration activities. In addition, CI and PUCESE will support 
training, monitoring and technical follow -up. This will be done from Years 2 to 5 and with the support of the 
restoration specialist and the social technician based in each estuary.  
 
97. Details of the process for identifying priority areas for restoration and further details on restoration methods are 
provided in Appendices 3 and 4 of Annex 2, the Feasibility Study .  
 
Activity 1.1.2.  Implementation of mitigation and adaptation strategies in 64,913 ha of mangroves located in PAs.  
98. Currently, PAs do not have enough human and financial resources to effectively implement conservation and management actions nor to include adaptation or mitigation practices. As described in Section B1 and the 
Feasibility Study, well -managed mangrove PAs have lower deforestation and therefore GHG emissions than 
unprotected areas. Improving PA effectiveness can further reduce GHG emissions from loss and degradation 
of the areas and increase new carbon sequestration through active restoration activities and natural mangrove recovery. Mangroves themselves are potentially vulnerable to climate change and therefore PA managers need 
to ensure that they are managing the PAs consistent with promoting ecosystem resilience. For example, one 
issue with SLR is the need for mangroves to be able to expand landward. Ensuring that there is space to do so 
could require management action in surrounding habitats. PAs usually don’t  include adequate adaptation 
practices in the management plans, so working to improve the planning  and implementation of climate 
adaptation actions is important.


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 35 
   
 99. CI and PUCESE will work with MAATE staff (paid with MAATE in -kind co -financing) in four PAs – Manglares 
Cayapas Mataje, Manglares Churute, Manglares El Salado and Manglares Estuario des Rio Muisine  – which 
are the PAs with the largest area of mangrove and the most deforestation (in terms of area), and therefore have 
the highest potential for further reductions in deforestation. CI, PUCESE and MAATE staff will work to integrate 
climate -change into planning instruments (management plans and annual operating plans) for  each of the PAs. 
In Year 1 , workshops will be organized by CI to identify the conservation objectives and the specific climate 
change threats that each PA faces. During Year 2 , the partners will develop assessments of each PA 
management plan, that will include recommendations for climate resilience and adaptation and identify 
strategies and actions with MAATE staff and local stakeholders . The assessments and recommendations are 
intended to be integrated into updated PA management plans at their next update (typically management plans 
are updated every five years) ; and  will be developed under service agreements through a competitive bid 
process. During Years 2 and 3, twice- yearly training events will be developed in each of the PAs to make PA 
managers aware of climate change risks and vulnerabilities and how to explicit ly incorporate climate change 
adaptation into MPA management plans and objectives.  
 
100. Management of PAs to reduce deforestation will also be strengthened by improving staff training and providing 
equipment for threat  monitoring, enforcement, and community engagement, including monitoring equipment 
such as data loggers, gear for underwater surveys, software and computers to ensure monitoring in line with 
the climate adapted management plans and analysis of information collected. This equipment will be managed by PA staff, with resources from the national environmental fund (FIAS) covering cos ts of operation and 
maintenance.  
 
101. Project impacts and learning at the four PAs will be amplified through the national network of PAs ( Red de 
Areas Marinas y Costeras Protegidas del Ecuador ). PAs and PA networks need to be adaptively designed and 
managed to address altered coastal and oceanic  conditions and habitat shifts due to climate change, which 
may affect future boundaries, locations, and sizes. Networks help reduce risk and promote resiliency. A network 
analysis and action plan will be developed in Year 3. For this activity, CI will w ork closely with the Undersecretary 
of Natural Heritage and the provincial offices of MAATE.  
 
102. In subsequent years, knowledge on the design, implementation and monitoring practices will be presented to 
the PA Network to amplify action. For this, CI will hold a workshop in Year 4 with all the marine PAs in  the PA 
network, produce and distribute guidelines on how to integrate climate change into management plans and 
organize activities with local associations to highlight the importance of the topic. The PA network is critical to 
maintaining climate change resilienc e and rebuilding ecological and socia l resilience.  
 
Output 1.2.  Improved livelihood activities and more economically productive community businesses to enable local 
people to become more resilient to climate change and incentivized to participate in, and maintain, mangrove 
conservation and restoration.  
Activity 1.2.1 . Technical and business development support to mangrove community associations, with an emphasis 
on women, youth, and other vulnerable groups.  
103. By supporting mangrove- dependent communities, through groups formally linked to mangrove conservation, 
ongoing conservation and stewardship can be made economically viable, with improved incomes reinforcing 
conservation, climate change mitigation and resil ience objectives. By improving the economic productivity of 
community enterprises, the value of mangroves to the communities is also increased and this creates incentives 
for mangrove conservation. Increasing incomes to communities increases their resilience to climate change 
shocks and provides more opportunities to adopt adaptation measures. CI and PUCESE will provide support to at least 60 community associations linked to protection of mangroves to design and implement business plans 
and strategies, incl uding strategies for improving enterprise governance and administration, access to finance 
and to markets for more resilient livelihood strategies  from Year 1 of the project, with additional technical 
capacity provided through specialist consultants. The estuary -based CI sustainable production specialist and 
the social specialist will work directly with the associations. The main strategy of this Activity is focused on 
adding value to mangrove- dependent fisheries products. Product quality and food safety wi ll be enhanced by 
monitoring cold chains, classification and selection of product sizes and classes according to market 
requirements . 
 
104. Other community economic activities not directly related to seafood products will also be supported to enforce 
resilience of local communities and diversify income sources. These initiatives will receive technical support 
from CI, market analysis and study  visits to other initiatives for one -to-one training.


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 36 
   
  
44 These funds will be reported as parallel co- financing for the project during implementation.   
Activity 1.2.2.  Establish and consolidate financial mechanisms in support of mangrove community associations 
(micro - and small enterprises) . 
105. Activity 1.2.2 is designed as a follow -on to support early -stage businesses (either new ones created in  Activity 
1.2.1 or existing ones).  
 
106. CI will award small cash grants on a competitive basis for productive projects originating with the associations 
legally established in the areas of the project and supported under Activity 1.2.1. Various organizations with 
legal status in the provinces of Esmeraldas, Manabí, Guayas and El Oro will participate, including both AUSCEM  groups and other organizations with links to mangroves. The objective is to support promising micro - 
and small -scale  enterprises by helping them to scale their operations with the aim of improving the income of 
these organizations and the standard of living of their members, while strengthening the incentives for 
sustainable use of mangrove environmental goods and servic es. To be eligible for the grants, the enterpris es 
will require a simple business plan that includes a financial analysis demonstrating how the grant will transform 
the business.  These enterprises are artisanal fishing production association or cooperatives that report to the 
Superintendence of Popular and Solidarity Economy. Also, in this category  are included microenterprises that 
have an annual income less than US $100,000 and between 1 to 9 workers.  
 107. This grant mechanism, totaling US$500,000, will be administered by CI and will provide an estimated 20- 25 
cash grants to community associations  (US$10,000- 50,000 per grant ). Grant support can be invested in 
processing equipment, operating costs and other needs to scale up enterprises. Selection criteria for the grants have been designed ( See Appendix  5 of Annex 2, Feasibility Study ), and a selection committee will include 
representatives from MAATE, associations and partner organizations of the project. CI will enter into grant agreements with grantees and monitor sub- grants using CI ’s policies and procedures.  
 
108. To access credit and investment from existing private and public financial institutions, CI will support 
associations to develop cost and market analysis to increase the degree of formality of the mangrove community 
business, define baseline indicators (e.g. , operational efficiency and profitability of the operation, profit/ha/day, 
feed conversion index). This information and technical support will be used to provide assistance in the 
identification and application to national sources of finance, such as cooperatives, public financial institutions 
(BanEcuador) and other private financial entities that provide credit and investment to micro-  and small 
enterprises.  
 109. CI will hire a Bioentrepreneur Specialist with expertise in small enterprise development to provide the technical 
support described in activity 1.2.2.  
      
Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other 
coastal populations.  
110. Engagement with the private sector in the project consists of promoting and enabling the adoption of improved shrimp production methods to reduce mangrove deforestation ( and achieve other GHG emissions reductions  
that are not the focus of the project)  and advancing mangrove conservation and restoration through 
philanthropic support. CI will work with Ecuador’s NCA  to provide training on the SSP approach, which includes 
a no- deforestation requirement and to promote CSS production methods that include mangrov e restoration 
(250 ha planned on farms in the project). CI will engage consultants to support small - and medium- sized shrimp 
farms to access private finance.  
 
111. In preparation for the project, the ASC and CI provided seed funding (US$50,000 and $100,000, respectively) 
in 2021 to establish the Socio Manglar  subaccount of Ecuador’s Socio Bosque Fund. This funding will be 
available to support the Socio Manglar  program during project implementation. ASC will request that their 
members contribute to growing this subaccount  through voluntary contributions.
44 Additional fundraising by CI 
and the Government of Ecuador will grow the subaccount  to provide long- term community incentives for 
mangrove conservation. Four million dollars (US$4 million) is requested from GCF to contribute to the Socio 
Manglar subaccount and will be managed in an interest -bearing account separate from other contributor s’ 
funds , which will be managed in an investment account in accordance with the investment policy of the fund 
manager, FIAS.


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 37 
   
  
112. Adoption of improved management and production practices in the shrimp sector would lead to reduced GHG 
emissions, improved climate resilience, and reduced environmental impacts, all while increasing production and 
profitability of the sector (see Section B1 for discussion of shrimp aquaculture and the reasons these changes 
have not yet occurred). By working on sector -wide policy and market changes, and directly working with  a core 
group of ‘early adopters’ comprising at least 20,000 ha (approximately 10% of all shrimp farms in Ecuador) to 
adopt an integrated package of CSS practices, the project will:  
• Reduce deforestation on current shrimp farms and build climate resiliency by reducing the overall 
environmental footprint in terms of energy use, water quality, and biodiversity loss, and increased profitability (through increased yields). Since the projec t will be working to protect all mangroves in 
the project area (and almost all mangroves nationally)  
through either community AUSCEM 
agreements, PAs or improved land- use planning with subnational governments, there is very little 
opportunity for leakage of  deforestation caused by improved management on farms.   
• Restore 250 ha of mangrove forests on current shrimp farm areas ( resulting in removal of 0.1 
MtCO 2e). 
• Catalyze an estimated US$5 million in investment in the transition to CSS from private- sector sources 
(see section B1 for background on other investment institutions interested in the aquaculture sector). Note that GCF grant funding will not be used to directly invest in shrim p production using CSS 
methods on shrimp farms. Shrimp farms needing to invest will do so from their own resources or from 
private sector finance sources.   
 
113. The rollout and adoption of the SSP approach and/or ASC certification nationally alongside the use of CSS will 
push the shrimp aquaculture sector to adhere to zero deforestation and promote mangrove restoration. The 
increased profitability of the CSS model  will act as an incentive for farms to invest in it without the need for 
future public grant funding.  As farmers modernize their production ponds by adding aerators, autofeeders, and 
water quality sensors and by utilizing biosecurity protocols, water quali ty management systems, and improved 
data management and analytics, they are able to reduce the cost of producing shrimp on a per kilogram basis and produce more shrimp per hectare of ponds. This enables farms to increase their profitability and output.  
Sustainable intensification requires increasing technical capacity to enable ‘best management practices’ (see Activity 2.1.1), financing of capital improvements (see Activity 2.1.2), and policy alignment (see Activity 2.1.3). The CSS strategy will be appl ied to farms in different geographies, in areas of high climate vulnerability, and 
near mangrove AUSCEMs and areas associated with  Socio Manglar  incentives. The project will specifically 
target areas where risks, vulnerability and ecosystem services overlap. More broadly, this project will strengthen the enabling conditions in policy, capacity, and market conditions to drive a sector -wide shift in production 
practices to favor zero- deforestation and restoration of mangroves in and around shrimp aquaculture areas.  
 
Project output 2.1 . Shrimp aquaculture farms adopt practices and production standards that require elimination of 
deforestation and active reforestation in coastal and mangrove areas.   
Activity 2.1.1. Technical assistance for development and promotion of climate- smart shrimp aquaculture practices 
in 20,000 ha of farms.  
114. The activity will involve the design, implementation and monitoring of mangrove restoration and conservation 
plans in and around shrimp farms to achieve biodiversity, water quality and coastal adaptation objectives (led 
by CI , with partners  from NCA, farm holders , members of local faming associations , and local communities).  
  
115. CI and the NCA  will provide direct technical support to aquaculture farms for adoption of the SSP standard and 
CSS. The NCA  will advise on training materials and training sessions. CSS involves working with shrimp farmers 
to sustainably intensify shrimp production, constructing treatment wetlands and restoring coastal ecosystems. 
NCA and ASC will act in an advisory role and pr ovide input to training materials and trainings. Activities include 
dissemination of sustainable management practices, dissemination of best restor ation practices, and ongoing 
socialization of CSS.  
 
116. Intensification of production using a CSS approach creates the necessary conditions and incentives to integrate 
mangrove restoration into shrimp farming operations while also enhancing climate change resilience of farms 
by protecting against SLR  and storm surge and mitigating and sequestering carbon emissions. Successful 
uptake and implementation of CSS program activities in select regions of Ecuador will require substantial 
coordination and capacity development at multiple levels of government, the private sector (farmers, supply 
chain, and other companies), and civil society. CI will develop guidelines for sustainable intensification best practices to engage with and train farmers, government agencies, and other private and public sector actors to 
strength en and internalize technical capacity building. Rather than working only with individual farms to


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 38 
   
  
45 See https://ci -aquafarm -mapping.web.app/  for the CSS assessment tool developed for the Philippines and Indonesia that will be adapted 
for Ecuador.  implement the guidelines and foster adoption of best practices, CI and NCA will utilize a ‘jurisdictional approach’ 
to coordinate alignment among relevant stakeholders throughout the region. Jurisdictional Approach projects 
have been shown to foster wider,  faster adoption of best practices, with a particular efficacy at enabling 
coordinated disease management, enhanced climate resilience, and environmental stewardship (Kittinger et 
al., 2021). Implementing a jurisdictional approach to best intensification practices requires coordinated activities, including:  
• Partner selection (led by CI, in partnership with NCA), based on an assessment tool45 (see criteria in 
Appendix 8 of Annex 2, Feasibility Study), applicable regionally and across geographies, to 
evaluate candidate farms.  
• Engagement to identify CSS project participants, and a final partner screening to select shrimp farms 
(small, medium, or large) willing to participate in the project.  
• Develop a collaborative, time- bound workplan with all CSS project partners based on the baseline 
analyses, final partner screening, and engagement strategy with explicit commitments from each participating farm to produce shrimp meeting the CSS criteria and each participating entity to support 
the advancement of CSS with defined roles and outcomes (e.g. offtake agreements, policy support, 
conservation use agreements). Led by CI, in partnership with NCA.  
• Workplan execution and stewardship (led by CI, in partnership with NCA). Conduct trainings and 
technical sessions for 200- 250 farmers from small - and medium- sized farms and other stakeholders 
(e.g. universities and NGOs working on the topic).  
 
117. Technical assistance from CI and NCA will enable farmers to design and implement restoration initiatives on 
portions of their farms, which will confer water quality benefits within the farm and provide broader climate 
change mitigation and adaption benefits, including effective and efficient flood protection. The costs of the 
mangrove restoration on farms will be financed by the farms.  
 
118. A target of 250 ha of mangroves will be restored in the immediate vicinity of shrimp ponds and in areas where 
ponds are no longer viable. Restoration designs as part of climate- smart business models will be developed by 
consultants hired by CI to establish hydrology and landscape conditions within the restored area while allowing the shrimp farm operat ions to be maintained or improved. This innovative approach improves upon the 
conventional approaches to coastal protection, by integrating ecosystems to improve the overall outcome for 
biodiversity, production, and coastal adaptation. The resulting designs, details and case studies generated through this project will provide tools to replicate at scale elsewhere in the region and the world, with potential 
to transform business -as-usual for global shrimp- farming practices and as a model for other agricultur al 
production sectors.  
 
119. There are many examples of exploitation and mismanagement of mangroves and shrimp farms, and hence the 
need to address these challenges through effective public policy that embraces partnerships between 
government agencies, local communities and the privat e sector, all of whom operate in the same space. 
Stakeholder consensus around the benefits and importance of CSS is a critical enabling condition of 
implementation of CSS at project sites and project initiatives and is critical to achieving program sustain ability. 
Consensus requires alignment among a diverse set of stakeholders, ranging from community members, local 
and national government, public institutions, universities, local organizations, national and international financial 
institutions, supply chai n actors, and most importantly, shrimp farmers and technicians. Additional efforts to 
communicate project activities and outcomes will promote climate -smart shrimp amongst other producers in 
Ecuador while signaling for supplemental interest and investments .  
 
120. To disseminate knowledge gathered by the project, collections of key documents and resources will be housed 
within existing knowledge portals including:  i) the website and training initiatives led by NCA as part of the SSP 
initiative ; ii) the eco.business Sustainability Academy platform;  iii) Escuela Politécnica del Litoral  (ESPOL) 
University, with its course on Marine engineering and Aquaculture engineering (a key stakeholder of the CSS 
initiative) ; and iv) the GMA  knowledge hub.  
 
121. A CI Communications & Knowledge Management Manager, the Manager of Component 2 (Incentives, Financial 
Mechanisms and Climate Finance) and the Climate Smart Aquaculture specialist will lead activities that will 
target specific stakeholder groups . A total of 35 workshops are planned to socialize CSS production models 
(with an estimated average of 20 people per training). A further 19 workshops are planned for  CSS technical 
training aimed at small - and medium -sized companies (with an estimated average of 20 pe ople per training).


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 39 
   
  
Activity 2.1.2.  Facilitate partnerships and access to mechanisms for credit and investment in shrimp farms for 
expansion and consolidation of climate- smart aquaculture practices .   
122. CI will work with different actors of the shrimp supply chain to address finance access barriers and facilitate the 
flow of credit and investment for farm operations that seek to transition their production models to more 
sustainable ones.  
 
123. The limited offer of financial products, both from the financial system and other sources, is a significant barrier 
for shrimp farms wanting to adopt the SSP and CSS models. The eco.business Fund is financing green credit 
lines to key banks such as Produbanco, Banco de Guayaquil, Banco del Pacifico and Banco Pichincha, and is 
an important ally in promoting a sustainable model of shrimp production, training bank staff on impact and risk 
management in relation to the shrimp business and testing models so that  the institutions feel confident in 
investing in a shrimp- related business.  
 
124. As new financial instruments are being developed, business demand for technical support to ensure successful 
investments is also increasing. CI will coordinate with the eco.business Fund to support and expand initiatives 
such as the Sustainability Academy, to small - and medium- sized farms, and other service providers in 
sustainable production models and investments that derive into more sustainable operations  (the platform is 
open to the general public) . The Sustainability Academy portal combines education materials, workshops, self -
assessment tools, and case documentation on several sectors, including shrimp aquaculture. The  Sustainability 
Academy content will be expanded to include CSS, good aquaculture practices, mangrove conservation and 
restoration, safeguards implementation, and other climate and conservation- oriented programs, such as the 
Socio Manglar  program. The project will bring together stakeholder s to make the Sustainability Academy and 
the existing financial products more available to small - and medium- sized  farmers that are not necessarily 
clients of the banking system to date, expanding the base of beneficiaries of the program.  
 
125. Implementation of demonstration cases, from diagnosis to work plan development, implementation and 
measurement, is critical to develop the skills of investors, suppliers and farmers. To strengthen these successful 
investment cases, CI will provide technical support to businesses in the project feasibility and implementation 
phases. Criteria for selecting beneficiaries will be developed to include conservation priorities (mangrove 
conservation or restoration component), market opportunities in connection wit h SSP and/or ASC, and 
particularly links to investors or banks that can provide the required funding for making an operation more sustainable. Support from the project will be conditional on the business’s commitment to invest in mangrove restoration and/or conservation.  
 
126. CI will also promote the implementation of a roundtable created by the National Mangrove Plan with industry  
actors  to include the CSS concept into the agenda and priority discussion topics and the solutions to address 
finance access barriers described in the project approach. Links to the commercial sector will be critical to 
reduce risks of investments in the shrimp industry, so working in connection with the NCA  as well as 
international buyers to secure commitments to CSS is important.  
 127. To address investment needs, the project will seek to identify and support shrimp farmers on the design of sustainability efforts as a tool to mobilize capital towards CSS, ASC and SSP models. CI will assist these needs 
through technical support from consultants. Shrimp farmers/companies will be eligible for this technical support 
if they comply with initial requirements: i) a concrete investment opportunity that can improve climate resilient 
practices and ii) a link to a financial institution interested in financing such investment. CI will assess all requests 
and prioritize opportunities based on a series of eligibility criteria (further details in Section 5.4.3 of Annex 2, 
Feasibility Study ).  
 
128. The technical support from the project will be used with the goal of unlocking private finance to specific 
geographies with a role in mangrove conservation or restoration but not necessarily those farmers being the 
most investable in the sector. Furthermor e, there is an understanding that many small - and medium- sized  
farmers operate in the area, and they are the ones that face more challenges in their capacity to attract 
investment into their operations. Th is technical support will : a) strengthen weaknesses  in management areas 
that limit the capacity of attracting capital to promote sustainable intensification at farm level, or  b) refine an 
investment opportunity through a feasibility assessment, business plan development, impact targets such as 
efficiencies and improved conditions, and definition of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to monitor 
advancement towards those goals.


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 40 
   
  
46 FIAS is a private, non- profit entity to support finance for environmental and conservation purposes in line with MAATE priorities.  
47 Such commitments would be voluntary and not be a condition for support from the project.  129. The CI project staff (Climate Smart Aquaculture Specialist) will facilitate agreements between retailers, 
importers/exporters, processers, and farmers to guarantee purchase of climate smart shrimp.  
 
130. CI will work with NCA and ASC to continually strengthen training materials for the CSS concept and to refine 
the concept itself based on industry feedback. CI will engage a consultant in Year 3 to develop a marketing 
strategy for CSS in Ecuador. This will include assessing market engagement for CSS with retailers, including 
market traceability, market recognition and establishing buyer assurance mechanisms. CI will also collaborate 
with NCA and ASC and third- party independent auditors that confirm farm adherence to the CSS standard.  
 
Output 2.2 . Sustainable management of mangroves is improved through agreements with the private sector, 
including direct financial support for mangrove conservation and restoration.  
Activity 2.2.1.  Establish agreements with businesses, including aquaculture companies, to contribute to mangrove 
restoration and financial sustainability of the national Socio Bosque Incentive Program (the Socio Manglar  
Program).  
 
131. Ecuador’s  Socio Manglar  incentive mechanism provides a tangible, government -supported pathway for shrimp 
farms and other enterprises operating on Ecuador’s coast to make effective their commitments to mangrove 
conservation. CI, in preparation for this project, has worked with the ASC to create and contribute to the capital 
of the Socio Manglar  subaccount of Ecuador’s Socio Bosque Fund, with an initial donation of US$150,000 
(US$50,000 from ASC and US$100,000 from CI). The Socio Bosque Fund is managed by Ecuador’s  
Environmental and  Sustainable Investment Fund ( FIAS)46, and the new  Socio Manglar  subaccount is managed 
using the same operating procedures. Each fund managed by FIAS has a governance mechanism for decision 
making and FIAS has a board made up of representatives from the public and private sectors . All funds are 
audited, and information is presented to the board and to each governance mechanism. FIAS also has an investment committee that oversees the policies and strategies implemented with the funds based in Ecuador 
and with the funds invested int ernationally. 
 Appendix 12 of Annex 2  provides further background on the  Socio 
Manglar  subaccount.  
  
132. FIAS  is a private, non- profit entity that has a track record of the management, mobilization, investment and 
implementation of public and private funds to finance nature conservation and mitigation and adaptation to climate change, complementing the efforts of  the Government of Ecuador. FIAS currently has more than 
US$100 million in five funds under management, with contributions from the Government of Ecuador and 
international donors, including CI. CI has a permanent voting seat on the “Technical Committee” responsible 
for the management of the Socio Manglar  subaccount. Through its role in the Socio Manglar  subaccount 
governance and ongoing financial and technical monitoring, CI will ensure compliance with GCF requirements both during the project implementation period and beyond. After the project implementation ends , but during 
the 20- year project lifespan , CI will provide an annual ‘testament’ to GCF confirming the continued existence of 
the Socio Manglar subaccount and that its purpose remains consistent with the objectives of supporting community management of mangrove areas.  CI will also obtain from MAATE and FIAS written confirmation 
that the remaining GCF funds in the Socio Manglar subaccount after project lifespan will continue to be used 
for the objectives of supporting community management of mangrove areas.  CI will monitor financial and 
technical reports of the Socio Manglar  subaccount , including the interest -bearing account in which GCF funds 
will be held  (financial reports) and broader  Socio Manglar  program (technical reports). Further details on CI’s 
role in supervision, monitoring and compliance with GCF requirements after the project implementation period 
are included in the Term Sheet, Annex 14.      
 
133. The Government of Ecuador (through MAATE) currently finances the Socio Manglar  program directly from its 
annual budget and the REDD Early Movers project. The objective for the project is to build up the Socio Manglar  
subaccount to provide a more stable and long- term sustainable source of financing for the Socio Manglar  
program. T hree main sources of funding for the Socio Manglar  subaccount will be targeted:  i) aquaculture 
enterprises looking to expand their environmental commitments
47; ii) Ecuadorian businesses seeking to 
compensate for their carbon footprint under Ecuador’s C arbon Zero program (PECC) ; and iii) a US$4 million 
contribution from GCF (see below) . CI will work with ASC, the corporate partners of their value chain and their 
membership (aquaculture enterprises) to secure voluntary commitments to contribute to the Socio Manglar  
program.  CI will also work closely with MAATE to promote support for mangrove conservation through the 
PECC program.


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 41 
   
  
48 This endowment grant mechanism is a Grant financing instrument within the scope of CI’s AMA accreditation. The $4 million endowment 
will be disbursed from CI to FIAS  via a subgrant. FIAS will place the funds in an interest -bearing bank account , and any interest generated 
from these funds will be used by FIAS  to pay for the community incentive payments under the Socio Manglar Program . Further details are 
included in Appendix 12 of Annex 2.  
134. To strengthen private- sector action, CI will develop a communications strategy, with the support of consultants, 
highlighting the importance of mangroves and the role the private sector can take in protecting and restoring 
them. The strategy will be developed for several audiences, including international companies in the ASC value 
chain, national shrimp farms and other Ecuadorian companies (i.e., others not linked to the aquaculture sector) 
looking to compensate their carbon footprint  (through the PECC program) . Meetings to present the Socio 
Manglar  program (including the Socio Manglar  subaccount) and the opportunities for private sector engagement 
with it will be organized in Years 2 and 3 in both Quito and Guayaquil.  
 
135. GCF funds of US $4 million are requested to capitalize the Socio Manglar  subaccount managed by FIAS. The  
GCF  funds will be granted to FIAS as an endowment in perpetuity for the subaccount,  and will be held separately 
from other funds in an interest -bearing account . The interest income will be used to pay annual incentives to 
AUSCEMs in the Socio Manglar  program  both during the project and after  the project  implement ation period 
ends .48 The Socio Manglar  subaccount is the principal mechanism for providing long- term sustainable finance 
to support AUSCEMs.  The US$4 million will capitalize the  Socio Manglar subaccount at a level that, along with 
other contributions (see next section), will generate enough income to provide incentive payments for the 
additional AUSCEMs eligible for payments resulting from Component 1 of the Project. FIAS will manage the GCF resources in a separate interest -bearing bank account alongside other contributions to the Socio Manglar  
subaccount and in accordance with its existing management procedures, which have been assessed to be compliant with GCF requirements. (See Appendix 12 of Annex 2 for details of the  Socio Manglar  subaccount 
and projections for growing its capital ). CI-Ecuador, with support from CI's Conservation Finance Division, will 
monitor the use of GCF funds within the subaccount managed by FIAS.  
 136. In addition to capitalizing the Socio Manglar  subaccount, the US$4 million in GCF funds are expected to catalyze 
mobilization of private investment into the subaccount. Increasing the subaccount’s capital early in the project (Year 2) is expected to provide a level of confidence from potential private sector donors because the 
subaccount will already be functioning with sufficient capital to provide incentives to some AUSCEM groups. Private -sector donors are more likely to contribute alongside public funding,  such as from GCF , since it will 
demonstrate there are realistic long- term prospects for the subaccount to act as a mechanism to provide 
incentive payments and to attract sufficient additional capital to allow the  Socio Manglar  program to expand  to 
conserve more mangroves . 
 The US$4 million is requested from GCF as a grant, rather than a reimbursable 
grant or loan, since i ) the  Socio Manglar  subaccount is intended to operate in perpetuity, ii) interest and 
investment income earned on it will be used to provide incentive payments in the form of grants to AUSCEM 
groups and iii) there is no revenue to the Socio Manglar  subaccount (other than the interest or investment 
income on the capital) with which to repay a reimbursable grant or loan.  
 
Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and 
increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.  
137. Actions by local communities and the private sector to protect mangroves and maintain flood- protection benefits 
as a nature- based climate change adaptation and mitigation strategy depend significantly on the government 
creating the necessary governance, regulatory and enabling conditions. These both dissuade and control illegal activities and ensure that a full range of climate considerations are incorporated into planning and investment 
decisions.  
 
138. By generating and disseminating better climate- change and mangrove- forest information to decision makers 
and stakeholders, project activities, particularly those focused on public entities, the project will contribute 
directly to increasing climate knowled ge for use in decision making and will provide the foundation for achieving 
project Outcomes 1 and 2 and their associated impacts.  
 
139. Improved legal and regulatory capacity, focused on planning, preparedness and enforcement, will contribute to 
sustaining mangroves as well as enhancing awareness and resilience of direct and indirect beneficiaries, 
primarily concentrated in the eight priority municipalities of the project area and will contribute directly to 
strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate responsive planning and development.


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 42 
   
  
Output 3.1 . Decision making for mangrove management by national government agencies and local governments is 
based on generation and provision of accurate and up- to-date data on mangrove condition and socio- economic 
information on mangrove dependent communities.  
Activity 3.1.1.  Monitoring of mangrove condition and socio- economic impacts in mangrove- dependent communities.   
140. The reduction of emissions and the environmental and social benefits associated with the implementation of 
project activities will be monitored integrating remote sensing and community participation. This activity will 
provide the data needed for monitoring of the GHG emission reductions achieved by the other components.  
 
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) of Mangrove Cover and Carbon Stocks  
 
141. CI will enter into subgrants with two local universities or NGOs (competitively chosen) to collaboratively generate 
data and capacity at multiple levels to improve MRV systems for mangroves, to be integrated both into project 
M&E and the national REDD+ MRV system. Ecuador’s  NDC is strongly linked with the terrestrial ecosystems. 
Mangroves along with other fragile ecosystems are included as a key priority in the NDC (2019). The information 
that this project will generate will be included in the national MRV system and the various initiatives that Ecuador 
is implementing to reach the targets included in the NDCs. The information generated in this activity is also 
fundamental to the implementation of the PECC with the private sector (linked to  activity 2.2.1).  
 
142. As described in Annex 2, natural changes in mangrove cover due to the complex hydrological dynamics of 
mangrove ecosystems are an important contributor to mangrove losses and gains. Improving the understanding 
of these natural changes is essential for future mangrove cover monit oring. MAATE, local universities and 
community stakeholders such as mangrove associations will be trained by CI to monitor the dynamics and 
structure of the mangroves and the biodiversity they contain. The areas that will be monitored will include: i) 
areas affected by natural disturbances ; ii) restored areas of mangroves and other natural forests ; and iii) areas 
of infrastructure development and deforestation not controlled by project activities. A subgrant will be awarded 
to a local university  or NGO  to collect the mangrove ‘blue carbon’ monitoring information. CI will also provide 
training on the collection of mangrove ‘blue carbon’ data to the sub- grantee and other stakeholders, including 
MAATE staff.  
 
143. Updated geospatial data on mangrove coverage and change will be gathered and integrated into national forest 
inventory and FRELs. CI will enter into a subgrant with a local university or NGO to analyze mangrove cover 
and provide results to the national MRV  system.  
 144. CI will disseminate information to decision makers at the local and national level, through policy reports for local governments, creating maps for local communities and extended reports to the MAATE and other national 
decision makers.  
 
Socio economic impact evaluation (SIE)  
 
145. The SIE ’s main objective is to assess the effects from project proposed activities on environmental and 
socioeconomic outcomes (i.e., climate mitigation and emissions reductions, resilience, enhanced livelihoods ) 
and to detect an effect between treatment and control groups within the project implementation period for the 
project activities.  
 
146. CI will conduct the SIE in Y ear 2 following project start -up for the baseline and in Year 6 for the final assessment. 
CI’s Moore Center for Science will support the establishment of the monitoring system and the processing and analysis of the information. CI will also enter into grant agreements with local universities in Ecuador for the 
data gathering and training. Eligibility criteria for selection of the local universities is provided as Appendix 7 of 
Annex 2. .  
 
Output 3.2. Legal and regulatory frameworks at local and sectoral level are harmonized and include climate 
resilience and mitigation strategies and enforcement.  
Activity 3.2.1.  Support local governments (2 provincial governments, 2 municipalities and 5 parishes) to improve 
and/or implement PDOTs and other participatory planning instruments that incorporate climate change adaptation 
and mangrove management, applying a gender approach.


---
*Page 50*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 43 
   
  
49 (https://www.planificacion.gob.ec/guias -para- la-formulacion- actualizacion- de-los-pdot/ )   
147. CI will work with local governments to enforce their capacity to manage their territories with a clear perspective 
of integrated coastal zone management and marine spatial planning that are critically important to realizing 
flood protection benefits from mangroves as well as other ecosystem services from coastal ecosystems.  CI will 
work with nine local governments/administrations to integrate natural climate change adaptation measures into 
their planning, including mangrove conservation and restoration. For this , CI will work following PDOT´s 
guidelines from the National Planning Secretariat that includes adaptation and mitigation actions49. The local 
governments have been prioritized based on the extent of their mangrove cover. To support this work, CI will provide a subgrant in Year 2 to a local organization (university or NGO to be competitively selected) to generate 
climate risk information to inform local planning.  
 148. CI will work with five p arish  administrations ( Parroquias ) to develop climate change risk -management plans that 
value impacts and involvement  of men and women.  CI will provide technical support to these local governments 
for planning that will help them increase the economic, social, health and cultural resilience of individuals and 
communities. The risk -management plans will include activities for monitoring and evaluation of the adaptive 
capacity of men and women considering their access and control of resources, participation and roles within organizational  processes.  
 
149. CI will work with two municipal governments (Guayaquil and Machala), responsible for land- use planning and 
zoning through their PDOTs. CI will provide technical input and facilitation of participatory planning processes 
to integrate strategies for climate- change adaptation, including strategies for conservation and restoration of 
mangroves.   
 150. CI will support two provincial governments (Guayas and El Oro) with technical support to integrate climate 
change considerations into the provincial planning and to support budget planning to promote additional climate 
change investment. These activities will support manageme nt of priority conservation areas, local fishermen, 
strengthen capacities for the preparation of management plans for the coastal areas, and develop land use and 
management plans as well as  integrated coastal management plans. The project will also support the integration 
into the provincial plans of actions to create the enabling conditions necessary for the long- term conservation 
and restoration of mangroves.  
 
151. CI will enter into service agreements with consultants beginning in Year 2 to provide territorial planning support 
to local governments for these activities. The CI Local Governance & Integrated Coastal Management Specialist 
will provide support to these government entities across the four estuaries of the project.  
 152. CI will provide ongoing support, monitoring and public communication for the implementation of plans, 
corresponding public investments and municipal ordinances  and other legal instruments  determined by 
PDOTs.     
 
Activity 3.2.2 Strengthen regulatory framework and law enforcement by agencies and institutions responsible for 
control of mangroves, with a focus on human rights.  
153. CI staff and consultants engaged by CI will conduct an analysis of multi -sectoral legal framework for mangroves 
and climate change and the creation of multi -sectoral working groups (“ mesas  técnicas ”) to generate proposals 
for regulatory changes in Environment, Vice-ministry of Aquaculture and Fisheries (V MAP), Navy, Ports, and 
GADs . Examples of such changes may include updates to the regulations regarding illegal shrimp farms not 
covered by Executive Decree 1391,  which have not been expropriated or approved, procedures for the 
restoration of mangroves, and regulation of areas that were formerly mangroves.  
 
154. CI will also support the discussion of legal reforms and new regulations in the context of the Roundtable for Sustainable Shrimp, to be convened by the MAATE and VMAP. CI will provide staff time and cover workshop 
costs to implement this roundtable.  
 
155. In Years 2 to 5, CI ’s Legal Specialist and Local Governance & Integrated Coastal Management Specialist will 
work with partners to re- establish the strategy of the UOCVs  for law enforcement and sanctions for illegal 
activities affecting mangroves.   A joint effort between the Oceanographic Institute of the Navy (INOCAR), 
MAATE, VMAP, NGOs and the NCA , the UOCVs’ main goal is to avoid and control the clear -cutting of mangrove 
forest areas through the cooperation of public, private and NGO entities. The implementation of this initiative


---
*Page 51*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 44 
   
 includes the surveillance technical system, the legal control technical system and the report and communication 
system.  
 
156. Also in Y ears 2 to 5, CI’s Legal Specialist and Component 3 Coordinator will support MAATE staff members  with 
responsibilities for mangrove administration, planning, PAs, and provincial districts by providing them training 
on the laws and regulations relating to mangroves and the administrative procedures for enforcement and 
sanctions. A system to follow up deforestation complaints will be improved by  CI project staff and implemented 
in collaboration with government officials so complaints from local associ ations, local governments and citizens 
will have a transparent follow -up process.  
 
157. In Year 3, CI will engage a consultant to develop a training curriculum relating to mangroves specifically aimed 
at judges and other staff of the judiciary system, including from the Public Prosecutor, Navy, and Ministry of 
Fisheries and Aquaculture.  Training workshops will be conducted by CI’s Legal Specialist and the Local 
Governance & Integrated Coastal Management Specialist for judges and judiciary staff. This training will be integrated into the regular training curriculum of the named institutions.  
 
158. In Years 1 to 3, CI will engage a consultant  to design an online and mobile app to facilitate reporting of 
deforestation and other impacts on mangroves. The consultant will also provide training to users of the app 
(MAATE staff and AUSCEMs).  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
 
NDA and Government Partner  
159. Ecuador’s MAATE, as the GCF National Designated Authority (NDA), will ensure that activities implemented by the project align with strategic national objectives, priorities, and standards, including the National Climate 
Change Strategy, and help advance ambitious action on adaptation and mitigation in line with national goals 
and needs. The Executing Entity ( EE) will engage with the NDA throughout project implementation. The NDA 
will contribute to the development of the multiyear workplan and will be provided with detailed reporting on the 
status of project activities and impacts. MAATE, through its Undersecretariat of Natural Heritage and Undersecretariat of Climate Change, will also contribute to project activities and provide grant and in- kind co -
financin g as described elsewhere in this proposal.  
 
Accredited Entity  
160. CI, through its CI -GCF Agency, will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for the project. The CI -GCF Agency will 
be responsible for the overall oversight of this project as defined in the Accredited Master Agreement (AMA) 
between the GCF and CI, including technical, financial, and administrative monitoring and supervision (through 
reporting, audits, and annual site visits) and review and approval of the EE ’s annual workplans and budgets. 
CI-GCF will also be responsible for providing support, guidance and bac kstopping to the EE; monitoring the 
achievement of project results and Outputs; reporting to the GCF; and project closure and evaluation. CI -GCF 
will conduct these responsibilities and disburse GCF funds to the EE. The CI -GCF Agency currently serves as 
AE for FP026, Sustainable Landscapes in Madagascar , a GCF project addressing mitigation, adaptation, and 
sustainable livelihoods, and for FP158, Ecosystem -based Adaptation and Mitigation in Botswana’s Communal 
Rangelands .  
 
Project Governance  
161. The project’s governance structure includes the Project Steering Committee and the Project Management 
Committee. The Project Steering Committee will be comprised of the following individuals: i) the Undersecretary 
of Climate Change of MAATE or his/her delegate; ii) the Undersecretary of Natural Heritage of MAATE or his/her delegate; and iii) the Vice President of CI -Ecuador or his/her delegate; and will be chaired by the Undersecretary 
of Climate Change.  
 
162. The principal functions of the Project Steering Committee will be to provide strategic guidance and support 
adaptive management of project implementation, review progress and evaluation reports, discuss problems or 
strategic issues that might arise during implementation, and provide support for the necessary inter -institutional 
coordination and contributions to project activities. The Steering Committee will also participate in the selection 
of the Project Director , through a competitive process.


---
*Page 52*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
  
50 This Direction manages marine, coastal and oceanic heritage.  
51 This Direction seeks to increase adaptive capacity and reduce environmental, social and economic vulnerability to climate change, 
through the management and implementation of policies, plans, programs, projects, measures and actions to achieve resilient c ommunities 
and ecosystems to climate change.  
52 All references to “CI Ecuador” denote the actions undertaken by the project’s CI staff employed through CI Ecuador, a branch office of 
Conservation International Foundation registered in Ecuador as an external company. The legal entity for this reference is Conservation 
International Foundation. CI Foundation will be the legal entity entering into any agreements, sub- agreements, or MOUs used in this 
project.   
163. The Project Steering Committee will meet at least twice per year, to review the progress of the ongoing semester 
or year and to advise the Project Director on strategic and policy -related decisions. The Project Steering 
Committee will be convened by the Project Director  in advance to give the members sufficient time to schedule 
the meeting and agree on the agenda. The Project Director  will prepare minutes of each meeting. Extraordinary 
meetings of the Project Steering Committee will be convened when deemed necessary and at the request of 
one of its members. The Project Steering Committee may also invite key stakeholders to support specific 
themes.  
 
164. The Project Management Advisory Committee will comprise the following individuals: i) the Director of the 
Marine, Coa stal and Oceanic50 (MAATE) ; ii) the Director of Climate Change Adaptation51 (MAATE); iii) a 
representative from V MAP; d) the Director of the Coastal and Marine Program of CI -Ecuador; and e ) the Project 
Director r employed by CI; and will be chaired by the Director of Marine, Coastal and Oceanic  from MAATE.  
 
165. The Project Management Advisory Committee will meet at least four times per year to advise the Project 
Director  and the National Project Director (NPD) on technical matters, and to discuss challenges and 
collaboration opportunities during implementation. The Project Management Committee may invite key partners 
to provide advice on specific themes.  
 
166. For both governance committees, members who are government employees will not be renumerated by GCF 
funds.  
 
167. The NPD will be appointed by MAATE’s Undersecretary of Natural Heritage, who will be employed and funded 
by MAATE. The NPD will advise the Project Director  on government policies and priorities; review coherence 
of the project activities, including results, risks, planning and procurement processes; advise on the project’s 
annual Procurement Plan for project services and goods; and review the technical and f inancial quarterly project 
reports to the AE.  
 168. Technical Advisory Committees will be created for each of the Components and each of the estuaries of the 
project. In the case of Component 1, the Technical Advisory Committee will include MAATE, the Risk 
Secretariat, Universities working in climate change adaptation and mitigation, and representatives from 
AUSCEM. The Component 2 committee will include MAATE, the VMAP, the NCA , the Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Public Research Institute, shrimp farmers, and other value chain members. The Component 3 
committee will include MAATE,  the VMAP, the Planning National Secretariat, Provincial, municipal, and Parish 
governments, and representatives of the INOCAR, the Prosecutor’s Office, and Judiciary Council. At the level 
of each estuary, a committee will be created to integrate the Zonal Directors of MAATE with the planning 
activities of local governments and AUSCEMS representatives.  
 
Executing Entity  
169. CI will self -execute this project. CI , acting through its country office in Ecuador (referred to in this proposal  as 
“CI” or “CI -Ecuador”),
52 will be the EE for all activities of this project. CI -Ecuador will be responsible for p roject  
execution, management of sub- grantees and their activities, reporting to the AE, and ensuring optimal alignment 
with the Government of Ecuador policies and priorities in coordination with MA ATE to achieve p roject  outcomes 
and Fund- level goals. As EE, CI , acting through its country office in Ecuador, will enter into legal  agreements 
(including sub- grant agreements, services agreements, and MOUs) for this project . As a branch of CI, CI -
Ecuador will follow CI policies and procedures in the execution of this project , including terms included in CI’s 
Operations Manual  (see Annex 21) . The CI -GCF Agency has assessed the capacity of CI -Ecuador and has 
determined it to be capable of applying CI and CI -GCF standards and policies in the execution of this Project.  
Throughout Project  implementation, CI -Ecuador  will be supported by various CI divisions  which will lend specific 
expertise , including CI’s Americas Division , Conservation Finance Division (supporting private -sector funding),


---
*Page 53*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 and CI’s  Center for Oceans (supporting  blue carbon and mangrove restoration ), and Project Delivery and 
Monitoring (supporting safeguards  and gender).  
 
170. For more than 30 years, CI has been protecting nature for the benefit of all. CI employs more than 1,000 people 
and works with more than 2,000 partners in 30+ countries. Since 1987, CI has supported more than 1,200 PAs 
and undertaken interventions across 77 countries, protecting more than 601 million hectares of land, marine 
and coastal areas. For over two decades, CI has been operating in Ecuador in the Gal ápagos, marine and 
coastal areas of continental Ecuador, Andes Choco and the Amazon to implement cons ervation solutions within 
priority landscapes. CI has supported the creation and management of marine and coastal PAs, working in 
close collaboration with artisanal fisher associations to promote capacity building and sustainable management 
measures of resources (in Galápagos with the spiny lobster, tuna, and prawn fisheries and in mainland Ecuador, with black shell and red crab fisheries).  
 171. CI-Ecuador will establish the main Project Management Unit (PMU) at CI’s office in Guayaquil. The PMU will 
be headed by a full -time Project Director employed by CI, who will be responsible for coordination with all 
stakeholders and successful implementation of the project and attainment of results specified in the project’s Funding Proposal, to the required standards of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost. The PMU will be responsible for overall project management and planning, providing support to the execution of 
day-to-day activities, coordinating with the national government and project partners, coordinating with the AE, 
managing and overseeing grants, and coordinating project execution across two project offices and four estuary 
sites. The PMU will also include the Operations and Finance Director and the Project Finance Manager and will 
receive support from the CI -Ecuador Senior Operations Director. Upon project inception, the Project Director in 
coordination with the Operations and Finance Director will prepare a Project Operations Manual, including responsibilities, procedures and details for a smooth and effective implementation, which will be approved by 
the Project Steering Committee. The project will also have dedicated full -time staff, including Monitoring & 
Evaluation Manager, Safeguards Manager, Gender Manager, Communications & Knowledge Manager, 
Procurement Manager and 3 Component Leads. Additional Project staff as detailed in Annex 4 will be based 
in Guayaquil and Esmeraldas.  
 
172. In addition, CI, in coordination with MAATE, will establish an Estuary Field Unit (EFU) in each of the Project’s 
four target estuaries (Cayapas -Mataje, Muisne- Cojimíes, Gulf of Guayaquil, and Jambelí) as regional execution 
offices. These EFUs will be housed in the MAATE Provincial Directions in Esmeraldas, Guayaquil, and Machala (as in -kind support from MAA TE), and will each be led by two project staff: an Estuary Coordinator and a Social 
Technician (CI staff for the southern estuaries and PUSECE staff for the northern estuaries). Establishing EFUs 
in the estuaries directly involved in the day -to-day activit ies of the local associations is a cost -effective strategy 
for achieving the goals of the project. Evaluations on mangrove areas have shown that frequent technical 
support leads to sustainable change in behavior and practices in local communities to change behavior and 
practices. The Estuary Coordinator will ensure effective liaison and coordination with local stakeholders and 
local government, Component Leads, the PMU, and the other EFUs in implementation of the project activities, 
and the supporting staff  will support implementation of Conservation and Stewardship Agreements with fishing 
associations and in -kind grants to local NGOs and universities.


---
*Page 54*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
  
 
Figure 10. Project Governance  
Subgrantee Organizations  
173. CI will provide GCF funding to several sub- grantee organizations to implement certain project activities or sub -
activities (see Annex 23 ). CI will enter into a grant agreement compliant with GCF requirements with each of 
the sub- grantees. CI Ecuador will manage and monitor these subgrants, will approve grantees’ annual 
workplans and budgets, and will have ultimate approval authority over t heir activities.  The resources will be 
granted based on selection criteria included Appendix 5 in Annex 2.   
 
174. PUCESE will execute activities under Component 1 in the two northern estuaries in the project: Cayapas Mataje 
and Muisne Cojimies. PUCESE has prior experience working with local communities and local associations that 
depend on mangrove resources as well as developing research on mangroves and climate change. PUCESE 
is based close to the project area and has opened a new campus near the target Cayapas Mataje estuary. CI 
will enter into a cash grant agreement with PUCESE for the implementation of its designated activities in Component 1. CI Ecuador will apply risk mitigation measures and manage and monitor in- kind sub- grants to 
ensure that goods are used in a manner consistent with CI and GCF policies, including safeguards and prohibited practices.  
 175. FIAS manages  the Socio Manglar  subaccount of the existing Socio Bosque Fund. U nder Output 2.2. , CI will 
provide a $4 million grant to FIAS  that FIAS will hold in an interest -bearing account and use the interest 
generated to pay for  community incentive payment s under the Socio Manglar program. FIAS  is a private, non-
profit entity that has a track record of the management, mobilization, investment and implementation of public and private funds to finance conservation of natural resources and biodiversity, mitigation and adaptation to 
climate change and environmental quality, complementing the efforts of the Government of Ecuador. FIAS 
currently has more than US$100 million in five funds under management, with contributions from the 
Government of Ecuador, Germany, Italy and other international sources, including GCF. CI has contributed to 
three FIAS funds to date, including a US$4 million in grant funds for the Ecuador Azul Fund managed by FIAS.  
 
176. CI will also enter into sub -grant agreements with community AUSCEM associations as described under 
Component 1 (selection criteria in Annex 2, Appendix 5) . CI will provide goods via in- kind grants to the 
associations that follow the terms of related conservation agreements between CI and the associations for 
conservation, management and restoration activities as described under Activity 1.1.1. CI will also enter into 
small cash grant agreements with the community associations for the development of enterprises and livelihood 
activities as described under Activity 1.2.2.


---
*Page 55*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 177. CI will enter into sub -grant agreements with local universities  or NGOs  in Ecuador to support data gathering 
related to monitoring on blue carbon, mangrove forest cover and socio- economic impacts of the project. 
Selection criteria for these sub- awardees are included in Appendices 7, 10 and 11 of Annex 2 .  
 
Other Implementation Partners  
178. As described in section B.3, important partners will contribute to the implementation of the project but will not receive GCF resources. CI will coordinate implementation of the project with these Implementation Partners 
(detailed in Annex 23) and will enter into agreements with them as appropriate to ensure clarity of roles and 
responsibilities of each party.  
 
179. CI will work with key government partners, in addition to the NDA. The VMAP will support the CSS initiative in 
Output 2.1 and will support the harmonization of the legal framework under Output 3.2. Provincial, municipal and Parish governments/administrations are key partners who will receive technical assistance to integrate 
climate-change adaptation and mangrove management measures into land- use planning as part of Activity 
3.2.1. The INOCAR, Prosecutor’s Office, and Judiciary Council will participate in training and capacity building 
under Activity 3.2.2.  
  
 
180. Partners from the private sector will contribute to and support activities in Component 2, including the NCA , 
ASC, financial institutions, and the eco.business Fund.  
 
 
Figure 11: Project implementation arrangements and financial flows by Component  
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
181. Public and private funding for the activities proposed in this project are limited and insufficient to tackle the 
ongoing challenge of mangrove deforestation and restoration at the scale required. GCF funding is necessary to implement the project and catal yze change. Project beneficiaries are among the most vulnerable populations 
in Ecuador, with direct exposure to heightened flood risks and livelihood disruptions associated with climate 
change compounded by low adaptive capacity due to poverty.  
 
182. Grant funding is warranted to create the enabling conditions for sustained capacity and investment. The 
important ecosystem services that mangroves provide are not currently adequately valued by public and private 
sector actors and receive limited investme nt. In particular, mangroves have proven effectiveness in reducing


---
*Page 56*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 escalating coastal flood risks due to climate change and they are among the world’s most valuable ecosystems 
for mitigating GHG  emissions, especially through the accumulation of carbon in soil as organic matter.  
 
183. Gaps in the generation and dissemination of data regarding climate change scenarios and mangrove ecosystem 
services for adaptation in coastal Ecuador have resulted in public entities, particularly subnational governments (provincial, municipal and parishes
), not adequately incorporating climate change risks and the 
protection/restoration of mangroves into investment decisions. Similarly, while the carbon sequestration benefits of mangroves, particularly in soils, are well documented globally, better Ecuador -specific data and monitoring 
protocols to integrate these climate benefits fully into national public investment, mitigation strategies and GHG  
accounting are needed to better mobilize both national and international finance. These gaps have historically led to under -investment in mangrove conservation and restoration in Ecuador, despite the strong public benefits 
of mangroves.  
 184. Private -sector investment in mangroves has also been constrained. Private sector investment would in principle 
be motivated by : i) the potential for private returns; ii) regulatory requirements; and iii) market drivers  (e.g. 
demand for sustainable shrimp) . To date, these factors have had limited effects in driving private investment, 
and the project seeks to address these constraints.  
 
185. Private sector returns from mangrove conservation and restoration have been undervalued, leading in the 
aquaculture sector to extensive production models that have driven approximately half of mangrove 
deforestation in Ecuador historically. There is, howev er, strong potential for key actors to internalize benefits 
through reduced costs and/or increased revenues. Shrimp aquaculture, using CSS models (see section B.3 
and Annex 2 ), can increase yields, profitability and resilience through sustainable intensifi cation, including 
increases in on- farm mangrove areas, requiring a shift away from Ecuador’s traditional, extensive methods of 
shrimp aquaculture. Shifting a critical mass of early movers to CSS will leverage additional private finance and drive a broader sector -wide change in practice.  
 
186. For community associations linked to protection of mangroves, reinforcing and expanding enterprises and 
revenue streams such as crab and shellfish fisheries or ecotourism also provide a way to internalize the returns 
of their mangrove conservation commitments under stewardship agreements (AUSCEM, see section B.3 and 
Annex 2). Currently, these livelihoods and income generating activities are not optimized, limiting the scale and 
effectiveness of these conservation strategies.  
 
187. Regulatory requirements have contributed to reversing Ecuador’s mangrove deforestation trends, but gross deforestation continues due to insufficient investment in enforcement and oversight, while market signals, 
especially from international demand for mor
e sustainable products in shrimp markets, are rapidly 
strengthening.  
 
188. Motivating private sector investment, which has to date been marginal for mangrove conservation/restoration 
requires better alignment of the potential for private benefits and regulatory frameworks and incentives that recognize the public benefits and externalities of mangroves. By generating and providing data, facilitating 
technical support and building the capacity of both the public and private sectors, the project will support long-
term integration into policy and institutional frameworks governing mangroves as well as strengthening the 
financial mechanisms for stable investment flows.  
 
189. The project objectives align well with GCF’s function as demonstrated by its contribution to three of GCF’s 
priority results areas (forestry and land- use, most vulnerable people and communities and ecosystems and 
ecosystem services) and the significant GHG  emissions reductions and adaptation benefits it will provide. Given 
the existing challenges for Ecuador’s government budget, which have been exacerbated by the economic 
impacts of Covid, significant national public funding for the project is not realistic . Nevertheless, the project will 
benefit from some government co- financing for support to community mangrove conservation. The project 
provides an important opportunity to catalyze current interest in improving sustainability within the shrimp 
farming industry such that it adopts a pathway towards zero mangrove deforestation and mangrove restoration, 
which will provide important climate change mitigation and coastal flood protection benefits. Further, there is a 
substantial unrealized but demonstrated oppor tunity to protect mangroves through community conservation,  
which would strengthen protection of existing areas and provide opportunities for restoration while also creating new economic opportunities for some of Ecuador’s poorest and most vulnerable coastal communities. However, to capitalize on these opportuniti es, grant funding is critical to overcome the barriers to mangrove conservation 
and restoration.  CI has raised funding for successful pilot projects on community conservation and promoting


---
*Page 57*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 climate -smart shrimp, but these are insufficient to tackle the issues for mangroves at the scale required. GCF 
funding for this project would not be duplicating work supported by other donors.   
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
[See Annex 2, Feasibility Study  for more details.]  
 
190. Project investments will drive  a paradigm shift in the institutional, organizational and financial frameworks 
governing mangroves as a climate- change adaptation and mitigation tool, by the private and public sector. The 
project includes various activities  that build sustainability , outlined below by component .  
 
Project Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate- adapted management increased, 
including through community -based management (AUSCEMs) and PAs  implementing climate adaptation 
plans.  
191. Project investments in strengthening the management of AUSCEMs and PAs , expanding their coverage, and 
explicitly incorporating climate risks and benefits into management will consolidate a foundation that will be 
institutionalized and extend beyond the project lifespan . 
 
192. AUSCEMs and Socio Manglar  agreements create legally binding terms and agreements for community -based 
mangrove conservation and incentives for up to two decades. Project investments will support training, planning 
and administrative support to overcome initial establishment costs for agreements and thus scale up long-lasting coverage of these programs.  
 
193. AUSCEMs establish (renewable) ten- year commitments from communities  (with contracts established 
voluntarily and with mutual consent, between the government and community beneficiaries) to conserve and 
sustainably manage mangroves, recognized and enforced by the environmental authority. Areas restored to 
mangroves under this component will be within AUSCEMs or within formal PAs to ensure continued protection 
of these areas beyond project implementation. The project design assumes that the Government of Ecuador 
will continue to use AUSCEMs as a mechanism for engaging communities in mangrove conservation and sustainable management.   
 
194. The project will expand the coverage of  Socio Manglar  agreements to cover an additional 20,000 ha. These 
Socio Manglar  agreements embody a 10- year renewable commitment on the part of the Government of Ecuador 
to sustain these areas and benefits , while including additional legal provisions in their contracts beyond the 
terms of AUSCEMs , including financial planning, accounting, tax obligations and reporting to the environmental 
authority and to the members . As noted in the project Theory of Change, an import ant assumption of the project 
is that the government continues to be committed to the use of AUSCEMs and Socio Manglar  agreements.  
 
195. The project also includes incorporating climate adaptation into the strategies of government -run mangrov e-
dominated Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). By integrating these strategies into the management plans of these 
MPAs, any long- term costs associated with them will be integrated into the regular MPA budgets. Ecuador’s 
MPAs already have consistent funding annually from the government but there are also additional ongoing actions to increase the sustainability of funding for the MPAs through two dedicated trust funds . This work on 
MPA sustainable funding is not directly part of this GCF project but will contribute to the long- term sustainability 
of the GCF investments.  
 
196. Legal commitments and financial commitments will contribute to reinforcing a solid foundation of grassroots 
capacity built by the project. Social capital and local livelihoods require legal and financial instruments, and vice 
versa. Mangrove- based associat ions already have a strong predisposition and interest in mangrove 
conservation, driving the signing of AUSCEM agreements covering 60,000 ha to date. By investing in organizational and planning capacity across 60 associations with AUSCEMs, the project will  strengthen human 
capacity of these local organizations and PA staff to value benefits of mangroves, including climate resilience, 
based on a participatory, gender -sensitive approach. Further reinforcing local commitments to mangrove 
management, local enterprises will perceive increased economic benefits through the implementation of 
business plans and strategies that are economically viable and have continuity after the project ends .


---
*Page 58*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
  
53 https://www.climatefinancelab.org/ideas/climate- smart -shrimp -fund/   
54 For more information on markets of certified shrimp, see  FS section 4.6.1.3 and  From Company Commitments to 
Collective Global Action: What’s Next for our Sustainable Seafood Strategy • The David and Lucile Packard Foundation  Project Component 2: The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG 
emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate 
resilience for other coastal populations.  
197. Long- term sustainability is the underlying rationale for this project outcome. By recognizing and internalizing 
the value of mangrove conservation and restoration in private- sector practices and investment decisions, the 
project will lay the foundation for  ongoing action.  
 
198. In the shrimp aquaculture sector, shifting a significant proportion of production area to climate- smart practices 
will lead to on -farm improvements in mangrove conservation and other climate- related practices over 20,000 
ha of aquaculture. By linking these actions by early adopters to public -private dialogue and market engagement, 
the project aims to shift policies, commercial strategies and common practice broadly across the sector, positioning Ecuador ’s shrimp sector internationally and driving demand and therefore further adoption of 
ASC/SSP certification and CSS practices. Once established as common, profitable practices and demand 
grows, any ongoing investment to maintain ASC/SSP certification status and CSS practices is expected to come 
from the companies themselves, either through self -financing made possible by enhanced profitability or from 
private financial institutions  (see activity 2.1.2) . In addition, in parallel with this project, CI is working with partners 
to establish a Climate Smart Shrimp F und
53 that will create a track record of successful CSS loans (as defined 
by loan repayment at commercial rates, farm profitability, and mangrove restoration) to demonstrate 
attractiveness to local financial institutions.  
 199. The CSS Fund is being developed as a blended finance vehicle, with approximately 30% concessional finance 
and 70% commercial finance. The fund's long- term goal is to make the case to local financial institutions that 
they can and should make CSS loans. Although the CSS Fund is not being developed as part of this GCF -
funded project, it will contribute to the sustainability of the work being supported by GCF.  Should the CSS Fund 
be fully capitalized during project implemen tation, this funding will be consider ed parallel financing.  
 
200. Certification schemes are designed to reward responsible farming practices. Globally, buyers in major markets 
are making strong commitments to purchase farmed seafood products from certified sources and ASC is a 
recognized leader in seafood certification. This growing demand provides the incentive needed for shrimp farms to invest in more sustainable practices and to undergo the assessments necessary to obtain certification. The 
project will remove the knowledge barriers that are currently blocking more widespread participation in 
certification and by the end of the project there will be more examples of small - and medium- sized  farms that 
have obtained private financing that will serve as examples for the industry and for the financial institutions that 
invest. The market -based incentives created by certification, and the influence of best practice among early 
adopters, combined  with improved regulation (through the activities of Component 3) should mean that more 
attention is paid to environmental concerns i ncluding ensuring no further clearing of mangrove beyond the 
projec t. Price premiums for certified shrimp can be elusive. Instead, market access via preferential sourcing is 
a common incentive for farms to attain certification
54. The project will support farmers to access these markets.  
 
201. The project will expand a dedicated long- term finance mechanism to assure continuity of resources for the  
Socio Manglar  incentive  payments to communities managing mangroves , and leverage commitments from the 
Government of Ecuador, which will provide US$ 449,000 per year for these incentives  as cofinance . The project 
will contribute to capitalizing the Socio Manglar  subaccount of the existing and highly successful Socio Bosque 
Fund. Four million dollars (US$4  million ) of GCF funding is requested to increase the capital of the Socio 
Manglar  subaccount, which will leverage additional private investment including from companies involved in 
shrimp aquaculture and Ecuador’s PECC . The GCF contribution of $4 million will be held in an interest -bearing 
bank account while funds from other contributors will be held in an investment account and  invested in 
accordance with the investment policy of FIAS.  Projections for the growth of the capitalization and use of the 
subaccount are provided in Appendix 12 of Annex 2 . By clearly demonstrating and documenting emissions 
mitigation benefits , the project will also contribute to creating the necessary conditions for results -based 
payments ( RBPs) for mangrove conservation in the long -term.


---
*Page 59*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
  Project Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation 
and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, 
coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.  
202. Sustainability and long- term permanence of improvements to policies and public institutions will be ensured by 
a combination of legal/regulatory instruments and institutional capacity.  
 
203. A key set of outputs of this Component  relate to the inclusive development of policy, planning and legal 
instruments that will govern management, enforcement and government budget allocations. These instruments will extend beyond the end of GCF funding and will include instruments at various l evels:  
• GADs will have codified mangrove conservation and climate considerations in local development plans, 
regulations and policy frameworks ( e.g. municipal ordinances, budgets, PDOTs, COA, integrated coastal 
development plans), ensuring the basis for long- term application of these regulatory instruments guiding 
development and public investment.  
• Harmonized public policy instruments for the management of the mangrove ecosystem ( e.g., procedures 
for assuring transparency in regulation, decision making and enforcement action, inter -agency 
cooperation for establishing technical standards ). 
• Improvements in procedures at MAATE for reception and processing of complaints, enforcement and 
sanctions, reflected in regulatory reforms formally adopted by the Ministry and/or other public entities.  
 
204. In addition, capacity building for national and regional institutions will help ensure that institutions can continue 
to monitor the effectiveness and sustainability of their actions after project completion and improve their effectiveness. Key partners in project implementation have been, and will be, involved in all aspects of project 
design and execution to ensure that they can sustain these activities after the GCF funding concludes.  For 
example, f orest monitorin g data,  specific to mangroves, including robust accounting of soil organic carbon, will 
be generated by the project with the aim of including a robust set of data and methodologies for inclusion by 
Ecuador´s MAATE in the national Forest Reference Emissions Level (FREL). By incorporating this very 
significant carbon pool and sequestration into national monitoring, Ecuador will be able to provide a more comprehensive accounting of emissions and reductions as well as potentially mobilizing additional carbon 
finance.  Also, institutionalization of training programs, curricula and materials developed by the project will 
provide the basis for ongoing replication by MAATE and the Judicial Branch after the project concludes.


---
*Page 60*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
   
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) Total amount Currency  
36.4 million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial 
instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans      
(ii) Subordinated  
loans      
(iii) Equity      
(iv) Guarantees      
(v) Reimbursable 
grants      
(vi) Grants  36.4    
(vii) Results -based 
payments      
(b) Co-financing 
information55 Total amount  Currency  
9.5 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrumen
t Amoun
t Currency  Tenor  & grace  Pricing  Seniority  
MAATE  Grant  
 2.7 million USD ($)      
 
MAATE  In kind  
 1.4 million USD ($)      
 
CI  In kind  
 5.5 million USD ($)     
Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount Currency  
45.9 million USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and contributions 
(max. 250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
page)  In addition to the co -financing committed for the project, other contributions can be considered 
parallel finance complementing the project. Prior to implementation of the Project, t he ASC 
provided US $50,000 and CI Ecuador provided US$ 100,000 in 2021 to establish the  Socio Manglar  
subaccount  of the Socio Bosque Fund in preparation for the project . During project 
implementation, the ASC  will request that its members contribute to the Socio Manglar  subaccount 
(support for Activity 1.2.2).  CI also expects that shrimp farms will seek an estimated US$ 5 million  
in financing from various financial institutions for investments in CSS (see Activity 2.1.2).  During 
implementation, CI will make efforts to track such parallel financing for final project reporting as 
detailed in the GCF Policy on Co- financing.  
C.2. Financing by component   
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost56 
million 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
 
55 Please see Annex 4 for details on co- finance.  
56 Columns may not add up to the total amounts due to rounding. Please see Annex 4 Detailed Budget Plan for exact figures.


---
*Page 61*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 Component 1: 
Mangrove areas 
under effective 
and climate-
adapted management increased, 
including through 
community -
based 
management (AUSCEMs) and protected areas implementing climate 
adaptation plans.  Output 1.1: 
Reduced exposure 
to flood risk for 
vulnerable people and reduced GHG emissions from 
mangrove 
restoration are 
achieved by 
strengthening 
community -based 
management 
through AUSCEMs 
and protected 
areas.
 22.4 16.3 Grants  2.7 
 
  
0.9 
 
 
2.5 Grants  
   
In-Kind  
 
 
In-Kind  Government 
of Ecuador 
(MAATE)  
 
Government 
of Ecuador 
(MAATE)  
 
CI 
Output 1.2: 
Improved livelihood 
activities and more economically 
productive 
community 
businesses enable local people to become more resilient to climate change and incentivized to participate in, and maintain, 
mangrove 
conservation and 
restoration.  3.3 2.9 Grants  0.4  In-Kind  CI  
Component 2: 
The private 
sector becomes 
a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal 
populations.  Output 2.1: Shrimp 
aquaculture farms 
adopt practices 
and production 
standards that 
require elimination of deforestation and active reforestation in coastal and 
mangrove areas
. 4.0 3.5 Grants  0.5 In-Kind  CI 
Output 2.2: 
Sustainable management of mangroves improved through agreements with the private sector, including direct financial support 
for mangrove 
conservation and 
restoration.   6.2 5.4 Grants  0.8 In-Kind  CI 
Component 3: 
Create the 
enabling conditions for 
sustaining Output 3.1: 
Decision making for mangrove management by 
national 2.5 2.2 Grants  0.3 In-kind CI


---
*Page 62*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 reductions in 
mangrove 
deforestation 
and increased 
mangrove 
restoration by 
strengthening 
governance, 
climate change 
adaptation 
strategies, 
coastal 
management 
policies, and 
legal 
enforcement.  government 
agencies and local 
governments is 
based on 
generation and 
provision of 
accurate and up-to -
date data on 
mangrove 
condition and 
socio -economic 
information on mangrove 
dependent 
communities.  
Output 3.2: Legal 
and regulatory 
frameworks at local 
and sectoral level 
are harmonized 
and include climate 
resilience and 
mitigation strategies and 
enforcement.  3.8 3.3 Grants  0.5 In-kind CI 
M&E M&E 1.2 1.1 Grants  0.2 In-kind CI 
PMC  PMC  
2.5 1.7 Grants  0.5 
 
 
0.2 In-kind 
 
 
In-kind Government 
of Ecuador 
(MAATE)  
 
CI 
Indicative total cost  (USD)  45.9 36.4 9.5 
 
GCF Funding is requested for all Project Activities. In addition, co- financing will be provided by the Government of 
Ecuador, through MAATE , and CI. MAATE will provide in- kind staff time and associated operational cost to support work 
under Output 1.1 (see paragraphs 113 and 184). Staff time will include MAATE specialists in climate change, sustainable 
production and development, forestry direction, and PAs as well as regional personnel. Operational cost s associated 
with th e staff costs (e.g., rent, communications, services, supplies and maintenance) will also be provided in- kind. 
MAATE will also provide in -kind staff time and associated operat ional costs to support its PMC -related activities.  MAATE 
will also provide grant funding in the form of direct incentive payments to beneficiaries for the Socio Manglar program 
contributing to A1.1.1 impacts.  
 
CI will provide in- kind financing of indirect costs that are not eligible for GCF financing to support all components of this 
project (see Annex 14 for details) .  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Capacity building is a cross -cutting element of this project across outcomes and with multiple stakeholder groups.  
 
Communities: AUSCEM communities will receive training, technical assistance and financial support to better conserve 
mangroves and their vital ecosystem services for both climate change mitigation and adaptation. This capacity building 
also includes the strengthening o f mangrove community associations’ micro - and small -sized enterprises, with an


---
*Page 63*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
   
 emphasis on women, youth and other vulnerable groups (Activities 1.1.1 and Output 1.2; GCF funding requested 
US$561,675)  
 
Shrimp famers: Increasing the technical capacity of small - and medium- sized shrimp farmers to drive adoption of 
climate -smart practices (Project Output 2.1; GCF funding requested US$289,390)  is key to the success of the project.   
Government:  
• MAATE’s capacities for planning and implementation of activities that improve climate resilience and mangrove 
conservation in PAs  will also be improved (Activity 1.1.2; GCF funding requested US$82,266);  
• National entities ( MAATE, judiciary) will attend training and technical assistance for complaints, enforcement 
and sanctions for infractions affecting mangroves ( Activity 3.2.2; GCF funding requested US$230,774).  
• Government entities will have the capacity to generate and incorporate improved mangrove forest cover and 
carbon stock data for planning, policies, investments and enforcement through training and basic equipment 
(Activity 3.1.1; GCF funding requested US$12,058);  
• Local and provincial governments (GADs) will have the capacity  to develop, update and/or adopt zoning and 
development plans including criteria and indicators relating to mangrove protection, climate change mitigation 
or adaptation ( Activity 3.2.1; GCF funding requested US$39,884) ;  
Local NGOs and universities:  The Project will also support the capacity building of partners that need to enforce their 
operation practices through Enforcement Plans to subgrantees. There will be a technology transfer in restoration 
practices with green- gray practices in Ecuador through the trainings provided to shrimp farmers and promotion of the 
CSS concept (Project Output 2.1).


---
*Page 64*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 57 
   
  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1  page ) 
 
205. The project will provide both adaptation and mitigation benefits. The direct adaptation benefits come from 
reduced flooding risk of vulnerable people and project activities that are expected to increase people’s 
resilienc e through livelihood benefits associated with better mangrove management. The mitigation 
benefits come from a combination of reduced emissions by reducing mangrove deforestation and from 
carbon sequestration in areas of restored mangroves.  
 
206. Eight priority municipalities , with a population of 3.4 million , were selected based on mangrove cover and 
population at risk of flooding related to climate change (see B.1.1.4).  Flood risk modelling including the 
effect of mangrove cover to reduce risk was used to estimate flood risk beneficiaries and expected reduced 
losses of economic assets  (see Annex 25).  Based on the modelling, the  flood  risk for 8 9,600 people can 
be mitigated by reducing mangrove loss and enhancing mangrove restoration efforts to increase the rate 
of mangrove recovery as compared to baseline rates. The population at risk is likely to increase as 
population grow s, however we conservatively assume benefits for the 89,600 people as modelling 
population growth and m igratio n introduces great uncertainty into the estimations  (See Annex 25 for details 
of Adaptation beneficiaries ). 
 
Adaptation Impacts  
Impact Indicator   Value  Data and assumptions  
Change in expected losses of 
economic assets due to the impact 
of extreme climate- related 
disasters  in the geographic area of 
the GCF intervention (US$)  – 
ARA1 Most vulnerable people and 
communities  US$ 280 million per year in 
avoided losses of economic 
assets  due to the flood 
protection benefits of 
mangroves  During project implementation period.  
Based on US$1, 600 in avoided property 
damage/ha/y of additional mangrove by 
comparison to the baseline.  
Direct and Indirect b eneficiaries  
reached (ARA 1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities )  89,600 direct beneficiaries  of 
flood protection benefits.  
 
 
3.4 million indirect 
beneficiaries  of improved 
planning processes in 
mangrove- rich municipalities  People at high annual risk of flooding 
benefit  from enhanced mangrove 
coverage and management . See Annex 
25  
 
People living in municipalities with high 
mangrove coverage to benefit from 
improved land- use planning.   
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or new 
climate resilient livelihood options 
– ARA 1 Most vulnerable people 
and communities  41,500  people (50% female , 
50% male) with diversified 
climate -resilient livelihoods,  
and/or  reduced flood risk  Includes t otal population expected to 
benefit from AUSCEM s, including 
support to livelihood activities in 
Component 1. These beneficiaries are 
also expected to benefit from flood 
protection benefits and are therefore not 
double counted in the estimation of total 
project direct beneficiaries.  
Hectares of terrestrial non-forest , 
freshwater  and coastal -marine 
areas brought under restoration 
and/or improved ecosystems (ha) 156,633  ha of mangrove 
protected and strengthened  Includes all of Ecuador’s mangroves. 
Although project activities are directly 
focused on four estuaries  (including 
96% of Ecuador’s mangroves) , the 
enabling conditions activities


---
*Page 65*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 58 
   
 – ARA 4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services (component 3) are expected to 
strengthen mangrove management 
nationally.   
Includes areas in PAs, AUSCEMs 
(existing and additional), and shrimp 
farms as well as currently unprotected 
areas that will be protected through 
improved planning and enforcement at 
diverse levels of government.  
 
Mitigation Impacts  
• GHG emissions from gross deforestation under the baseline scenario are projected to be 2,428,986 tCO 2e 
over the project implementation period and 1 1,062,246  tCO 2e over 20 years.  
• Reductions in GHG emissions from reducing deforestation due to project interventions relative to this 
baseline scenario are projected to be 567,404  tCO 2e over the project period and 3,566,685  tCO 2e over 
20 years.  
• In addition, removals of GHG emissions from project reforestation activities are projected to be 164,707 
tCO 2e over the project implementation and 1,042,785  tCO 2e over 20 years.  
• Total net GHG reductions, from avoided deforestation and mangrove restoration are projected to be 
732,111 tCO 2e over the project implementation period and 4,609,470 tCO 2e over 20 years.  
• A detailed description of methods and data is included in Annex 2 2 along with an Excel workbook  with 
the calculations  of GHG emission reductions, including all assumptions and equations used, to enable a 
technical assessment to retrace the calculations.  
• Estimates will be refined through on- the-ground measurements during project implementation.  
 
Impact Indicator  Value  Data and assumptions  
Tonnes of GHG emissions  (tCO 2e) 
reduced,  avoided  or 
removed/sequestered – MRA4  
Forest s and land use 732,111 tCO 2e reduced during 
project implementation period  
4,609,470 tCO 2e reduced over 
20 years  See above and spreadsheet in Appendix 
22. 
Includes sequestration from mangrove 
restoration.  
 
207. In addition to the project’s contributions towards advancing national climate change adaption and mitigation 
plans, the project will also contribute to the aims of the GMA57, which brings together a global community of 
practitioners to halt mangrove loss, restore lost mangroves and secure mangrove protection. CI is a founding 
member along with other international organizations and the project will contribute in two ways to the GMA’s 
work.  
 
208. The first relates to ongoing knowledge sharing of GMA, especially related to mangrove restoration and “blue 
carbon” information. One of the functions of GMA is as a knowledge hub to share information between 
practitioners engaged in mangrove conservation and restoration. The mangrove restoration approach is 
informed by GMA toolkits and best practice guides. Data collected under activity 3.1.1 will also be shared 
with the GMA as a matter of course (through the Mangrove Restoration Tracker Tool and Global Mangrove 
Watch).  
 
209. Second, the project itself makes an important contribution to the ‘Mangrove Breakthrough’, an initiative 
launched by the GMA and the UN Climate Change high level Champions during the UNFCCC COP27. This 
high-level initiative aims to secure the future of 15 million hectares of mangroves globally (through 
conservation, restoration and securing long- term financing of mangrove protection). This project alone 
represents about 1% of this goal.  
 
 
57 https://www.mangrovealliance.org/


---
*Page 66*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 59 
   
 D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max.  500 words, approximately  1 page)  
210. This project will drive a paradigm shift in the way that Ecuador values and benefits from critical natural 
infrastructure that protect s coastal people and assets from flooding.  By fully valuing the adaptation and 
mitigation benefits of mangrove ecosystems and integrating these into governance and economic 
frameworks across Ecuador’s coastal region, the project presents an innovative approach to the goals of 
reducing GHG emissions  and improving the livelihoods of some of the country's most vulnerable people. 
The current paradigm undervalues both climate risks and the ecosystem services provided by mangroves, 
particularly with regards to climate change adaptation and mitigation. Under the current paradigm, exposure 
to climate risk and GHG  emissions are both augmented by lack of sufficient government, private sector and 
civil society action. This situation is due to lack of adequate information, institutional coordination, 
empowerment of local stakeholders, and mobilization of private sector investment.  
 
211. The combination of bolstering public sector frameworks and capacity, catalyzing public -private partnerships 
and private investment and strengthening local community participation and economic benefits, with a focus 
on the ‘green infrastructure’ that mangroves provide is an innovative and cost -effective approach with strong 
potential for scaling up and replication. Successful approaches will be sustained by local communities and 
government entities over time and the project will create lessons, guidance and tools for application in other 
countries with communities living in coastal areas threatened by climate change.  
 
212. Across all activities, the project will engage in comprehensive monitoring and reporting with the aim of 
strengthening learning and knowledge sharing. The project aims to carry out two comprehensive 
evaluations: at the  project mid- term and at the final evaluation of the project. Each exercise will include the 
identification of lessons learned and their dissemination.  
 
213. Complementing the strong focus on local action, community participation, gender equity and private sector 
engagement, the project will consistently work to integrate these into a strong enabling environment and 
policy framework. This enabling environment i ncludes the strengthening of regulatory and policy frameworks 
at the national and subnational level, as well as creating mechanisms and successful ongoing processes for 
dialogue and collaboration across sectors.  
 
214. The project includes a series of capacity building packages for local communities to strengthen their ability 
to participate in innovative business models, as well as to engage more closely in the land use planning 
process with local government. Building c onsensus among key stakeholders, including government, 
community groups, and private sector actors, is a difficult task, largely neglected because of its high 
transaction costs. However, many experiences confirm that sharing a common vision is a very effic ient and 
effective mechanism through which to achieve social objectives. The project approach is to develop a 
pragmatic mechanism through which consensus can be reached on the operational management of 
mangroves. The project has selected several planning t ools to be formulated through a transparent and 
open participatory process, guided by the entity responsible for their promulgation and facilitated through 
the project. Technical assistance, training, logistical support, and coordination are the responsibi lities of the 
project, along with the facilitation process to allow all stakeholders to express their views, expectations, and 
contributions, and to reach agreements for the benefit of all. It is expected that after several similar 
participatory processes,  community leaders, public officials, and private sector leaders will learn that such 
an approach is valid and worthwhile, despite the additional initial transaction costs, and that reaching 
agreements is an effective means of managing relationships with other stakeholders.  
 
215. The project will strengthen the participation of the private sector through its support to the definition of clear 
land use plans and the adoption of climate- smart practices, especially conservation and restoration of 
mangroves.  
  
216. The project involves the scaling up and consolidation of activities that have successfully been used to 
conserve and restore mangroves  in Ecuador. The area where the project is located lacks the most basic 
land-use planning instruments that could guide the sustainable use of natural resources. These instruments 
will be built jointly between the local communities and the local government as a first step to ensure the 
long-term sustainable development of the provinces involved. The project will facilitate par ticipatory, open 
and transparent planning processes. In addition, the participatory process for land use planning will be 
closely documented and the lessons from this experience will be shared with the national government. 
Legal and regulatory adjustments,  as needed for effective planning, will be recommended through technical 
documents.


---
*Page 67*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Environmental co -benefits  
217. The project will reduce deforestation, increase restoration and enhance management across Ecuador’s 
entire mangrove area of 156,633 ha .   
 
218. In addition to the mitigation and flood- risk abatement benefits highlighted under GCF’s reporting framework 
(D.1), mangroves provide significant additional ecosystem services including biodiversity conservation and 
habitats for fishery  nursing grounds. Ecuadorian mangroves are home to 179 plant species (Cornejo, 2014) 
and constitute important nesting grounds for numerous bird species. Mangroves are also an important 
habitat for spawning, breeding and nurseries of commercial and non- commercial fish species. The 
structural complexity and ecological conditions of mangroves provide both protection from predators and 
abundant food resources due to the high primary productivity of this ecosystem (Huxham et al., 2004, 
Mirera et al., 2010, Shinnaka et al ., 2007, Wang et al ., 2009). Globally, secondary production of fish is 1-
11.8 t/ha/y (Mirera, Kairo, and Waweru, 2010). Fisheries production dependent on mangroves alone has 
been estimated to be US$100- 21,000/ha/y (Spalding et al , 2010). According to UNEP (2014), the full range 
of ecosystem services are worth an average US$33,000 to US$ 57,000/ha/yr to the national economies of 
developing countries with mangroves ( UNEP, 2014). A more recent review of 250 studies around the world 
that have estimate d the biodiversity and ecosystem service value of one hectare of mangrove reported an 
average value of US$21,100 ha/yr  in 2018 prices (Getzner et al., 2020) . Irrespective of valuation methods 
used, the importance of mangrove fisheries as a food source for local communities is widely recognized.  
 
Social co -benefits including health impacts  
219. In addition to the reduction of flood risks , the project will result in additional co- benefits, especially for 
mangrove- dependent communities and associations:  
• Improved social cohesion and organizational capacity for mangrove management by 60 associations 
will lead to enhanced ability to engage with government stakeholders, resolve internal conflicts and 
develop additional community activities.  
• Improved mangrove management and plans are likely to integrate other social and environmental 
considerations with benefits for human health and wellbeing including water management and waste 
disposal . 
• Improvements in control of illegal activities in mangrove areas, in partnership between community -
based associations and government authorities will also generate collateral benefits in enhancing 
local security.  
Economic co -benefits  
220. Mangrove conservation and restoration is a r elatively low -cost solution for climate change adaptation that 
will generate economic benefits for the government, the private sector, and the communities through the 
avoided cost of the impacts of extreme climate events. The shrimp sector will be able to access new 
markets by producing shrimp more sustainably and bei ng able to brand and market the product 
accordingly, resulting in increased export revenue and employment.  
 
221. Communities will see lower flooding and relocation costs, reduced impacts on infrastructure, housing, 
crops and livelihoods. Livelihood diversification and adaptive fishing techniques will increase the 
resilience, economic stability, and food security of marginalized coastal fishing communities. Mangrove 
ecosystems are the foundation for diversified local economies, with 80% of the human population of the 
mangrove ecosystem dedicated to artisanal fishing, obtaining corvina ( Cynoscion albus ), mullet ( Mugil 
curema), sea catfish ( Arius kesslei ) and grunts ( Anisotremus caesius ), as well as red crab ( Ucides 
occidentalis ) and black clam ( Anadara spp.). Several of these species migrate to the sea and are an 
important contribution to the composition of rich marine fisheries, frequently exploited by the marine fishing 
industry.  
 
Gender -sensitive development impact  
222. The project will contribute directly to increasing the empowerment of women and other vulnerable groups 
in economic activities and advancing their participation and leadership in organizations and enterprises. 
See G.2 and Annex 8 .


---
*Page 68*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
 D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
223. Economic growth in Ecuador has directly reduced poverty and inequality levels and increased the size of 
the middle class. Between 2007 and 2018, poverty decreased from 36.7% to 23.2%, while extreme poverty 
decreased from 16.5% to 8.4%. Similarly, inequalit y as measured by the GINI Coefficient has fallen from 
0.55 in 2007 to 0.47 in 2018.  
 
224. However, the economy is still heavily dependent on the oil sector, a vulnerability demonstrated in recent 
years during periods of low  oil prices and the appreciation of the US dollar. The reduction of this 
dependency has been part of the national strategies implemented by the central government.  
 
225. With more than 3,630 km of coastline, approximately 54% of Ecuador's population of 17 million people lives 
in Ecuador's five coastal provinces. These areas are particularly vulnerable to SLR and the associated risks 
of saltwater intrusion and storm surges, flooding and storms.  
 
226. These trends put coastal areas in Ecuador at particular  risk. With 45% of the population below the extreme 
poverty line in the project area, the poverty rate in coastal areas is well above the national average. An 
increasing number of predominantly poor and vulnerable people in the coastal areas live in unsafe housing, 
in part due to rapid urbanization and persistent poverty.  
 
227. Beyond the basic challenges of coastal development, the risks of climate change are placing additional 
stresses on the Government of Ecuador's efforts to achieve sustainable development. Despite the high 
level of exposure and vulnerability of the country's  coasts, there is no integrated plan for the protection of 
mangroves and wetlands to address the combined future impact of sea level rise and intensified storms.  
 
228. The project addresses the needs of the government of Ecuador, coastal communities, and important 
economic sectors such as the shrimp and fisheries sector to address the risks and impacts of climate 
change as described in the National Climate Change Strategy and the National Climate Change Plan.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
229. The project is fully aligned with national plans to combat climate change and with a set of national policies 
and strategies.  In addition to climate policies, the project is well aligned with a major new initiative 
announced by the Government of Ecuador in March 2023 to protect its entire coastline and marine 
resources within eight nautical miles of the coast. This initiative is in the early stages of design and 
consultation,  but the objective can’t be achieved without protection and sustainable management of the 
country’s rich mangrove resources, which this GCF project will be helping to achieve.   
 
230. The MAATE is the national environmental authority in charge of designing environmental policies and 
coordinating strategies, programs, and projects for the conservation of ecosystems and the sustainable 
use of natural resources. It proposes and defines the rules for environmental q uality, with development 
based on the conservation and adequate use of biodiversity and natural resources. The GCF Focal Point 
(NDA) is part of the MAATE.  
 
231. MAATE has been involved in the whole process of the development of the proposal, including development 
of the PPF application , public consultations and review of drafts of the funding proposal. Several different 
Under -secretari ats of MAATE have been involved, including C limate Change, Natural Heritage and the 
former Coastal and M arine Resources  (now included within Natural Heritage).  
 
232. The protection of mangroves in the context of climate risk management in coastal areas is included as a 
priority in all current Ecuadorian climate policies, strategies and plans : 
• National Climate Change Strategy 2012- 2025: The proposed project directly addresses seven of the 
eight  national climate change priorities . 
• NDC prioritizes addressing the multi -million -dollar cost of extreme climate events and recognizes 
ecosystem conservation measures as important adaptation and mitigation measures . 
• Mangroves are declared as forest and protective vegetation under Ecuadorian law and are an integral 
part of the country's REDD+ efforts .


---
*Page 69*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 62 
   
 • In April 2017, the Organic Environmental Code was published in which there are 10 articles (Art. 99, 
Art. 100, Art. 101, Art. 102, Art. 103, Art. 104, Art. 105, Art. 106, Art. 107, Art. 108) related to the 
conservation of mangroves, among which it is estab lished that mangroves (along with several other 
categories of non- tree vegetation) are part of the National Forest Estate. Conservation of the 
mangrove ecosystem is described according to Art. 99 of Chapter IV, which prohibits its affectation, 
felling, and  change of land use, in accordance with the law, and at the same time strengthens the 
participation of the communities in the care of mangrove ecosystems.  
• The National Adaptation Plan approved i n February 2023 includes mangrove conservation and 
restoration as an adaptation strategy . 
 
233. Ecuador’s NDC does not provide detailed targets but highlights the following relevant mitigation actions 
that the project will contribute to: conservation of natural heritage, strengthening of sustainable forest 
management, strengthening of the restoration of natural heritage, strengthening forest control, and 
strengthening the national system of PAs . The adaptation component of the NDC highlights the importance 
of mangroves and the ecosystem functions that they provide. It identifies increasing the area of  forests and 
coastal ecosystems as a priority action to maintain their ecosystem function in climate change scenarios. 
Further, the implementation of sustainable natural resource use is also highlighted as a priority. Finally, the 
NDC notes as a priority t he ‘creation and strengthening of capacities on climate change and natural heritage 
management in social, academic, research and government sectors .’  
 
234. The implementation plan for the first NDC (2020- 2025) does not cover the proposed project period and an 
implementation plan beyond 2025 has not yet been developed. However, the current 2020- 2025 
implementation plan provides a sense of level of ambition and how the project will contribute to achieving 
NDC goals. The current plan includes a conditional goal of reducing GHG emissions from the Land Use, 
Land- use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector of 62,074,310 MtCO2e. The estimated contribution of this 
project  to that goal would be 732,111 MtCO2e, or 1.2 %, over the project implementation period, rising to 
4,609,470 MtCO2e, or 7.4 %, over the project lifespan. Other goals included in the NDC implementation 
plan to which the project would contribute are: i) Update at least three tools for the management of PAs 
with climate change adaptation criteria ( four updated management plans, including adaptation measures, 
are planned under the project); i) Increase the area under conservation by at least 127,500 ha through 
Socio Bosque incentives to contribute to the maintenance of ecosystem functionality in climate change 
scenarios ( 10,000 new hectares are planned under the project in addition to strengthening management at 
60,000 hectares of existing AUSCEMs with incentive payments); and iii) Deliver at least 30 AUSCEM 
agreements in mangrove areas .  
 
235. Additional frameworks, such as the updated National Climate Change Plan,  are still under development. 
However, it is expected that this document will highlight the importance of coastal ecosystems for mitigation 
and adaptation.  
 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
236. The financial structure of the p roject will ensure efficient use of GCF funds by directing that funding at the 
key barriers that are currently hindering progress to reduce mangrove deforestation and by encouraging 
mangrove restoration efforts. The majority of the project funding is directed towards c ommunity -based and 
public sector actions to strengthen mangrove conservation and restoration. The approximately  11% of GCF 
funding used for activities with the private sector  (i.e., Output 2.1)  is aimed at small - and medium- sized 
shrimp producers to provide training,  promote the use of certification standards and to facilitate the access 
to credit that these farmers need to invest in the CSS model and/or achieve certification SSP/ASC 
standards. Investment  on shrimp farms to implement more sustainable production methods will be financed 
by the private sector  and not using GCF funds.  The GCF funds directed towards supporting the private 
sector (~US$3.1 million ) are expected to result in approximately US$5 million investment by the private 
sector in climate -smart  shrimp production methods and certification. Further uptake of these models 
beyond the project implementation period is expected  once these models are broadly recognized by the 
industry to increase profitability and resilience as noted in section B5.  
 
237. The overall efficiency of the Project with regards to expected mitigation benefits is extremely high with a 
projected 4.6 MtCO 2e of GHG emissions reduced and sequestered over the project lifespan , equivalent to


---
*Page 70*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 63 
   
 a cost of US$10 per tCO 2e, which is in the typical range for avoided deforestation type mitigation projects. 
In addition, the project will be bringing multiple adaptation benefits to a wide range of people, including 
direct expected livelihood benefits for 41,500 people and reduced risk of flooding for  89,600 people. We 
conservatively assume that the 41,500 people will also be beneficiaries of flood protection and therefore 
use the figure of 89,600 people as the total direct beneficiaries for the p roject  (i.e. we do not sum these two 
figures together to get the overall number of beneficiaries) , which equates to a cost of US $512 per person  
over the six -year implementation period.  
 
238. Grant funding is appropriate for the project because its primary goal s are to secure public goods, in the 
form of the ecosystem services that mangroves provide to achieve mitigation and adaptation benefits . Most 
of the population that will benefit is defined as poor based on Ecuador’s unmet needs index  and the direct 
activities to improve livelihoods are directed at poor communities that can play an essential role in improving 
mangrove management. The part of the p roject targeted at the private sector is designed to enable 
increased private sector investment in climate- smart  practices by addressing barriers related to lack of 
knowledge and targeted support for the development of investment plans needed for unlocking further 
private sector investment.  
 
239. An Economic Analysis for the Project is provided as Annex 3a (model in Excel) and 3b (narrative) and 
demonstrates the important economic value of the p roject . A Financial Analysis has not been included 
because it is less meaningful for this project since its objective is to secure public goods and services rather 
than generate a financial return.  Based on the economic analysis assumptions, which were chosen to be 
conservative, the economic Net Present Value (NPV)  of the p roject over the 20 years  and applying a 6% 
discount rate is US $158 million more than the NPV for the ‘ without project ’ scenario . The estimated 
economic benefits of the project outweigh the costs by a factor of 4.7. Further, the ‘project’ scenario as 
presented in this Funding Proposal provided the most economic value of four scenarios that were 
considered (based on the highest NPV, benefits to cost ratio and economic internal rate of return) . The 
three other alt ernative scenarios included in the economic cost benefit analysis were the ‘without project’ 
scenario, a scenario that only included the project’s proposed mangrove conservation activities to reduce 
deforestation and a scenario that only included the project’s proposed mangrove restoration targets and 
activities.  The high economic value of the proposed project reflects the very high economic value of 
mangroves to the broader economy of Ecuador. Much of the value is driven by the importance of fisheries 
production, which underpins the livelihoods of the coastal fisher families that make up much of the 
vulnerable population of coastal Ecuador.  The sensitivity analysis included in the model shows that the 
economic benefits of the project (and in fact all the scenarios considered) are robust to increases in costs 
and reductions in benefits of +/ - 30%. The model (Annex 3a) can be adjusted to consider the impacts of 
larger changes.


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co- financing.   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  Ecuador’s mangroves have been 
decimated over the last 40 years, 
mainly due to aquaculture 
expansion,  and remain in a 
precarious state despite a recent 
stabilization in mangrove loss. 
Recent initiatives  to halt mangrove 
loss, notably measures to better 
regulate shrimp farm expansion and community -based mangrove 
management pilots, have been 
locally effective and provide an 
opportunity that needs to be 
consolidated and expanded  upon.  Medium  The paradigm shift  achievable by the 
project is to  align government, private 
sector and community initiatives to 
increase mangrove coverage nationally 
by conserv ing remaining mangroves and 
restor ing additional areas  to accel erate 
net gain of mangrove area. The target 
scenario involves well protected 
mangroves  with minimal further loss  
under a combination of state- controlled 
PA and community -managed areas  and 
an expansion of restored areas.      
The project will deliver 4.6  MtCO 2e over 
20 years, excluding replication effects. 
This would represent a significant 
paradigm shift in Ecuador’s GHG 
emissions . Further, by strengthening the 
protection of existing mangroves and 
restoring new areas, the project will 
maintain coastal flood protection 
functions for  an estimated 89,600 people. 
The mangroves will also maintain other 
essential ecosystem services,  including 
fisheries production that supports 
livelihoods of vulnerable people.


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 65 
  
  
 Replicability  Few aquaculture companies have 
adopted sustainable production 
techniques with high 
environmental standards , so there 
are insufficient models and there 
are knowledge and financial 
barriers to replication.   
Community management of 
mangroves has been piloted 
successfully but could be 
replicat ed throughout Ecuador 
and in other  countr ies. Low Once the climate -smart  shrimp model is 
more widely demonstrated  to provide 
added economic value while delivering 
environmental benefits , and knowledge 
and financial barriers are removed, it can 
be replicated within Ecuador, the region 
and internationally.  
The AUSCEM community management model is already demonstrated but once 
it is made more effective and linked to sustainable community businesses , it 
could be replicated throughout the 
country and could be adopted in other 
countries.    
The project will address knowledge and 
financial barriers to promote adoption of 
the CSS model and more widespread 
adherence to standards such as the 
ASC’s  and those advocated by Ecuador’s 
SSP.  The project will provid e the 
necessary knowledge, remov e financial 
barriers and provide demonstrations of the model that will allow other companies 
to replicate it both nationally and 
internationally.     
 
Further strengthening of the AUSCEM 
community management model  and 
further demonstration of its benefits to communities will lead to increased 
demand for new AUSCEMs.     
Sustainability  Government commitment to 
improving mangrove conservation 
is evidenced by recent decrees to 
ensure that aquaculture 
operations are operating legally , 
as well as the operation and the 
funding of four mangrove PAs 
covering 64,916 ha. However, 
legal requirements for shrimp 
farms regarding mangrove 
restoration and conservation are 
low and significant areas of 
mangroves remain outside the PA 
network  and community -managed 
areas .  Low The paradigm shift would see improved decision making and enforcement of 
existing legislation to protect mangroves 
at all levels of government.    
Improved enforcement of legislation 
would be accompanied by the 
widespread adoption of profitable, 
climate -smart  shrimp production models 
linked to highly respected certification 
standards that command a premium 
price.  
Financial institutions would encourage 
investment in shrimp farming operations 
that integrate climate- smart  practices.  The project will strengthen the enabling 
conditions  necessary to sustain 
reductions in the loss of mangroves by strengthening governance, coastal 
management policies and enforcement.  
 
The project will be promoting the use of 
improved climate -smart  production 
methods for shrimp farming. Once the methodology of this profitable approach is better known, existing private financing 
will provide the means necessary for it to be replicated.  
 
The project will be expanding the Socio 
Manglar
 subaccount (part of the existing 
Socio Bosque F und) and the government 
will be seeking additional funding for it 
from various sources to grow it over time


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 66 
  
  
 Private sector sources of finance 
for aquaculture operations are 
available but don’t currently 
incentivize  climate -smart  
practices , including mangrove 
conservation and restoration.  
Financial resources for supporting 
community -based mangrove 
management are limited.  There 
are more requests from communities to manage mangrove areas than current 
resources can support . There  are 
no long- term dedicated funds to 
support community management  
other than the US$150,000  Socio 
Manglar  subaccount of the Socio 
Bosque Fund established in 
preparation for this project.   
 The Socio Manglar  subaccount of the 
Socio Bosque Fund , which has been 
created to support community -based 
mangrove management , would be large 
enough, and generate sufficient 
resources , to provide long-term 
sustainable finance to all participating 
communities.   
 so that it is able to support the number 
and extent of AUSCEMs for which there 
is demand.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1- 4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators) .  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final58 
 
58 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emiss ion reduction), please also provide the target value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number  of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 67 
  
  
 ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  
 Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Direct: Project reports on 
updated maps for flood 
protection provided by 
new mangrove cover.  
Indirect: Census data for 
the coastal provinces 
where the project works.  86,200  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 87,900  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 89,600  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4 M Direct: Calculated based on 
the number of people with 
reduced exposure to 
flooding due to mangroves 
conserved or restored by 
the projec t 
Indirect: based on the population of the 
munici palities  where 
mangroves occur and the 
project works (census data)  
Target figures include 
beneficiaries under 
Supplementary 2.1. Hence, 
the targets under Core 2 
indicator is not to be added 
with Supplementary 2.1.  
 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient 
livelihood options  Report of the social 
impact evaluation of the 
Project that includes a 
gender approach.  (MRV)  0 males  
0 females  20,750  
direct 
beneficiaries 
adopting or 
continuing to 
have a diversified 
climate 
resilient option 
(sustainable 
fisheries and 41,500  
direct 
beneficiaries 
adopting or 
continuing to 
have a diversified 
climate 
resilient option 
(sustainable 
fisheries and  
Assumption: there is a good 
response from 
communities, businesses 
and local governments to 
adopt and replicate adaptation strategies 
including new livelihood 
options . The adaptation 
benefits for direct 
beneficiaries are increased


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 68 
  
  
 sustainable 
shrimp 
farming)  
 sustainable 
shrimp farming)  
 access and control over 
mangrove resources associated with AUSCEM 
agreements and more 
resilient livelihoods 
(supported through 
activities 1.2 .1 and 1.2.2) . 
 Supplementary 3.1: 
Change in expected 
losses of economic 
assets due to the impact 
of extreme climate-
related disasters in te 
geographic area of the 
GCF intervention  Calculated based on 
economic value of 
avoided damages (in 
US$) per ha of 
mangrove restored or 
conserved by project, 
over projected baseline 
scenario.  
Area verified through 
satellite monitoring of 
mangrove cover.  US$ 250.6  M in 
avoided property 
loss from 
mangrove area 
increase due to 
project activities.  
 US$ 256.7 M 
per year  in 
avoided 
property loss  US$ 281.0 M 
per year in 
avoided 
property loss  Project interventions are 
effective in increasing 
mangrove areas over 
baseline scenario. 
Valuation per hectare per 
year based on Men éndez 
model described in Annex 
2, which gives a flood 
prevention value for 
mangroves of $1,600 per 
year 
Baselin e: 156,633 ha  
Hectares additional to 
baseline at:  
Midterm: 2575 ha 
Final: 5975 ha 
 Core 4: Hectares of 
natural resources 
brought under improved Official records 
(contracts, agreements, 
management plans, 0 ha of 156,633
59 ha of 
mangrove 60,000 ha  156,633 ha  Political will of MAATE, 
local governments and local 
 
59 Total area of mangroves within priority subnational government areas targeted by project. This area encompasses areas of AUSC EM and protected areas targeted for management improvements 
(120,000 ha, Project Result 1.1) as well as the portion of total shrim p farm area targeted by project (22,000 ha, Project Result 2.1) comprised of mangrove cover, as well as additional areas outs ide 
of these categories or formal protection with improved coverage and strengthened by project interventions at scale of national and subnational government policies and activities.


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 69 
  
  
 ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 low-emission and/or 
climate -resilient 
management practice  local development and 
zoning plans) for 
mangrove areas under 
improved management. 
With areas confirmed by 
assessment of 
mangrove forest cover 
by remote sensing.  ecosystems with 
sufficient 
protection or CC 
strategies  
 associations to adopt and 
implement strategies.  
 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas 
brought under resoration 
and/or improved 
ecosystems  Project records on 
mangrove restoration 
activities . Remote 
sensing, project GIS and 
database.  0 ha 2200 ha  4850 ha  Assumes  average survival 
rates of mangrove 
seedlings and planting of 
restoration keeps to the 
original schedule.  
 
MRA4 Forestry and 
land use  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Project MRV linked to national forest 
monitoring system.  
Verified through satellite 
monitoring of mangrove 
cover and forest 
inventory plots  0 tCO2e  195,186 tCO2e 
reduced  732,111 tCO2e 
reduced during 
project term  
4.6 MtCO2 
reduced over 
20 years  Financial support from 
private and public sources 
is sufficient to incentivize 
conservation and 
restoration.  
Local, regional and national 
governments maintain and 
strengthen planning and 
enforcement to reduce 
deforestation  
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 70 
  
  
 Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and pr oject/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenar io and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section.  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  National government, 20 
subnational 
governments and 60 
artisanal fisheries and 
mangrove management 
groups with limited or no 
regulatory systems or 
incentives for climate 
resilience and their 
effective implementation  low National government, 9 
subnational 
governments and 60 
artisanal fisheries and 
mangrove management 
groups include improved 
regulatory  systems or 
incentives for climate 
resilience and their 
effective implementation  The project will create 
the enabling conditions 
for sustaining the 
reductions in mangrove 
deforestation by 
strengthening 
governance, climate 
change adaptation 
strategies, coastal 
management policies 
and legal enforcement 
(see description of  
Component  3 in B3 for 
details ) Multiple sub -national 
areas within a country  
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  50 farms60 have ASC 
certification, 10 
companies are members 
or associates of the SSP 
initiative61 and 1 
company is 
experimenting with CSS 
practices62. low Increased adoption of 
nationally and 
internationally 
recognized aquaculture 
standards and/or 
improved practices by 
shrimp farms (e.g.,  
ASC/SSP or CSS 
practices) that include 
commitments to no 
mangrove deforestation 
to cover at least The project will be 
working with the shrimp 
aquaculture sector to 
encourage the adoption 
of standards that include 
commitments to no 
mangrove deforestation 
and practices that 
include restoring 
mangroves (see 
Outcome 2 in section 
B3. National level (one 
country)  
 
60 According to ASC online searchable database, https://www.asc -aqua.org/find- a-farm/; accessed 28 Feb 2023 
61 According to the SSP website, https://www.sustainableshrimppartnership.org/ssp- members/ ; accessed 28 Feb 2023  
62 In collaboration with CI Ecuador


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 20,000ha of shrimp 
farms.  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  Low adoption of 
improved standards and 
practices in shrimp 
farms but there is an 
emerging interest.  
low See indicator above for 
shrimp farms.  
Improved management 
in 60,000 ha of existing 
mangrove AUSCEMs 
and good management 
in 10,000 ha of new 
AUSCEMs to put in 
place.  
Integration of climate 
change adaptation 
measures into the 
management plans and 
practices of the 4 PAs  
targeted by the project 
(which cover the 
majority of protected 
mangroves in the 
country).  The project includes 
three main interventions 
that encourage adoption 
of better practices, 
methods and standards. First is the work with the 
shrimp aquaculture 
sector covered also in 
the indicator above. The 
second is the improved 
management of 
mangroves by 
community associations 
through the AUSCEM 
mechanism. The third is 
through training to 
integrate adaptation to 
climate change into the 
protected areas that 
include mangroves. See 
details of activities in the 
Funding Proposal and/or 
Feasibility Study.  National level (one 
country)


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
  
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators  (project outcomes and outputs)  
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co -benefit indicators under the 
“Project/program me co -benefit indicators ” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV) Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Component  1.    Mangrove areas under effective and climate -adapted management increased, including through community -based management 
(AUSCEMs) and PAs implementing climate adaptation plans.  
Output 1.1.  Reduced 
exposure to flood risk 
for vulnerable people 
and reduced GHG 
emissions from 
mangrove restoration 
are achieved by 
strengthening 
community -based 
management through 
AUSCEMs and 
protected areas.  Number of hectares 
under community 
stewardship and 
protected areas with 
management capacity 
assessment scores 
increasing by 50% or 
more  Registry of active 
AUSCEMs  
 
Project monitoring system 
capacity assessment of 
communities and 
protected areas  
 0 
 60,000 ha  120,000 ha  Communities and 
protected areas 
management motivated 
to participate.  
 
tCO 2e emissions 
reduced through 
restoration in areas 
under community 
stewardship or PAs Forest monitoring data 
with ground truthing  
 0 52,673 tCO 2e 252,495 tCO 2e 
 Communities motivated 
to participate in 
restoration.  
 
tCO 2e emissions 
reduced from avoided 
deforestation over 
project 
implementation period  Forest monitoring data 
with ground truthing  
 0 140,005 tCO 2e 467,075 tCO 2e Market trends favoring 
sustainable investment 
and climate- smart shrimp, 
as well as political 
climate, reinforce 
conservation objectives.


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 People with reduced 
exposure to climate 
change related 
flooding events due to 
the project   Forest monitoring data. 
Number of beneficiaries 
is derived from mangrove 
coverage using the model 
used to make the initial 
estimates (see Annex 
25) 
 
 
 86,200  
 87,500 people 
(50%M/50%F)  89,600 people 
(50%M/50%F)  
 Land use planning, 
weather events and 
socio -economic factors 
do not lead to 
unpredicted, large- scale 
shifts in human 
settlement patterns in the 
coastal region.  Updated 
census data may also 
affect the estimate.  
Improved management of 
mangroves ensures that 
baseline flood protection 
benefits are maintained.  
Output 1.2 . Improved 
livelihood activities and 
more economically 
productive community 
businesses enable local 
people to become more 
resilient to climate 
change and incentivized 
to participate in, and 
maintain, mangrove 
conservation and 
restoration.  Number of males and 
females in mangrove 
areas benefiting from 
the adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options and business 
practices linked to 
mangrove promoted 
by project  
 Project monitoring system 
assessment of livelihoods  0 males and 0 
females  
 20,000 people 
(50%M/50%F)  41,500 people 
(50%M/50%F)  Business and livelihood 
models will be successful 
at achieving livelihood 
impacts and conservation 
Project Outcomes  
Component 2.    The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to 
conserve and restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal populations.  
Output 2.1. Shrimp 
aquaculture farms 
adopt practices and 
production standards 
that require elimination 
of deforestation and 
active reforestation in Hectares of shrimp 
farms adopting 
practices and 
production standards 
that eliminate 
deforestation (e.g. 
ASC or CSS)  Mapping of shrimp 
aquaculture areas that 
have adopted climate 
resilient approaches  0 8,000 ha   
20,000 ha  Aquaculture producers 
motivated by market 
signals, technical 
assistance and economic 
viability of climate- smart 
practices


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 coastal and mangrove 
areas.  Hectares of mangrove 
restoration achieved 
on shrimp farms  Surveys and ground 
truthing  0 100 ha  250 ha  Aquaculture producers 
motivated by market 
signals, technical 
assistance and economic 
viability of climate- smart 
practices  
tCO 2e emissions 
reduced through 
restoration in areas by 
shrimp farms  Forest monitoring data 
with ground truthing  
 0 22,574 tCO 2e 112,870 tCO 2e Technical support and 
market linkages of CSS 
sufficient to motivate 
shrimp farm investment  
Output 2.2.    
Sustainable 
management of 
mangroves is improved 
through agreements 
with the private sector, 
including direct 
financial support for 
mangrove conservation 
and restoration.  Amount of funding 
provided by the 
private sector to 
support mangrove 
conservation.  Area details from signed 
agreements  
 0 USD 
150,000/year  USD 
300,000/year  Aquaculture producers 
and other private sector 
companies motivated by 
market signals, CSR and 
reputation.  Includes 
contributions through 
PECC.  
 
Component 3.    Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by 
strengthening governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.  
Output 3.1. Decision 
making for mangrove 
management by 
national government 
agencies and local 
governments is based 
on generation and 
provision of accurate 
and up- to-date data on 
mangrove condition 
and socio- economic 
information on 
mangrove dependent 
communities.  Number of annual 
reports on mangrove 
cover and socio-
economic data 
shared with national 
government agencies 
and local government  
 Remote sensing/GIS for 
mangrove coverage  
 
Surveys for 
socioeconomic 
information  0 4 8 Government entities have 
technical capacity, staff 
and will to integrate data 
generated by project.


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 Output 3.2. Legal and 
regulatory frameworks 
at local and sectoral 
level are harmonized 
and include climate 
resilience and 
mitigation strategies 
and enforcement.  Number of local and 
provincial 
governments with 
zoning and 
development plans 
including criteria and 
indicators relating to 
mangrove protection, 
climate change 
mitigation or 
adaptation  Planning and zoning 
instruments, officially 
adopted  Only 2 local 
governments 
have planning 
instruments 
including climate-
change 
measures   2 9 Willingness of political 
leadership and technical 
staff in governments to 
participate in project 
across election cycles  
Number of people 
living in jurisdictions 
of local and provincial 
governments with 
zoning and 
development plans 
including criteria and 
indicators relating to 
mangrove protection, 
climate change 
mitigation or 
adaptation  Census data  
 
Project assessment of 
whether jurisdictions have 
zoning/development 
plans including the 
criteria and indicators  0 1.0M people 
(50%M/50%F)  
(indirect 
beneficiaries)  3.4 M people 
(50%M/50%F) 
(indirect 
beneficiaries)  Willingness of political 
leadership and technical 
staff in governments to 
participate in project 
across election cycles  
Project/programme co -benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1. 
Biodiversity and 
ecosystem service 
benefits are increased.  National mangrove 
cover (hectares)  Remote sensing analysis 
(see activity 3.1.1) ; 
reports of mangrove 
restoration.  156,633 ha 159,208 ha 166,110 ha Assum es the baseline 
cover of 156,633 ha 
(2018) . Baseline to be 
revisited once mangrove 
cover analysis is redone 
for the project start date.  
Targets include habitat 
restoration areas which 
will not yet be detectable 
in remote sensing


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
 analysis by end of 
project.   
Co-benefit 2. Economic 
resilience of coastal 
communities is 
increased.  See Supplementary 
indicator 2.1 in the 
Outcomes indicator 
section above       
Co-benefit 3. Uptake of 
sustainable shrimp 
production practices is 
increased.  See core indicator 7 
in the enabling 
conditions section  
above.       
Co-benefit 4. Economic 
value of fisheries for 
artisanal fishers is 
increased.  Economic value of 
fisheries in additional 
mangroves protected 
or restored by the 
project   Value is derived from 
additional hectares of 
mangrove due to the 
project and the data on 
fisheries production 
collected during project 
design (see Annex 3 , 
Economic and Financial 
Analysis)  0 US$ 5.1 million  US$ 12.7 
million   The model assumes that 
fisheries benefits are 
accrued once the 
restoration is done but 
there will likely be a delay 
as the mangrove grows 
so these are longer term 
benefits of the increased 
mangrove coverage  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
 
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Strengthen and expand 
community -based mangrove conservation 
and management to reduce deforestation 
and increase mangrove restoration.  Support community stewards to better conserve mangroves and their vital ecosystem services for both climate 
change mitigation and adaptation.  
 1.1.1.1  Strengthening governance 
capacity and planning of existing 
AUCEMs  
 
1.1.1.2  Expand areas under active 
AUSCEMs  
 1.1.1.3  Expand areas covered by SA 
incentives  
 
1.1.1.4 Restoration of mangrove areas 
within AUSCEMs and PAs  
Improved governance and management of 60,000 has of existing AUSCEMS  
 Integration of 10,000 has under new AUSCEMSs  
 
New
 Socio Manglar  agreements 
covering 20,000 has supported through 
planning and preparation


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
 4,600  ha of additional mangrove 
restoration on AUSCEMs and PAs (note 
that an additional 250 ha of restoration will 
be on farms under Activity 2.1.1)  
Activity 1.1.2  PAs have implemented 
mitigation and adaptation strategies in 
64,913 ha of mangroves  Support management, enforcement and 
planning capacities for 4 MPAs  (Cayapas 
Mataje, Churute, El Salado and Estuario del río Muisne)
 1.1.2.1 Integrate climate -change scenarios 
into planning of protected areas and local management strategies . 
 
 Management plans and climate change 
adaptation plans designed and in implementation in 4 MPAs . 
 
Improvement in management effectiveness in 4 MPAs , as reflected in 
annual effectiveness assessments . 
Activity 1.2.1 Technical and business 
development support to mangrove community associations, with an emphasis on women, youth and other vulnerable 
groups.
 Provide technical and business 
development support to at least 60 
community associations linked to protection of mangroves to design and implement business plans and strategies, including strategies for improving governance and administration, access to finance and to markets for more resilient 
livelihood strategies.   
 
Activities to strengthen and diversify local 
livelihoods to create economic alternatives 
aligned with mangrove protection and to make livelihoods more resilient to impacts 
of climate change.  1.2.1.1 Technical and business development assistance to mangrove community associations for development of enterprises and livelihood activities, with an emphasis on women, youth and other vulnerable groups.
 Value chain analysis and strategies for 60 
community associations designed, and 20 
in implementation with support of financial 
mechanisms (link to 1.2.2) or 
independently.  
 
Activity 1.2.2  Establish and consolidate 
financial mechanisms in support of mangrove community associations (micro- and small enterprises)
 Structure grant mechanisms and facilitate access to investments for community associations supporting mangrove conservation having received technical and business development support (link to 1.2.1)
 1.2.2.1 Create and implement grant mechanisms for technical support to micro - and small enterprises of mangrove 
community associations.  
 
1.2.2.2 Support access to mechanisms and institutions providing credit and investment to micro - and small enterprises 
of mangrove community associations.  20 community association  enterprises 
supported by grant mechanism with business plans financed and in implementation.  
  
Credit /investment from at least 2  financial 
institutions (public and private banks, cooperatives and other financial 
international funds) accessed  
Activity 2.1.1  Technical assistance for 
development and promotion of climate-smart shrimp aquaculture practices in 
20,000 hectares of farms  Provide technical assistance to early adopters and innovators, especially small and medium producers, for the 2.1.1.1 Sustainable Intensification 
Practices  Improvements in production systems 
leading to improved mangrove coverage 
and management to reduce emissions


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
  
63 Incentives for companies to participate in mangrove conservation and restoration include achieving their own Corporate Social Responsibility  aims, achieving carbon neutrality aims through the 
PECC program and in some cases, tax incent ives. Contributions to mangrove conservation and restoration could be directly with AUSCEMs or through contributions to the Socio Manglar 
subaccount.  Financial projections for the funds available for the Socio Manglar program incentive payments  and growth of the Socio Manglar subaccount capital are provided in Appendix 12 of 
Annex 2.   development and validation of the 
production model.  2.1.1.2 Mangrove Restoration – 
demonstration farms (250 ha of 
restoration)   
2.1.1.3 Education, Outreach and Enabling 
Conditions Implementation of Sustainable 
Shrimp Aquaculture  
 and/or vulnerability to climate change in 
20,000 ha of farms  
 
Mangrove restoration undertaken on at least 250 ha within Shrimp farms  
 
Public private roundtable for promotion of climate -smart  shrimp practices and market 
engagement.  
Activity 2.1.2  Facilitate partnerships and 
access to mechanisms for credit and investment in shrimp farms for expansion and consolidation of climate- smart 
aquaculture practices
 Credit to finance working and investment capital needs will be provided/leveraged with CI’s support . 
 2.1.2.1 Education as a tool to facilitate 
access to credit and other investment to shrimp farms for expansion and 
consolidation of CSS practices  
2.1.2.2 Project feasibility as a tool to 
mobilize capital towards CSS production  At least  US$ 5M from financial institutions 
is accessed by farms  in support of climate -
smart shrimp practices contributing to improved mangrove coverage and management to reduce emissions and/or vulnerability to climate change
 
Activity 2.2.1 Establish agreements with businesses, including aquaculture companies, to contribute to mangrove restoration and financial sustainability of the national Socio Bosque Incentive Program (Mangrove Chapter).
 Voluntary partnerships established with 
companies63 to finance restoration and 
conservation of mangroves  through 
contributions to the  Socio Manglar  
program, including providing capital to the Socio Manglar  subaccount . Also, US$ 4 
million of GCF funds added to the capital 
of the  Socio Manglar  subaccount  to be 
held in a dedicated interest -bearing bank 
account . See Appendix 12 of Annex 2 for 
details of  Socio Manglar  subaccount 
management  by FIAS  and Annex 14 for 
CI’s supervision and monitoring of use of 
GCF funds . 2.2.1. 1  Grow the capital of the  Socio 
Manglar  subaccount of the Socio Bosque 
Fund to support long-term community management of mangroves.
   
  Agreements with the private sector result 
in at least  an additional  US$ 300,000/year 
by the end of the project  being  available 
for incentive payments to AUSCEMs 
involved in the Socio Manglar program.  
US$4 million of GCF funds added to  Socio 
Manglar  subaccount  (held in an interest -
bearing account ) and the interest used in 
accordance with the conditions set out in 
the term sheet, Annex 14  to provide 
incentive payments to AUSCEMs during the project implementation period and in 
the long term after the project 
implementation ends.    
Activity 3.1.1 Monitoring of mangrove 
condition and socio-economic impacts in 
mangrove- dependent  communities.  
 Improved monitoring of mangrove cover , 
deforestation rates  and GHG emissions  
related to mangroves.    
 3.1.1.1 Demonstrate the impact of 
mangrove conservation and restoration on national mangrove cover, stocks, and socio -economic indicators through 
monitoring linked to the national MRV, and 
build long -term monitoring capacity.  Inventory of blue carbon used by the 
project M&E and integrated into national 
REDD+ monitoring and reporting system, including national forest and emissions inventories and FREL.


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 79 
  
  
 Monitoring of social and economic benefits 
and impacts of mangrove conservation 
providing information to government agencies to improve policies and 
programs.   Framework for socio -economic monitoring 
of livelihood activities adopted and implemented, including its use to evaluate the project impacts on livelihoods .
 
Activity 3.2.1 Support local governments 
(2 provincial governments, 2 municipalities and 5 parishes) to improve and/or implement Coastal Development and Zoning Plans (PDOTs) and other 
participatory planning instruments that 
incorporate climate change adaptation and 
mangrove management applying a gender 
approach.  Integration of better climate change data 
and mangrove conservation measures in current and proposed Development and Land Management Plans.  
 3.2.1.1 Provide technical assistance to subnational governments for improvement of PDOTs to integrate climate- change 
adaptation and mangrove management measures.
 At least 9 subnational governments with mangrove areas have PDOTs and/or budgets that incorporate mangrove climate change strategies aligned with equity agendas.  
 
 
Activity 3.2.2 Strengthen regulatory framework and law enforcement by agencies and institutions responsible for control of mangroves, with a focus on human rights
 Coordinated planning and implementation 
of mangrove protection and coastal 
adaptation measures through a network of national and provincial institutions responsible for coastal management and planning This will improve cross -sectoral 
planning
 3.2.2.1 Provide technical and legal support 
for harmonization and adoption of 
improved sectoral policies and regulations and technical assistance for implementation of CODA (Código Orgánico del Ambiente)
 3 proposals for harmonized public policy 
instruments for the management of the mangrove ecosystem (e.g.,  procedures for 
assuring transparency in regulation, decision making and enforcement action, inter-agency cooperation for establishing 
technical standards)  
3.2.2.2 Provide technical and legal support 
leading to reforms to Ministry of 
Environment and Water processes of complaints, enforcement and sanctions for 
infractions affecting mangroves  
 140 MA ATE staff members trained  
3.2.2.3 Provide training for judges and 
other institutions regarding regulations and 
sanctions for crimes involving mangroves


---
*Page 87*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 80 
  
  
 E.7. Monitoring , reporting and e valuation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
240. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  Plan is provided as Annex 11. The plan includes GCF -level Impact and 
Outcome indicators based on the IRMF and Project -level Outcome and Activity indicators, metrics for each 
indicator, methodology for data collection, baseline information, frequency of data collection, and indicative 
resources needed to complete the plan. The Project monitoring and evaluation will be coordinated by a 
dedicated M&E specialist at CI-Ecuador in close coordination with subgrantees  (notably PUCESE) , partners 
and other CI units contributing to the project. Project partners will be responsible for providing timely and 
comprehensive reporting including technical results and financial data as necessary and appropriate. These 
responsibilities will form part of contractual agreements between CI and the project partners and detailed 
monitoring requirements will be established based on their roles. All monitoring data being collected by these 
partners will be aggregated for project level reporting.  
 
241. The Key Project Indicators, including measures of GHG emissions reductions and vulnerability reduction, as 
outlined in sections E2 to E6 will be monitored by the Project’s M&E specialist (in coordination with staff at 
partner organizations  and with the aid of consultants where necessary) applying the methodologies and 
frequencies as outlined in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan ( Annex 11). The M&E specialist will be assisted 
by the project experts to be hired within CI and other CI units on gender and safeguards issues, blue carbon 
and project impact evaluation.  
 
242. The M&E Plan is a living document , follows the templates specified by GCF , and focuses on measuring the 
project’s delivery of outputs, outcomes and broader paradigm shift. More detail will be added to the M&E Plan 
during the inception stage of the project (the first six  months of implementation) by the M&E specialist  and in 
collaboration with government agencies and local partners. Development of the full M&E Plan will ensure that 
the M&E requirements are fully assimilated and that the plan is owned by the project staff. The full M&E plan 
will build on the information provided in this document but elaborate in more det ail on the roles and 
responsibilities for data collection and management, information flows and reporting systems, finalized 
indicators and means of verification, monitoring protocols and tools, implementation plans and schedules, 
alignments and collaborat ions with existing national M&E systems. The detailed M&E Plan will also include 
participatory methods for data collection and learning and an impact evaluation plan that builds on the summary 
evaluation plan included in Annex 11.  
 
243. The Project Steering Committee will meet annually to review and approve annual budget and workplans, 
discuss implementation issues and identify solutions, and increase coordination and communication between 
key project partners. The NDA will participate in these meeti ngs as a member of the project steering committee.  
 
244. CI-GCF Agency staff, as AE, will continuously monitor the work of the EE through quarterly EE reports and 
meetings to monitor progress towards deliverables. CI-Ecuador, as EE, will prepare an Annual Performance 
Report to monitor project progress and report to the CI -GCF Agency. The report will summarize the annual 
project results and progress.  CI-Ecuador will also provide a final report at the end of the Project . 
 
245. The Project will undergo an independent Interim Evaluation in Year 4, consistent with GCF’s Evaluation Policy . 
The evaluation will determine progress being made towards the achievement of outcomes and outputs and will 
identify course correction if needed. The evaluation will incorporate an assessment of the Project’s 
contributions to a paradigm shift in the enabl ing conditions using a three- point scale rating as specified in the 
IRMF and with reference to the expected changes in enabling conditions noted in section E4 above. 
Recommendations from the Interim Evaluation will be incorporated into the design of the Project to secure 
maximum results and sustainability.  
 
246. An independent Final Evaluation will be conducted at the end of the Project and will be undertaken in 
accordance with the AE’s guidance and consistent with GCF’s Evaluation Policy . The Final Evaluation will 
focus on the delivery of the Project’s results as initially planned (and as corrected after the Interim Evaluation, 
if any such correction took  place). Once again, it will include an assessment of the p roject’s contributions to a 
paradigm shift in the enabling conditions using a three -point scale rating.


---
*Page 88*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
 247. In addition to the project specific monitoring of the indicators noted in section E for reporting to GCF, the Project 
will also feed relevant information into Ecuadorian government monitoring systems and to CI’s institutional 
results monitoring. Some of the indicators used fo r the Project monitoring have direct relevance for the 
Government of Ecuador’s reporting to the UNFCCC, the Sustainable Development Goals, targets related to 
the Convention on Biological Diversity and national targets.


---
*Page 89*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 82 
   
  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
 
Selected Risk Factor 1  A changing climate may impact the feasibility, sustainability or success of the project . 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Low 
Description  
The base line study confirms that Ecuador’s coastal ecosystems are susceptible to climate change impacts. However, 
the impact on the project activities themselves is considered limited. Moreover, it is one of the main aims of the project 
to increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem to the impacts of climate change.  The main climate change 
impact s that may have a direct bearing on the project activities a re those that could change t he ability of mangroves to 
survive such as  SLR and physical changes to mangrove estuaries that could make some areas unsuitable for 
mangrove. As noted in section B1, mangroves are dynamic systems and natural changes in mangrove cover can occur 
as mud/substrate moves due to erosion or deposition. However, as also noted in section B1, projected SLR rates are 
below the rates at which mangrove s can adapt to the change by expanding into newly created suitable habitat.    
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Several aspects of the design of the project will address the potential threat that some areas will become less suitable 
for mangroves over time due to climate change. First, t he restoration approach that the project will follow will include 
consideration of the hydrology of restoration sites to consider the current and future suitability of areas for mangrove 
survival and growth. Second, the activities to develop adaptation plans for the PAs are intended to build resilience for 
these areas, and mangroves in particular , by ensuring that potential impacts for each of the PAs are identified and 
adaptation measures are integrated into management plans and current management. Finally, the work on P DOTs with 
subnational governments includes  land- use planning in which potential climate impacts will be identified and used to 
identify appropriate land- use planning adaptations. For example,  this would include identifying areas unsuitable for 
development as they may be needed for mangrove ‘retreat’ under future SLR  scenarios .      
Selected Risk Factor 2  A changing climate may impact the adaptation opportunities provided by the project.  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
One climate change impact that could influence the adaptation opportunities provided by the project is SLR, as this 
could influence the area available for reforestation. The base line study included an assessment of the vulnerability of 
the entire project area to rising sea levels. SLR is expected in all parts  of the project area,  but the River Guayas Estuary 
was identified as having the highest risk . 
The vulnerability assessment included in the baseline study included the factor of SLR, particularly  in the development 
of maps prioritizing areas for mangrove reforestation.  In fact, areas with high vulnerability to SLR  (in combination with 
other factors) were prioritized for reforestation. This is because experience with mangrove reforestation projects has 
shown that successful reforestation can lead to increased sediments, allowing the young mangrove trees to form a 
protective barrier against further climate change impacts, such as coastal erosion, and even protecting themselves 
against future SLR (Spa lding et al. 2014; Van Lavieren et al . 2012).  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project addresses this risk through Activity 1.1.1 under which stakeholder meetings  will be conducted as part of 
the detailed planning of restoration activities to  record local knowledge on climate change impacts and potential 
future impacts on mangrove reforestation, considering the views of men and women, for use in the final confirmation of sites for reforestation, especially in the Guayas River Estuary.  
Selected Risk Factor 3  There are risks to the project area from potential third parties’ action.


---
*Page 90*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 83 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
The project area suffers from pollution from cities and their productive activities, agrochemicals, the proximity of large 
ports and water contamination by ballast water.  These forms of pollution could impact mangrove survival in parts of the 
project area although they are likely to be very localized and involve small areas (with respect to the scale of the overall 
project size).  The potential impact is therefore considered to be low.  These influences are largely outside of the control 
of the project, at the same time, they further emphasize the need to increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project already addresses these issues:  
• Activities 1.2.1, 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 aim to introduce climate- smart approaches to existing economic activities 
or new bio- enterprises based on climate- smart approaches, which would both lead to less contamination 
from harmful substances currently in use, e.g., in shrimp cultivation.   
• Activity 3.2.1 includes work with local governments, municipalities and prefectures that are responsible for 
territorial management and planning in the context of improved management of contamination . 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Project staff could be at risk due to tensions between certain actors within the project 
area that exist or may worsen  as a result of project implementation.  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
In the project area , there are tensions between shrimp farmers and fishermen, because some do not accept the existing 
rules. The project aims to work especially with local associations, which may lead to a further divide between members 
and non- members. Tensions between stakeholders within the project could disrupt activities if some stakeholders 
decide they do not want to participate.   
Furthermore, there is the risk of criminal gangs operating in remote mangrove areas. Ecuador’s remote coastal areas 
are used to ship cocaine produced in neighboring countries further up the coast to Central America to the United States  
and to Europe.  The risk exists throughout the project area but is more acute in the northern estuaries and some areas 
of the Guayas estuary . Violence between rival criminal gangs  and with law enforcement  is common, making it important 
that project staff and partners operating in the mangroves are not mistaken as being from rival gangs or being 
associated with law enforcement  agencies . 
Despite r ecent gang violence in Guayaqui l, the risk to project staff as a result of  existing tensions is considered to be 
low and in case of actual security issues , CI’s Security and Protection Plan applies to CI staff as well as project partners. 
CI already has a presence in the region, and there have been  no gaps in operations, even with additional security 
precautions that were put into place (i.e. no travel after dark). CI Ecuador benefits from strong and experienced leadership, with a close relationship with the government  and also  with local partners, including communities  where 
this project will work . CI Ecuador has regional and office level Security  Focal Points, which helps to identify and assess 
risks quickly, efficiently, with the safety of CI, partners and beneficiaries  the first priority. CI and partners also have 
strong relationships with the communities, which not only makes it easier to operat e during uncertain times and provides 
CI with early warnings when conditions begin to deteriorate.   
In addition, the project is likely to reduce existing tensions through its planned activities. The established project -specific 
Grievance Redress Mechanism, if used by stakeholders as foreseen, can be used to track where tensions are 
aggravated,  and responses will be identified on a case -by-case  basis to address these tensions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
For the potential  risk of  tensions between stakeholders: CI  will implement the project -specific Grievance Redress 
Mechanism to track grievances related to tensions between stakeholders and between stakeholders and the project 
team.  The team will i nitiate spaces and procedures for stakeholder dialogue where tensions between stakeholders and 
the project team appear to have intensi fied as a result of the project and provide mediation to ensure improvement over 
time.  The project ESMP also includes the requirement to screen all  the community grant support that will be provided


---
*Page 91*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 84 
   
 and consideration of tensions that the grant could create are to be assessed in the screening and mitigation measures 
developed if the risks are considered medium or high level.  
 
For the work with AUSCEM organizations , CI and PUCESE will also be encouraging AUSCEM organizations  to include 
more members to maximize  participation of fishers within the associations and reduce the potential for conflict between 
members and non- members.   
To address safety risks posed by criminal activity , CI’s director for Safety and Security will conduct a thorough security 
assessment and mitigation plan during project start -up. Example mitigation measures include  pre-activity community 
engagement to ensur e local communities understand the project objectives  and that there is no link to government 
efforts to combat criminal gangs ; Hostile Environment Awareness training and guidance on avoiding and reporting 
criminal activity ; and ensuring that it is easy to identify CI staff and partners as contributing to project objectives  (rather 
than criminal or law -enforcement activity) .  
An additional mitigation measure will be an emphasis on selection of consultants and subgrantees who have a 
demonstrated history of operating in the project areas. PUCESE, t he main project  partner  that will lead activities in the 
two northern sites , is well known in the northern areas and familiar with working in those regions  and with local 
communities .  
A Security Plan has been developed for this project and is included as Appendix 11 of the ESMP ( Annex 6).  
Selected Risk Factor 5 The project area is susceptible to earthquakes, subsidence, landslides, erosion, flooding 
or extreme climatic conditions.  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  High Low 
Description  
The project area is sensitive to erosion, flooding or extreme weather conditions, for example in El Niño or La Niña 
years.  These natural extreme events have the potential to disrupt project operations ; however , the impacts on project 
operations are expected to be low since the issues are likely to be relatively short -term by comparison to the length of 
the project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project includes several activities that are mitigation measures themselves, i.e ., they can jointly reduce the overall 
impact of such extreme weather events or help improve the management of their impacts:  
• Local people’s livelihoods will be improved through the development of new bio- enterprises (sub- activity 1.2.1);  
and, 
• The resilience and extent of the mangrove ecosystem will be increased, thus reducing the risk of impacts from 
extreme weather events (sub- activity 1.1.1), specifically coastal flooding.  
• Improve local planning, including identification of areas at risk of flooding and identification of priority natural 
infrast ructure to protect and restore.   
 
Linked to the restoration activities (and related to risk factor 2 above), CI  and PUCESE will c onsult with local 
stakeholders to ensure their knowledge about the influence of extreme weather events is taken into consideration in 
the establishment of bio- enterprises , if relevant  (e.g. regarding the selection of sites to establish mangrove nurseries) , 
as well as in the final confirmation of sites for mangrove reforestation.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  Political instability and changes in government agencies  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Low 
Description  
The political stability index has shown a steady improvement over the last decade and was at - 0.02 in 2014. The index 
measures perceptions of the likelihood of Ecuador's government becoming destabilized.


---
*Page 92*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 85 
   
 Political risk in Ecuador is characterized by possible changes in government personnel in key positions or changing 
mandates of different ministries because of  elections. One example is that the administration of mangrove concessions 
could be transferred from the M AATE to another Ministry, which could result in changes to concession regulations.  
Since some of the Outcome 3 activities relate to working at the subnational governments, changes at those levels could 
also impact the project operations. The main risk is that c hanges in personnel and/or government structures could 
cause delays in project operations.  Another example is that  a new administration may seek to alter FIAS’s  governing  
structure or rules , which may impact its independence of operations . FIAS has taken several  steps to enhance good 
governance practices, including the expansion of its Board to provide for greater  independence, consistent with best 
practice standards for conservation trust funds . A risk remains that some of these practices could be changed under a 
new administration.  
 
A snap general election for both the executive and legislative branches took place in August 2023.  All the leading 
political parties and candidates embrac ed environmental issues as key pillars of their platform so it seems unlikely that 
there would be backtracking on climate change commitments or support for mangrove conservation and restoration, 
the key focus areas of this proposal. The regulatory frameworks and programs around which the proposed project is 
built (Sustainable Use and Custody Agreements/AUSCEM and the Socio Manglar  program)  are enshrined in the 
constitution and regulatory frameworks and are unlikely to be impacted. Although ministers may change following the 
elections , ministerial level turn -over is not new for Ecuador and CI Ecuador has maintained strong relations at these 
levels throughout numerous previous  administrations and through many different ministers. Local and provincial officials 
were not impacted by the 2023 elections, meaning that CI Ecuador’s strong relations with government at those levels 
remained  in place. Local and provincial elections will happen during the project implementation period but CI Ecuador ’s 
strong relations  with those governments  are expected to provide continuity  for the project.  A new administration has 
been in place in Ecuador since December 2023 and the engagement of the government, local associations  and private 
sector remains .  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
CI has been able to maintain its activities during the last 20 years in the political context of Ecuador and has been able 
to collaborate consistently with successive administrations  and with subnational governments . Elections were held in 
August 2023 and resulted in a presidential change in December 2023, however, not a change in the majority party .  
 
All relevant ministries have been involved in the development of this project, including participati on during Project 
Preparation Funding activities  of Funding Proposal development . The project has been designed to address 
government priorities related to climate change, nature conservation and economic development and enjoys support 
from the ministries involved. MAATE is even provid ing co-financing for the project. In the case of any changes in 
mandate or personnel, CI will continue its extensive engagement with the government to ensure a smooth transition 
and to address possible changes as needed.  
 
The risk that a new administration would  alter FIAS’s governing structure or rules  is considered low risk  and in the due 
diligence there are some measures highlighted to design and implement before the granting process. There are internal 
processes  and policies t hat will be included in the grant to ensure compliance of use of GCF funds . The project budget 
also includes support for capacity building and enforcement support to FIAS.  
 
The risk presented by changing priorities and approaches from new  administrations  warrants monitoring,  although it 
has been reduced since FIAS’s inception due to concerted outreach by FIAS and engagement with the donor 
community , resulting in reforms to FIAS’s governance . It is unlikely that there would be dramatic additional reforms to 
FIAS so soon after the Government of Ecuador helped restructure it in 2017 .   
 
Of note,  the vast majority of F und decisions are made by an Administrative Board (“Junta Administrativa” or “JA”) for 
each of FIAS’s  subsidiary funds  (such as the Socio Bosque Fund) . These JAs were created during financing 
agreements with donors, are largely determined according to the requirements in such agreements, and largely operate 
independent of the FIAS Board of Directors . The governance structure of each of these JAs is defined in their governing 
rules / operations manuals which may be subject to modification based on FIAS and donor agreement s. The JAs are 
primarily respons ible for supporting the ex ecution of projects, making decisions on fund allocations and disbursements, 
consistent with the terms of any donor agreement. The J As are respons ible for the evaluation and oversight of donor


---
*Page 93*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 86 
   
 supported projects / funds. Accordingly, CI will ensure  in its grant agreement  with FIAS that the JA managing the  Socio 
Manglar  subaccount meets best practices , including any GCF requirements.  
Selected Risk Factor 7  Prohibited Practices,  including ML/FT  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Low Medium  
Description  
The Project involves a wide array of actors, including government, sub -grantees, vendors and service providers, and  
beneficiaries.  Based on a calculation using multiple international risk indicators, CI assesses Ecuador to be a low -risk 
country for GCF prohibited practices, including terrorist financing and money laundering. CI Ecuador  follows and is 
subject to CI‘s Anti- Money Laundering and Counter -Terrorism -Financing (AML/C FT) Policy and related procedures , 
which have been assessed as effective by the GCF. In addition, CI -Ecuador  is subject to national laws related to 
AML/CFT, for which it has a country -specific Manual for Prevention of ML and FT. In compliance with the Organic 
Regulation to the Law of Prevention and Detection of Laundering Money and Financing Terrorism, CI-Ecuador’s 
AML/CFT  practices are supervised by a public entity, the Financial Analysis Unit ( Unidad de Análisis Financiero  
[UAFE ]), which conducts a thorough review of financial procedures related to AML/CFT and to which CI -Ecuador  must 
submit monthly reports. Finally,  the project’s major non -EE recipients of GCF funds, sub- grantees PUCESE  and FIAS,  
were screened and cleared against international sanctions lists .  
 
Concerning impact, serious breaches in prohibited practices, including ML/FT, would impact the reputation of CI and 
the project.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
CI has several procedures and controls in place to prevent, mitigate, and identify risk. In order to comply with CI 
AML/CTF, U.S. law, and GCF fiduciary standards, CI applies rigorous C FT/AML screening to all CI funding recipients. 
CI also conducts an assessment of Prohibited Practices (PP) risks of grant recipients and includes any required 
mitigation measures in its legally binding grant agreements. All EE staff and subgrantees must also undergo training 
on PP (including red flags and how to report violat ions), and all grant and services agreements (used by both CI and 
sub-grantees) must include language on compliance with the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices , including AML/CFT . 
Sub-grantees PUCESE and FIAS will receive capacity -building related to AML/CFT and prohibited practices from CI 
Ecuador , and c ompliance with PP policies and mitigation measures is part of project monitoring, including site visits 
and CI audits, throughout implementation.  
To report and remedy risks, any CI employee; employee of an executing entity, grantee, partner, or vendor; or 
beneficiary may report a grievance or violation of these policies anonymously online or by telephone through CI’s 
Ethics Hotline. All reported gri evances will be investigated and addressed per CI’s Anti -Fraud Policy & Guidelines for 
Investigations. Full details can be found on CI’s website at https://www.conservation.org/about/our -policies/reporting-
illegal- or-unethical -conduct -statement . 
Selected Risk Factor 8  Unrealized or delayed co -financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
Co-financing plays a n important part in achieving the full impact of the proposed project . There is a medium risk of 
delay ed or unrealized co- financing for the project , because MAATE’s grant co- financing depends on the approval  
processes for government budgets. However, t he committed co-financing is proposed for activit y A.1.1.1 and therefore, 
the negative impact to the project would be limited to th is activit y. In addition, a portion of the co -financing committed 
by MAATE is ‘in-kind’ and related to staff salaries  and therefore poses a low risk of not materializing.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The project team  will periodically assess the degree of risk (both likelihood and impact) that co -financing will be funded 
and its associated impact on project implementation.  CI will also conduct regular engagement with co- financing sources 
to understand and manage this risk.  In the event that co -financing is not realized, CI will try to identify alternative 
sources . If that is not possible , CI would work with GCF  within the framework of the project’s FAA  to propose adaptive


---
*Page 94*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 87 
   
 management measures that may in clude  reducing the scope of affected activities  with minimal negative impact to 
project objectives . 
Selected Risk Factor 9  Risk of inflation  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
Although currently decreasing, Ecuador’s inflation rate for 2022 was 3.7% according to the International Monetary 
Fund’s Data Mapper (April 2023). Ecuador’s  average inflation rate over the period 2013 to 2022 was 1.8%  with a 
maximum of 4.2% in 201764. This period includes several turbulent years for Ecuador’s economy due to fluctuations in 
the global price of oil, on which Ecuador’s economy is highly reliant . The IMF’s forecast for inflation in Ecuador is 1.34% 
in 2025, risi ng to 1.54% in 2026 through to 202865. However, given the increases in inflation globally, the risk of rising 
inflation is considered a ‘medium ’ risk to this project as it could impact the budget, co- financing and activity 
implementation.  Higher than expected inflation would incr ease costs across the whole project , making it harder to 
achieve all of the project activities . High in flation rates  would be accompanied by high interest rates at financial 
institutions, which could impact the likelihood of private sector shrimp farm companies taking loans to invest in climate 
smart shrimp practices (Activity 2.1.2 ).  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
To mitigate for the impacts of inflation, CI has included inflation considerations into its budget figures. The budget has 
been prepared assuming an inflation rate of 3%.  The 3% figure is above the IMF’s forecast but given the challenges of 
inflation forecasting  and recent global increases in inflation, CI has used the 3% figure out of precaution. In addition, CI 
will regularly monitor inflation pressures on the project budget and continually seek to identify cost savings where 
possible.  
 
 
 
64 https://datos.bancomundial.org/indicator/FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG?locations=EC ; accessed 2 June 2023  
65 https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Ecuador/inflation_outlook_imf/ ; accessed 2 June 2023


---
*Page 95*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 88 
   
  GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
248. The Environmental and Social risk screening for the project indicated that a limited and adequate Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) be conducted to identify potential project risks. This assessment resulted 
in the following:  
 249. The project is risk  category B (moderate risk) . 
 250. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) , 
included as Annex 6,  includes a summary of the project and the applicable legal and institutional framework, 
the risks identified, the action plan with mitigation measures and implementation modalities. Also included are a 
Grievance Redress Mechanism as well as:  
• Natural Habitat Protection Plan;  
• Process Framework for Restricti on of Access to Natural Resources;  
• Plan for Afro -descendant Communities and Cholos Pescadores;  
• Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7 ); and  
• Gender Action Plan (Annex 8 ).  
 
251. The project does not intend to cause negative environmental or social impacts; on the contrary, it aims to increase the resilience of the mangrove ecosystem and benefit local communities. It is based on rights -based 
and inclusive approaches, including measures to ensure the participation of vulnerable groups, such as women, 
youth and others.   
 
252. Some  risks are, by their nature, beyond the control of the project. For example, climate change may impact the 
project area and there are localized  impacts on the mangrove ecosystem from pollution in some places. The 
project includes a variety of activities to address these issues.  
 253. Some details of activities will be defined during  the project and therefore risk screening and appropriate 
mitigation measures for these will be identified as part of the project act ivities . Screened activities that result in 
a category B risk rating will require further limited ESIAs and ESMPs to be developed as per the guidance 
provided in Annex 6 . This applies to:  
• Activities 1.2.1  and 1.2.2: It is necessary to identify which community livelihoods activities and small -scale 
enterprises to be supported in various locations  near the time of the work . Once the options and locations for 
their development have been prioritized, their potential impacts must be assessed.  
• Activities 1.1.1: Project preparation included the identification of areas with potential for reforestation. The 
resulting map ( see Annex 2 ) defines a potential of 10,000 ha while the project includes 4,850 ha as a target, so 
the detailed selection of sites for reforestation is pending. To address this , detailed reforestation plans will be 
developed as part of the reforestation activities including assessment of risks and measures to avoid 
environmental damage and negative social impacts . 
 
254. Apart from those mentioned above, the most important risks and their mitigation measures are:  
 
Environmental or 
Social Risk Factor  Mitigation Measures  
Community 
Management groups 
(AUSCEMs) could 
impose r estrictions 
on access to or use 
of natural resources 
and result in 
economic 
displacement (see • Identify all stakeholders affected by these restrictions, with special attention to 
members of Afro- descendant communities , Cholos  Pescadores  and women- led 
households . 
• Consult with stakeholders on the need/measures for conservation and identify those 
measures that can lead to restrictions/economic displacement . 
• Consult with any affected stakeholders, applying a culturally appropriate and gender -
sensitive approach, to develop a socioeconomic assessment and analysis showing 
quantifiable impact of restrictions on their livelihoods that can be used to inform , 
negotiate and identify solution options for inclusion in the refined Process Framework 
and the Plan for Afro- Descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores . 
• Explore opportunities to maintain engagement of affected stakeholders in project 
activit y 1.2.1.


---
*Page 96*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 89 
   
 ESMP, risks R 3.1, 
R4.1 and RHR2).  • In cases where economic displacement is unavoidable, ensure that stakeholders 
remain involved throughout the process of defining and implementing the Process 
Framework for Restricting Access to Natural Resources ( see Annex  6), including in the 
process for obtaining FPIC . 
• Seek FPIC  from affected stakeholders, following an FPIC procedure that has been 
previously agreed in a participatory manner and in line with CI  and GCF’s ESMF 
guidelines for Applying FPIC . 
• Implement a Process Framework that has been agreed upon by local communities to 
which it applies, including the Afro- descendent communities and Cholos Pescadores  
(see Annex  6). 
• Implement the project -specific Grievance Redress Mechanism and trace complaints in 
the context of economic displacement to ensure satisfactory follow up and conclusion of 
complaints.  
Women and other 
vulnerable groups, 
including those not 
affiliated  with 
AUSCEMs , could be 
negatively impacted 
by not being able to 
participate in the same way as other 
stakeholders (see 
ESMP, risks RHR1 
and RHR3).  • Investigate in more detail the potential adverse effects of the project on non -partners, 
with special attention to vulnerable groups such as women, youth, elderly fishermen,  
non-affiliates of AUSCEMS,  members of Afro- descendant communities and Cholos  
Pescadores . 
• Conduct informational and awareness -raising sessions to clarify the potential benefits 
of joining an AUSCEM group , especially in the context of this project.  
• Identify ways to ensure that the project does not cause harm to local people unwilling to 
join an AUSCEM group and clearly communicate the efforts made to ensure this.  
 
More mitigation measures specifically to ensure gender equity are included in the gender 
action plan. The ESMP also includes mitigation measures to address the risk of Sexual 
Exploitation, Sexual Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEAH).   
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
255. During Project preparation, a gender assessment (see Annex 8 ) was undertaken to understand the differential 
vulnerability to, and impact of, climate change on women and men in the project area. From the findings of this 
assessment and an analysis of the proposed project design, a Gender Action Plan (GAP) was developed. The 
process to produce these components included a desktop review and analysis of available literature and relevant legislation, policy and programs in the country, as well as key informant interviews, household questionnaires, 
focus group discussions and consultation workshops with project stakeholders and beneficiaries.  
 
256. The GAP  (see Annex 8) identifies opportunities to close gender gaps , reduce gender -based violence (GBV)  and 
the included actions are largely concentrated in the support of mangrove associations where direct collaboration 
with the women and men who depend on, and manage, the mangroves will occur. These include mangrove use 
agreements that integrate gender co nsiderations, tailored and specific support to women in mangrove 
associations (including the two women’s associations), setting targets (50/50) for women’s and men’s benefit 
from the adoption of diversified and climate resilient livelihoods options linked to mangroves, and ensuring that 
project staff and delivery partners are trained on gender equity principles and the importance of mitigating gender inequalities in the project, including gender -based violence.  
 
257. To support implementation of the GAP, CI will employ a full -time Gender Manager to ensure robust gender 
analysis and lead the mainstreaming of gender into the project . The Gender Manager will develop and deliver 
appropriate capacity building for colleagues and delivery partners that is well -designed, clear, tailored to the 
context, and practical. The Gender Manager will accompany project teams to the field to ground truth progress 
on gender outcomes: meet with women/women’s groups, collect qualitative information, help project teams to 
problem solve, propose adaptive changes  and participate in report  preparation. The mana ger will s upport the four 
estuaries  and, in particular , the social coordinat ors in the implementation of the GAP. The manager will also 
collaborate with CI’s global gender program to ensure consistency in gender approach across the institution and will be support ed by CI’s global Gender Advisor. Th e Gender Manager position will be based in Guayaquil city.  
 
258. A complex set of historical, social, cultural, and economic factors influence the project sites’ current gender norms and inequalities . There is a lack of political representation by women in decision- making, time deficit du e to mostly 
reproductive labor impinging on their ability to engage in community, organizational, and project activities, and 
finally high rates of gender -based violence that further highlights inequalities and is an important barrier that


---
*Page 97*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 90 
   
 keeps women from exercising their voice and agency in mangrove conservation. This situation is compounded 
by a number of structural problems associated with education, health, the provision of utilities and limited 
employment opportunities.  
 
259. In these mangrove- dependent communities, women are more vulnerable and experience higher rates of poverty 
than men. Men tend to control the main economic activity in the communities: the harvesting and sale of seafood. 
Often it is men who hold formal posit ions of leadership within communities and fishing associations.  
 
260. There are distinct gender differences in mangrove use and management in the northern sites vers us those in the 
south. In the north, women walk (often collectively) to the mangroves and are therefore more actively engaged; 
Mangrove associations in the north also have ~60% women members. The south is more male dominated; 
women’s access and use of the mangrove areas is constrained by distance as the mangroves are far from the 
community and must be accessed by boat (often individually). Because they are not familiar with the mangroves, they are largely absent from the associations; mangrove associations in the south have ~15% women members. 
 
 261. Women living  in mangroves work long days, which include family caregiving responsibilities, harvesting or fishing 
activities, cooking for the family and looking after the children. The average working day for women is around 14 
hours and little societal value is place d on their caregiving or reproductive tasks. By contrast, men have much 
shorter days, fishing or harvesting for between four and five hours. This means that once their day’s fishing or 
harvesting is over, they are relieved from work.  
 262. Rates of GBV are very high (67% in project sites) and could be perpetuated/increased by climate change impacts 
that result in economic disruption.  
 263. As a result of gender norms, men and women are impacted differently by climate related events. Rising sea levels and flooding – the two major effects cited in justifying climate change adaptation action in these project sites – 
can also have consequences like an increase in water salinity and water -borne diseases, which are likely to affect 
primarily women, who tend to be responsible for collecting water for the household and caring for sick family  
members. Furthermore, existing gender inequalities may be exacerbated by the dynamics of climate change in 
the project area.  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
264. The project will be executed by CI-Ecuador,  and therefore, financial management and procurement for this project 
will follow relevant CI policies and procedures, as well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master 
Agreement (AMA) signed between CI and the GCF.  
 
Financial management:  
 
265. CI uses Unit4 Business World software suite as its enterprise resource planning (ERP) system for financial 
accounting and monitoring in all its global operations. This system supports financial monitoring, reporting, human 
resources, procurement, and recor d-keeping in line with the requirements of CI’s AMA. It supports a system of 
ledger accounts to separate and track income and expenditure by donor, project, and subaward.  It also provides 
a coding system for monitoring and reporting of projects. In additi on, all EEs and sub- grantees will be required to 
submit quarterly financial reports that will be systematically reviewed by the AE and EE, respectively.  
 
266. An annual audit of the project will be conducted by an independent external audit firm in accordance with audit 
standards under U.S. GAAP and furnished to the GCF in accordance with CI’s AMA.  
 
267. Disbursements made to CI will be recorded to the ledger account for this GCF project, which can be tracked using 
the Business World system. Disbursements from the EE to sub- grantee will be made upon CI’s receipt of 
acceptable progress and financial reports  and any other requirements as included in the applicable grant 
agreement.  
 
268. CI has procedures and controls in place to prevent risk of prohibited practices, including ML/FT (collectively, ‘PP’). 
CI applies rigorous CTF/AML screening to all CI funding recipients. CI also assesses PP risks of grant recipients 
and includes mitigation measures in its grant agreements. All CI staff and subgrantees must also undergo training 
on PP (including red flags and how to report violations), and all grant and services agreements (used by both CI 
and sub- grantees) must include language on complianc e with the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices. 
Compliance with PP policies and mitigation measures is part of project monitoring, including site visits and CI


---
*Page 98*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 91 
   
 internal audits, throughout project implementation. Violations of PPs, fraud, or financial misuse may be reported 
anonymously online or by telephone through CI’s Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and 
addressed per CI’s Anti -Fraud  Policy & Guidelines for Investigations.  
 
269. Violations of Prohibited Practices, fraud, or financial misuse may be reported anonymously online or by telephone 
through CI’s Ethics Hotline. All reported grievances will be investigated and addressed per CI’s Anti -Fraud Policy 
& Guidelines for Investigat ions.  
 
Procurement:  
 
270. All procurement for this project must follow the Procurement Process Standards as defined in the CI Procurement 
Policy, which requires that all procurements of goods or services ensure the best value and comply will all donor 
funding terms and conditions, and that all goods be used only for their intended purposes and consistent with 
CI’s Code of Ethics and suite of anti -fraud policies. CI’s procurement standards are in l ine with GCF fiduciary 
standards.  
 
271. All procurement done by  the EE  will follow CI’s internal procurement controls and risk -mitigation measures, 
including procurement planning, multi -level purchasing approvals (including AE approval over a set threshold), 
quarterly reporting on procurement & equipment, periodic inventories, and post -award reviews. CI’s Grant and 
Contracts Unit must approve contracts of US$ 20,000 or more awarded by CI’s Ecuador office, including for this 
project.  
 
272. CI will assess the procurement policies of any subgrantee organization conducting procurement for this project. 
Consistent with CI’s Procurement Policy, Project sub- grantees that meet CI’s Procurement Process Standards 
as defined in the  CI Procurement Policy will use with their own procurement policy and procedures for the project; 
otherwise, they will be required to use CI’s Procurement Policy for the project  in whole or in part . Detailed 
procurement requirements consistent with CI and GCF standards will be included in the grant agreement signed 
between CI and the grantee organization.  The Project’s s ub-grantee PUCESE will conduct procurement to 
support  the implementation of its Project activities, in line with these requirements and as described in Annexes 
10 and 19.  
 
273. CI will apply mitigation measures and monitor all procurement for this Project to ensure that any procured goods 
are used only for their intended purposes. It will provide training on procurement and prohibited practices for CI 
staff and subgrantees and wi ll approve annual procurement plans and all procurements over a set threshold. It 
will also conduct monitoring through quarterly reporting on procurement & equipment and through periodic site 
visits.  
 
274. An indicative  plan for  maintenance, operation, and disposition of GCF -funded equipment procured by CI 
Ecuador is found in Annex 21.  
 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
 No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure polic y, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.   
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 99*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 92 
   
  
 
66 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.  ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study  
☒ Annex 3  Economic analys is in spreadsheet and narrative format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, etc.)   
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter s (template provided)   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule  
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 4b Term sheet for the Socio Manglar subaccount  and appendices  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence/ evaluation report for proposals that  up-scal e/replicat e a pilot project  
☒ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects financed by 
the entity  
☒ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and cross cutting-
projects)66 
☒ Annex 23 Implementation arrangements  
☒ Annex 25  Adaptation Beneficiaries  
☒ Annex 26  Example of an AUSCEM Agreement


---
*Page 100*
---

Oficio Nro. MAATE -SCC -2023 -0535 -0 
Quito, D.M., 15 de noviembre de 2023  
Ministerio  del Ambiente,  Agua y Transición  Ecológica  
Dirección:  Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía  
Código  Postal:  170525 / Quito  - Ecuador  ● Teléfono:  (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec  
1/2 
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux   
A
sunto: Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Conservation International Foundation 
regarding Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community Partnerships for 
Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador 
S
eñora 
Mafalda duarte 
Executive Director GREEN  CLIMATE  FUND 
En su Despacho  
D
ear Madam,  
W
e refer to the project titled Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community 
Partnerships  for Mitigation  and Adaptation in Ecuador in Ecuador as included in the 
funding proposal submitted by Conservation International Foundation to us on October 6th, 
2023. 
T
he undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Environment, Water 
and Ecological Transition, the National Designated Authority of Ecuador. 
P
ursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, 
we hereby communicate our no- objection to the project as included in the funding proposal.  
B
y communicating our no- objection, it is implied that: 
1.The government of Ecuador has no- objection to the project as included in the funding
proposal;
2.The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national
priorities, strategies and plans of Ecuador;
3.In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the project as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no- objection to the project as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We
 acknowledge that this letter  will be made publicly available on the GCF  website. 
Atentamente,  
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 101*
---

Oficio Nro. MAATE -SCC -2023 -0535 -0 
Quito, D.M., 15 de noviembre de 2023  
Ministerio  del Ambiente,  Agua y Transición  Ecológica  
Dirección:  Calle Madrid 1159 y Andalucía  
Código  Postal:  170525 / Quito  - Ecuador  ● Teléfono:  (593 2) 398-7600
www.ambiente.gob.ec  
2/2 
* Documento firmado electrónicamente por Quipux   
D
ocumento firmado electrónicamente  
Mgs.  Karina  Maribel  Barrera  Moncayo  
SUBSECRETARIA DE CAMBIO  CLIMÁTICO  
Copia:  
Señor  Magíster  
Diego  Gonzalo  Quishpe  Landeta 
Director de Adaptación  al Cambio  Climático  
Señorita  Ingeniera  
Gabriela Jeanneth  Vargas  Luna  
Especialista  de Políticas  de Cambio  Climático  3 
Señora  Secretaria  
Teresa Del Pilar  Pérez Toscano  
Secretaria  de la Subsecretaria  
gv/
db 
Firmado electrónicamente por: 
KARINA MARIBEL 
BARRERA MONCAYO


---
*Page 102*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or 
programme title  Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community Partnerships for 
Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador  
Existence of 
subproject (s) to 
be identified 
after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public 
or private)  Public  
Accredited 
entity  Conservation International  Foundation (CI)  
Environmental 
and social 
safeguards 
(ESS) category  Category B  
Location – 
specific 
location (s) of 
project  or target 
country or 
location (s) of 
programme  Republic of Ecuador . 
The project activities focus on the four main estuaries with mangroves: 
Cayapas Mataje, Muisine Cojimies, Guayas and Jambeli. The project area 
includes eight municipalities: El Guabo, Machala, Santa Rosa, Eloy Alfaro, 
Muisine, San Lorenzo, Guayaquil and Naranjal.  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  Thursday, June 13, 2024  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on 
language  Spanish is the official language of Ecuador . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default -source/gcf/annex -06---ci -
ecuador ---esmp ---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0 
 
Spanish:  
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default -source/gcf/annex -06---ci -
ecuador ---esmp ---es---
disclosure1a80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0  
 
Other link(s)  CI Website:  
English:  
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves -for-climate  
 
Spanish :  
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro -
trabajo/programas/marino -y-costero


---
*Page 103*
---

 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B  project is 
contained in “ Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  Thursday, June 13, 2024  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on 
language  Spanish is the official language of Ecuador . 
Link to disclosure   English:  
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default -source/gcf/annex -06---ci -
ecuador ---esmp ---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0 
 
Spanish:  
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default -source/gcf/annex -06---ci -
ecuador ---esmp ---es---
disclosure1a80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0   
Other link(s)  CI Website:  
English:  
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves -for-climate  
 
Spanish :  
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro -
trabajo/programas/marino-y- costero  
 
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B  project is 
contained in the “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan  (ESMP )”. 
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of 
disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on 
language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosur
e on accredited 
entity’s website  Indigenous People Plan (IPP) / Thursday, June 13, 2024


---
*Page 104*
---

Language(s) of 
disclosure  English  and Spanish  
Explanation on 
language  Spanish  is the official language of Ecuador,  and the Government uses 
Spanish  to communicate government publications (reports, policies, 
laws, minutes etc.) with the communities  in the coastal areas . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default -source/gcf/annex -06---ci -
ecuador ---esmp ---
disclosure95b281f63c7b42deb3eb7e37496adf0a.pdf?sfvrsn=d7c9c322_
0 
 
Spanish:  
https://www.conservation.org/docs/default -source/gcf/annex -06---ci -
ecuador ---esmp ---es---
disclosure1a80a7f4b9754b23a43f17cb7a678828.pdf?sfvrsn=b4f5ecff_0   
Other link(s)  CI Website:  
English:  
https://www.conservation.org/gcf/projects/mangroves -for-climate  
 Spanish :  
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro -
trabajo/programas/marino -y-costero   
Remarks  The Plan for Afro -descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores is 
included as Appendix 5 of “Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA)  and Environmental and Social Management Plan  
(ESMP )”, which is the document published on the AE and CI -Ecuador’s 
websites.   
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Thursday, June 13, 2024   
Place  The ESS documents were published in Spanish on the CI Ecuador website 
on June 13, 2024. CI -Ecuador website link: 
https://www.conservation.org/ecuador/nuestro -
trabajo/programas/marino-y- costero  
 
All stakeholders who participated in the stakeholder consultation (see 
Annex 7, Summary of Consultations) have been informed by email that 
the document is available for consultation. An email address  has been 
provided where comments can be sent to the project development team.   
To accommodate  for those who may not have access to the internet, a 
computer, or a reliable power source, or would prefer to consult a physical copy of the document, CI and the  Ministry of Environment , 
Water and Transition of Ecuador (MAATE)  will be sharing the ESS 
document  (Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal)  by June 14, 2024 in the 
following locations :  
 Marine, Coastal and Oceanic Direction office of MAATE . Av. Francisco de 
Orellana y Justino Cornejo, Guayaquil.  
2
nd Zonal Direction of MAATE. Av. Jaime Roldos Aguilera y Jr. Coronel 
centro de atención Ciudadana. Esmeraldas .


---
*Page 105*
---

7th Zonal Direction of MAATE. Calle Vela 1323 entre 25 de Junio y Sucre 
Edificio Ex Predesur - 3er piso. Machala.  
P
rovincial Government office of  Esmeraldas. Avenida 10 de Agosto entre 
Bolívar y Pedro Vicente Maldonado. Esmeraldas.   
P
rovincial Government office of Guayas . Av. Juan Illingworth 108 y Av. 
Simón Bolívar . Guayaquil.  
P
rovincial Government office of El Oro. Avenida Junin  s/n y Av. 25 de 
Junio . Machala.  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of 
accredited 
entity’s Board 
meeting  N/A 
Date of GCF’s 
Board meeting Monday, July 15, 2024  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 106 
 
 
Secretariat ’s assessment  of FP 235  
Proposal name:  Mangroves for Climate: Public, Private and Community 
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador  
Accredited entity:  Conservation International Foundation (CI)  
Country:  Ecuador  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
Mangroves model : The project involves  
government, local communities and the 
private sector in supporting community -
based  enterprises and  community mangrove 
management teams undertaking income 
generation while restoring and sustainably 
managing mangroves  based on a results -
based payment scheme . In addition to 
mitigation benefits,  the mangroves  provide 
ecosystem services that protect coastal 
communities and upstream communities 
from salinization caused by  floods and sea 
level rise.   
Community grants : The project is working 
with a trust fund and government finance 
that aims to empower  local communities to 
sustainably manage large areas  of mangroves 
via community management agreements  that 
grant reward payments for their  
management activities.   
Transform ation of the  private sector : The 
project will accelerate the transformation of 
the shrimp industry from being a driver of 
mangrove deforestation to a driver  of 
preservation , while shrimp farmers will be 
able to access a premium price for certified 
shrimp cultivation.


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 107 
 
 
Financial sustainability model : The project 
will help to capitalize the trust fund 
subaccount on results -based payments for 
community mangrove management , with  
additional funding to be contributed  annually 
from private and government sources. The 
trust fund is expected to run in perpetuity , 
hence generating  impact beyond project 
implementation and even beyond the 20 -year 
project life span .  
Scalability and replicability:  The project 
may allow Ecuador to become a 
demonstration site for climate -smart shrimp 
farming that can be scaled and replicated 
across different regions, especially due to the 
project ’s link with the Global Mangrove 
Alliance .  
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the 
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity, and, if considered 
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in Annex II of document GCF/B.39/02.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat ’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. The project background , as set out in the funding proposal,  underscores the pressing 
need to address the impacts of climate change on Ecuador ’s coastal regions. Climate change 
projections indicate increasing risks , such a s sea  level  rise, extreme weather events and coastal 
flooding, that threaten local communities and economic activities. Mangroves play a crucial role 
as natural barriers against erosion and flooding, yet ongoing deforestation exacerbates these 
risks. Despite recent conservation efforts, man grove loss continues, with adverse consequences 
for carbon sequestration and biodiversity.  
4. The proposed interventions aim to address these challenges by engaging local 
communities, the private sector and government entities in the  protect ion and restor ation  of the 
mangroves. Through effective mangrove management and restoration, the project seeks to 
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, to enhance flood protection for vulnerable coastal 
populations and to improve livelihoods. It aligns with Ecuador ’s national climate change 
strategies and contributes to global initiatives such as the Global Mang rove Alliance.  
5. The project ’s components focus on increasing the area of mangroves under community -
based management, engaging the private sector in sustainable practices and strengthening 
governance frameworks. By integrating these efforts, the project aims to achieve multiple 
climate mitigation and adaptation goals, including reducing GHG emissions, protecting 
ecosystems and enhancing infrastructure resilience.  
6. Moreover, the project ’s alignment with the objectives of the Global Mangrove Alliance 
underscores its potential for knowledge -sharing and global impact. By leveraging international 
partnerships and best practices, the project aims to contribute significantly to global efforts to


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 108 
 
 
conserve and restore mangroves, ultimately benefiting both Ecuador ’s coastal communities and 
the broader global environment.  
7. The project will directly benefit 89,600 individuals through enhanced access to climate 
finance, adoption of climate -smart aquaculture practices, and mangrove restoration to mitigate 
landslide and flooding risks. Moreover, the long -term conservation and su stainable 
management of mangroves will indirectly benefit 3 .4 million  people, spanning 44  per cent  of 
coastal provinces and 20.1  per cent  of the country ’s population, as a result  of the climate -
resilient practices.  
8. The total mitigation impact from mangrove conservation, restoration and preservation  
amounts to an estimated GHG emission reduction of 732,111 tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent ( t CO 2 eq) by the end of the implementation period and 4,609,470 t CO 2 eq over the 
project ’s 20 -year lifespan, equivalent to USD 3.2  per t CO 2 eq for GCF finance. This project ’s 
estimated contribution to the national ly determined contribution  (NDC ) stands at 732,111 t  CO 2 
eq or 1.2  per cent  over the project implementation period, r ising to 4,609,470 t  CO 2 eq or 7.4  per 
cent  over the 20-year project duration . 
9. The proposal include s a comprehensive budget totall ing USD 45.9 million, with a 
significant portion (USD 36.4 million ) sought from the GCF as a grant. The remaining USD 9.5 
million is anticipated to be sourced from co -financing by the Ministry of Environment, Water 
and Transition of Ecuador and the Conservation International Foundation (CI), in the form of  
both in- kind contributions and grants.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1 : Mangrove areas under effective and climate -adapted management increased , 
including through community- based management  (AUSCEMs),  and with protected areas 
implementing climate adaptation plans ( total cost: USD 26  million; GCF  cost:  USD 19.5  million ) 
10. Component 1 of the project aims to increase mangrove areas under effective and 
climate -adapted management  (AUSCEMs) , including through community -based management  
and protected areas i mplementing climate adaptation plans. Despite the effectiveness of 
community -based stewardship in protecting mangroves, there are gaps in coverage that can be 
addressed through outreach and providing assistance in organizing, planning and strengthening 
relationships with government program mes that recognize  AUSCEMs. The component is crucial 
to ensure that existing AUSCEM associations have the organizational capacity to sustain their 
stewardsh ip efforts.  
11. Community -based mechanisms for mangrove conservation are often economically 
precarious ; therefore, generating stronger local economic benefits based on mangrove 
conservation is essential for ensuring sustainability. Restoration efforts under community stewardship will contribute to enhancing mangrove coverage and associated benefits.  
12. To achieve these goals, o utput 1.1 focuses on reducing flood risk for vulnerable 
populations and reducing GHG emissions , through strengthening community -based mangrove 
management. Activities include providing training, technical assistance and equipment to 
AUSCEM groups, supporting the expansion of AUSCEMs, and assisting with the application 
process for incentives under the country’s Socio Manglar  (SM) programme . 
13. Output 1.2 aims to improve livelihood activities and economically productive 
community businesses to incentivize participation in mangrove conservation and restoration. 
This involves providing technical and business development support to mangrove communit y 
associations, particularly focusing on women, youth and other vulnerable groups. In a ddition, 
financial mechanisms will be established and consolidated to support micro - and small -scale


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 109 
 
 
enterprises, including cash grants and assistance in accessing credit and investment from 
existing financial institutions.  
14. Overall, these efforts seek to strengthen community -based mangrove conservation and 
management, reduce deforestation, increase economic benefits for local communities and 
enhance resilience to climate change.  
Component 2 : The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG 
emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that increase 
climate resilience for other coastal populations  (total cost: USD 10.2 million; GCF  cost:  USD 8.9 
million ) 
15. The project aims to engage the private sector in promoting improved shrimp production 
methods to reduce mangrove deforestation and advance mangrove conservation and 
restoration in Ecuador. CI is t he accredited entity  (AE) , and it will collaborate with Ecuador ’s 
National Conservation Agency  to provide training on sustainable shrimp production (SSP) and 
promote climate -smart shrimp (CSS) farming methods, including mangrove restoration on 
farms. CI will also engage consultants to help small-  and medium -sized shrimp farms access 
private finance.  
16. Seed funding will be provided by the Aquaculture Stewardship Council and CI to 
establish a subaccount within Ecuador ’s Socio Bosque Fund to support the S M program me for 
the incentive payment . The project aims to cataly se investment in CSS farming methods, leading 
to reduced GHG emissions, increased profitability and mangrove restoration.  
17. Technical assistance will be provided to shrimp farms for adopting SSP and CSS 
standards, with a focus on sustainable intensification and mangrove restoration. The project will facilitate partnerships and access to finance for shrimp farms transitioning to  sustainable 
practices, including through the E co Business Fund. It will also establish agreements with 
businesses to contribute to mangrove conservation and to finance the SM program me. 
18. In addition, the project will disseminate knowledge through various platforms and 
workshops, develop a marketing strategy for CSS  farming , and seek to mobilize private 
investment into the SM subaccount, supported by funds from the GCF. These efforts aim to 
strengthen private  sector engagement in mangrove conservation and restoration while 
promoting SSP practices in Ecuador.  With successful management, the SM subaccount is 
expected to create a long -term financial mechanism that attracts private sector invest ment and 
provides incentive payments for sustainable mangrove conservation and restoration.  
Component 3 : Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation 
and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening  governance, climate change adaptation 
strategies, coastal management policies and legal enforcement  (total cost:  USD 6.2 million; GCF  
cost:  USD 5.5 million)  
19. Actions by local communities and the private sector to protect mangroves and maintain 
flood protection benefits as a nature- based climate change adaptation and mitigation strategy 
are contingent upon the G overnment of Ecuador establishing the necessary governance, 
regulatory and enabling conditions. These conditions are essential  for deterring and controlling 
illegal activities and ensuring that climate considerations are integrated into planning and 
investment decisions.  
20. By providing better climate change and mangrove forest information to decision -makers 
and stakeholders, particularly focusing on public entities, the project will directly contribute to 
increasing climate knowledge for decision -making, laying the groundwor k for achieving project 
outcomes related to mangrove management and climate resilience.  
21. Improved legal and regulatory capacity, focusing on planning, preparedness and 
enforcement, will support sustaining mangroves and enhancing awareness and resilience


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 110 
 
 
among beneficiaries, primarily in the eight priority municipalities of the project area. This will 
directly contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive 
planning and development.  
22. To achieve these objectives, the project includes several activities under o utput 3.1, such 
as monitoring mangrove condition s and socioeconomic impacts, integrating remote sensing and 
community participation for emissions reduction monitoring, and conducting socioeconomic 
impact evaluations. Output 3.2 entails harmonizing legal and regulatory frameworks at the local 
and sectoral level, incorporating climate resilience and mitigation strategies, and enforcing regulations with a focus on human rights.  
23. Activities under o utput 3.2 include supporting local governments to improve planning 
instruments that integrate climate change adaptation and mangrove management, 
strengthening regulatory frameworks and law enforcement by relevant agencies, and 
generating proposals for regu latory changes in various sectors. This will involve analys ing legal 
frameworks, facilitating discussions on legal reforms and providing training to judiciary staff. In 
addition, the project will develop an online and mobile communications application ( app) for  
reporting deforestation and other impacts on mangroves, thereby enhancing transparency and 
enforcement efforts.  
III. Assessment against investment criteria  
3.1 Impact  potential                                                                                   Scale: N/A       
24. The project aims to directly benefit 89,600 individuals, with an additional 3.4 million 
indirect beneficiaries. Furthermore, it targets an estimated GHG emission reduction of  
4,609,470 t CO 2 eq over its 20 -year duration.  
25. The AUSCEM  project  seeks to address both adaptation and mitigation challenges posed 
by climate change, particularly in vulnerable coastal regions. By leveraging the protective 
capacities of mangrove ecosystems, the project endeavo urs to yield significant benefits for both 
local communities and the global environment. This project represents a multifaceted approach 
to address ing climate change impacts at both the local and the global scale, highlighting the 
crucial role of mangrove ecosystems in fostering resilience a nd mitigating environmental 
degradation.  The project offers both adaptation and mitigation benefits, focusing on reducing 
flooding risks and enhancing livelihoods through improved mangrove management.  
26. Adaptation impacts: Direct adaptation benefits include reduced flooding risk and 
increased resilience for vulnerable populations , while there are a number of indirect adaptation 
benefits  for s elected municipalities with high mangrove cover and populations at risk of 
flooding , including : 
(a) Potential benefits for 89,600 people in mitigating flood risks , according to f lood risk 
model ling estimates;  
(b) A USD  280 million per year  reduction in e conomic asset losses caused by  extreme 
climate -related disasters ; 
(c) Approximately 3.4 million indirect beneficiaries from improved planning processes in 
mangrove -rich municipalities ; 
(d) 41,500 individuals (50  per cent  female, 50  per cent  male) expected to adopt climate-
resilient livelihoods or experience reduced flood risk ; 
(e) 156,633 hectares of mangroves protected and strengthened, covering all of Ecuador ’s 
mangroves ; and


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 111 
 
 
(f) Restoration efforts covering  protected areas, sustainable land -use program mes and 
shrimp farms.  
27. Mitigation impacts : Mitigation benefits arise from the decreased GHG emissions 
resulting from a  reduc tion  in mangrove deforestation and an increase in carbon sequestration 
from restored mangroves , amounting to an estimated GHG emission reduction of 732,111 t  CO 2 
eq during the implementation period and 4,609,470 t  CO 2 eq over the 20-year  project lifespan . 
3.2 Paradigm  shift potential                                                                     Scale: N/A   
28. This project aims to transform Ecuador ’s approach to valuing and utilizing critical 
natural infrastructure, particularly mangrove ecosystems, to protect coastal communities from 
flooding. By integrating the adaptation and mitigation benefits of mangroves into governance 
and economic frameworks, the project offers an innovative solution to reducing GHG emissions 
and enhancing the livelihoods of vulnerable populations. It addresses the current undervaluation of climate risks and ecosystem services provided by mangroves,  which is the 
result of  inad equate information, institutional coordination and private sector investment.  
29. The project employs a multifaceted strategy, including strengthening public sector 
frameworks, fostering public –private partnerships and empowering local communities, with a 
focus on leveraging the “ green infrastructure ” of mangroves. This approach is cost -effective and 
scalable, and includes  lessons, guidance and tools that can be used for other coastal 
communities threatened by climate change. Comprehensive monitoring and reporting 
mechanisms will facilitate learning and knowledge -sharing throughout the p roject, with mid -
term and final evaluations to identify lessons learned and disseminate findings.  
30. The project aims to create an enabling environment and policy framework by 
strengthening regulatory frameworks and fostering dialogue and collaboration across sectors at 
the national and subnational level. Capacity -building initiatives will empower local communities 
to participate in innovative business models and to engage in land -use planning processes with 
local government. The project emphasizes consensus -building among stakeholders through 
participatory processes, facilitating agreements for the sustainable management of mangroves. 
Private sector participation will be enhanced through support for land -use planning and the 
adoption of climate -smart practices, particularly mangrove conservation and restoration.  
31. The project focuses on scaling up successful mangrove conservation and restoration 
activities in Ecuador, addressing the lack of basic land -use planning instruments in the project 
area. Participatory planning processes will be facilitated, documented and s hared with the 
national government, with recommendations for legal and regulatory adjustments as needed.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                                Scale: N/A  
32. Environmental co-benefits:  The project aims to reduce deforestation, enhance 
restoration and improve management practices across Ecuador ’s entire mangrove area, which  
span s 156,633 hectares . In addition to  mitigating climate change and reducing flood risks, 
mangroves offer further  ecosystem services;  for example, t hey support biodiversity 
conservation, acting as habitats for numerous plant and bird species. Mangroves also serve as 
vital nursing grounds for fisheries, fostering the spawning, breeding and early development  of 
various fish species. Thus mangroves play a significant role in fish production and provide substantial economic value through fisheries -related ecosystem services. The total ecosystem 
service value of mangroves, including biodiversity and other services, is estimated to be substantial, providing essential benefits to local economies.


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 112 
 
 
33. Social co-benefits:  In addition to mitigating flood risks, the project will yield various 
social co -benefits, particularly for mangrove- dependent communities and associations , as 
follows : 
(a) Improved social cohesion and organizational capacity among 60 associations  with 
AUSCEMs , which  will enhance the ability of communities to engage with government 
stakeholders, resolve internal conflicts and develop additional community activities;  
(b) Enhanced mangrove management and planning are likely to integrate social and 
environmental considerations, including water management and waste disposal,  
benefiting human health and well- being ; and  
(c) Collaborative efforts to control illegal activities in mangrove areas between community -
based associations and government authorities will enhance local security, generating collateral benefits.  
34. Economic co-benefits:  Mangrove conservation and restoration offer a cost -effective 
solution for climate change adaptation, generating economic benefits for the national and local 
government, the private sector and communities by avoiding the costs of extreme climate 
events. The shrimp production sector stands to benefit by accessing new markets through 
sustainable and CSS  production, leading to increased export revenue and employment 
opportunities.  
35. Communities will experience reduced flooding, along with minimized impacts on 
infrastructure, housing, crops and livelihoods. Diversification of livelihoods and adoption of 
adaptive fishing techniques will enhance the resilience, economic stability and foo d security of 
marginalized coastal fishing communities. Mangrove ecosystems form the foundation for 
diversified local economies, with artisanal fishing playing a significant role in sustaining 
livelihoods and contributing to marine fisheries.  
36. Gender -sensitive development impact:  The project will directly contribute to 
empowering women and other vulnerable groups in economic activities and advancing their 
participation and leadership in organizations and enterprises, ensuring a gender -sensitive 
approach to development initiatives.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                                                         Scale: N/A  
37. Ecuador has experienced notable economic growth  from 2007 and 2018 , resulting in a 
reduc tion  in the levels of poverty and inequality and the ongoing  expan sion of the middle class. 
However, the economy ’s heavy reliance on the oil sector presents a sign ificant vulnerability, 
particularly evident during periods of low oil prices and the appreciation of the US dollar.  
38. With over 3,630 km of coastline, Ecuador ’s five coastal provinces are home to  
approximately 54  per cent  of the population. These areas face significant risks from sea level 
rise, saltwater intrusion, storm surges, flooding and storms. Coastal regions of  Ecuador are 
disproportionately affected by poverty, with 45  per cent  of the population in the project area 
living below the extreme poverty line. Unsafe housing conditions persist due to rapid 
urbanization and persistent poverty.  
39. The challenges of coastal development are compounded by the threats of climate 
change, yet Ecuador lacks an integrated plan to protect mangroves and wetlands from the 
combined impacts of sea level rise and intensified storms. The project addresses these pressing 
needs by aligning with Ecuador ’s national climate change strategy and p lan, with the aim of 
support ing the national and local government, coastal communities and crucial  economic 
sectors such as shrimp farming and fisheries.


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 113 
 
 
3.5 Country ownership                                                                              Scale: N/A  
40. The project is in alignment with the NDC  in terms of contributing to both mitigation and 
adaptation goals  through the aim of protecti ng mangrove ecosystems.  The project is also  aligned 
to other national policies , including  the national climate change strategy, the conservation of the 
national forest estate, and REDD+ efforts . Moreover, the project is linked to the nation al 
measurement, reporting and verification  and monitoring and evaluation ( M&E ) systems for 
NDC im plementation ; thus the results will be agg regated into the national biennial transparency 
reports that the national governm ent will submit  under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change .  
41. In addition, c ountry ownership is firmly established through active government  
participation in project management structures.  Both the Ministry of E nvironment, Water and 
Ecological Transition  and the Vice-ministry of A quaculture and F isheries will be part of the 
project management advisory committee and  the technical committees guiding each project 
component . This involvement enhances ownership and promotes awareness of the 
technological solutions proposed by the project, setting the foundation for replication and 
scala bility in the future .  
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                          Scale: N/A  
42. The project  provides the most value of the scenarios considered over both the project 
implementation period ( 6.5 years) and the project life span  (20 years ), and it gives a high 
benefit -to-cost ratio (8 :1). The project is expected to generate USD 299 million of economic 
value over and above the “without project ” scenario over the 20-year project life span . As such , 
the project as designed provides excellent value for money because it will generate significant 
benefits to society over both the implementation period ( 6.5 years) and the expected project 
lifespan (20 years).  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
43.  The project aims to achieve GHG emission reduction s while providing flood protection 
and enhancing the livelihoods of the communities through coordinated efforts to protect and restore the mangrove ecosystem in Ecuador. The project interventions are intended to have 
positive impacts on people and the environment. Any unintended adverse impacts are expected 
to be minor and site-specific , and can be managed through careful design and standard 
mitigation measures. T he environmental co -benefits  due to reduced deforestation, restoration 
and management of the man grove ecosystem include enhanced habitat s, particularly for bird 
and fish species, and enhanced biodiversity and ecosystem services. T he social co -benefits 
include reduced flood risks, improved capacity for mangrove management and better human health and well -being.  
44. Environmental and social risk category and safeguards instrument. The project has 
been classified as environmental and social (E&S) risk c ategory B. The Secretariat confirms the 
categorization and that it is within the AE’s E&S risk accreditation level. Since the interventions 
are several and located in multiple sites involving various communities and development 
partners, and are not yet identified, the AE has prepared an e nvironmental and s ocial impact 
assessment and an e nvironmental and s ocial management  plan (ESMP) which together identif y 
the potential risks and impacts and possible mitigation measures and set out the procedures for 
assessing and managing E&S  risks and impacts of the individual interventions (subprojects).


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 114 
 
 
45. Compliance with GCF ’s Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) Standards  
46. The following paragraphs describe the project’s compliance with the GCF interim ESS 
standards:  
47. ESS1 : Assessment and management of e nvironmental and s ocial risks and 
impacts.  An environmental and social impact assessment  and ESMP (included as a nnex 6 to the 
funding proposal) provide a summary of the project activities and outcomes and the applicable 
legal and institutional framework, the biophysical and social environment, the identified 
potential risks and impacts, the mitigation measures and action plan , and the implementation 
and monitoring mechanisms by which the project will be implemented. The main risk pertains 
to potential restriction or loss of access  to mangrove resources  for some groups or individuals 
resulting in economic displacement. However, economic displacement, if any, is expected to be 
minor because  the planning and management of mangrove areas will be undertaken by the 
communities themselves , who are the traditional users and beneficiaries of the resource.  
48. ESS2 : Labou r and w orking conditions.  The project will mostly involve the community 
members themselves implement ing the activities under the project. However , those who will be 
working on the subprojects may be exposed to drowning hazards, poisonous animals and disease vectors. Mitigation measures will include assessing the health and safety risks to 
workers and developing prevention and emergency response planning for these activities. The 
project’s screening procedure also includes questions regarding whet her the subproject has a 
risk of potentially involving or lead to working conditions that do not meet national or 
international labo ur laws and regulations. In this regard, the project will ensure the health and 
safety of subproject -related workers and protect workers’ rights. Further, the project also 
excludes activities that might include the use of forced labo ur or child labo ur.  
49. ESS3 : Resource efficiency and p ollution prevention . The project is not expected to 
contribute to pollution but rather will support farms to reduce the use of materials that could 
generate and discharge pollutants to the ecosystem. Hence, the project’s activities are expected 
to lessen the pollution caused by the shrimp aquaculture farms and improve their resource 
efficiency ap proaches. The project’s activities include technical assistance for the development 
and promotion of CSS  aquaculture practices.  
50. ESS4 : Community health, safety and s ecurity. The mangrove 
restoration/reforestation activity of the project may expose community members to physical 
hazards, poisonous animals and disease vectors,  given that mangrove forests are home to some 
potentially dangerous animals and vectors that may result in  diseases such as malaria, dengue, 
leptospirosis and vibriosis. Community health, safety and security risk assessments will be 
conducted, and community health, safety and security plans will be implemented on each of the 
subprojects. The measures that will be implemented include first aid training for all project staff 
and guidance on how to address  communities’ safety related concerns.  
51. ESS5 : Land acquisition and i nvoluntary resettlement.  The AE has determined that 
the project would not involve acquisition of land but could potentially result to restriction or loss of access for some groups or individuals to mangrove resources. A process framework for 
restriction of access to natural resources is included as procedural guidance should community 
associations put in place restrictions on access to the mangrove resources for both members 
and non- members of these associations. The framework includes eligibility criteria,  measures to 
assist affected people , and a conflict resolution and complaint mechanism.  
52. ESS6 : Biodiversity conservation and s ustainable management of l iving natural 
resources . The AE has determined the applicability of ESS6 given that the project will support 
various forest use and conservation activities that may take place in and/or around protected 
areas and buffer zones. The project is not expected to result in the introduction of invasive 
species of flora and fauna , since the project aims to use only native species and enhance the 
ecosystem services that mangrove forests provide. The proj ect includes mangrove restoration


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 115 
 
 
activities using native and locally sourced species within the areas managed by the AUSCEMs, 
some of which are within protected areas. Additional restoration activities will also take place 
on private shrimp farms. The project will sign conservation agreem ents with the local 
communities that are to be supported by the project, particularly those that will oversee 
establishing forestry units and conduct reforestation activities. Assessment o f the 
environmental, social and economic viability of the restoratio n/reforestation activities will be 
conducted to ensure that the activities are not only technical feasible but are environmentally 
appropriate, socially beneficial and economically viable.  
53. The application of the GCF Indigenous Peoples  Policy takes into consideration Afro -
Ecuadorians and cholo artisanal fisher communities who are located within the project area . In 
addition to mainstreaming their engagement throughout the main funding proposal  documents, 
the Plan for Afro -descendent Communities and Cholos Pescadores  provides a specific 
instrument for ensuring that the rights of th ese groups are considered and strengthened 
throughout and beyond the project life cycle. In the preparation of the funding proposal , 
consultations were undertaken with both Indigenous Peoples and local communities, with 
outcomes included in the plan. In line with their roles and functions, the Indigenous Peoples 
Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the AE  and executing entities  (EEs) . 
54. ESS8 : Cultural heritage.  The project is not expected to implement activities that might 
affect cultural heritage. As part of its exclusion list, it will also not support activities that will “involve the removal, alteration, or disturbance of any non- replicable or critical cultur al 
heritage, or the use of intangible cultural heritage without the f ree, prior and i nformed consent 
of the communities to whom it belongs.”  
55. Sexual exploitation, abuse and h arassment (SEAH) . The revised GCF Environmental 
and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM -2021/18 requires safeguarding from SEAH  in GCF-
financed activities. The AE provided information on SEAH safeguards during the proposal 
development and outlined the SEAH risks in the ESMP, as well as providing  some SEAH 
mitigation measures in the gender action plan. The AE is committed to ensuring a safe, trusted and respectful environment within its  organization and global offices, as well as in its  
program mes and projects. This is in alignment with the CI SEAH policy which is applicable to its 
projects. The project recognizes potential SEAH risks , especially community engagements that 
will involve working directly with marginalized and vulnerable groups/communities. The AE 
will ensure that , in cases where SEAH incidents occur (or have a high probability of occurring), 
the rights and dignity of survivors are upheld in a confidential and gender -respons ive manner. 
The AE has therefore identified potential SEAH risks and mitigation measures  in the ESMP . 
56. Implementation arrangements . The project will have a p roject steering committee 
that will provide guidance and support management regarding  project implementation. A 
project management advisory committee will also be established to provide advice on technical 
matters. CI  Ecuador will be the EE for all activities of this project and will be responsible for 
project execution, management and reporting of project’s activities. A p roject management unit 
will also be established and will be responsible for overall coordination, management and 
implementation of the project on the ground. The project will have dedicated full- time staff, 
including a s afeguards manager and a gender manager among other full -time staff who will be 
responsible for  safeguards and gender -related matters . An e stuary field unit will be established 
in each of the project’s four target estuaries to be directly involved in the daily activities of the local associations.  
57. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure.  The AE has engaged 
stakeholders through workshops and targeted meetings at the national and local level. The consultation process involved key project stakeholders such as the men and women of local 
mangrove associations and other disadvantaged or vulnerable stakeholders. Community 
organizations managing AUSCEMs were also involved. The issues raised in the consultation 
process were considered in the development of the project. A stakeholder engagement plan has


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 116 
 
 
been  prepared to identify stakeholders, define participation strategies, establish procedures and 
methodologies, and identify issues and concerns that could affect project implementation.  
58. Grievance redress mechanism (GRM).  The project has described a project -level GRM 
that will be promoted during the awareness -raising and capacity -building activities of the 
project. It describes  the types of complaints that can be addressed, who can raise a complaint, 
the contact points at the community level, and the responsible authorities in handling 
complaints. The GRM also describe s the ability for stakeholders to access CI’s Ethics Hotline that 
employees, grantees and other partners and beneficiaries c an access to report incidents 
anonymously. The GRM also allows for stakeholders to access the GCF’s Independent Redress 
Mechanism.  In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF I ndigenous Peoples Focal 
Point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made.  
4.2 Gender policy  
59. The AE provided a gender assessment and action plan with the funding proposal , and 
therefore complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. The assessment report 
presents information on the differential impact of and vulnerability to  climate change for  
women and men in the targeted project area. The gender assessment is based on secondary 
data, as well as  consultation workshops that  were held  between 2016 and 2019. However, t he 
majority of the secondary data is from outdated sources ( i.e. 2010 –2012 ). The S ecretariat 
therefore recommends that , during early project implementation , the AE may need to make 
some revisions to the documents in annex 8 of the funding proposal  if there are any major 
changes in the demographics and/or socioeconomic statuses that  may have a bearing on this 
specific project.  
60. The gender action plan  for the project outlines various interventions in order to ensure 
that anticipated gender outcomes are realized. The emphasis  is on interventions that will aim at 
increasing women ’s participation in ensuring diversified and climate -resilient livelihood 
options in mangroves , as well as increasing women’s leadership, skills building within 
associations and gender quotas , among other  thing s. The Secretariat recommends and suggests 
that the AE include the following  provisions : (i) engage local women and fisherwomen in 
participatory project planning and implementation , including utilizing their knowledge of 
marine and coastal resources i n assessments, and their traditional practices in natural resource 
management; (ii) ensure that women -led businesses  have improved financial and market access 
and profitability, and address barriers within families and households by involving men; (iii) 
build critical awareness among women and disadvantaged groups on their rights as women and 
fisherfolk; and (iv) define common goals and develop str ategic alliances between women ’s 
groups and other organizations/associations for more effective advocacy for po licy change. 
Gender balance should be considered when forming stakeholder groups; this may involve 
including female minority leaders and managers to encourage participation and capacity -
building. Also, the AE needs to ensure that financial leakage is eliminat ed and that financial 
resources actually reach the needy, poor, vulnerable and disadvantaged communities including 
women and girls.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( medium risk)  
61. The project aims to coordinate efforts across the public, private and community sectors 
to protect and restore mangroves in Ecuador. This initiative plans to reduce mangrove loss, 
resulting in a reduction in GHG emission s amounting to 4.6 Mt  CO 2 eq over the project lifespan . 
It will also accelerate mangrove recovery to enhance flood protection for 89,600 people and


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 117 
 
 
improve the livelihoods of 41,500 people. The project activities are structured around three 
main components: (i) reducing flood risks and increasing resilience while also reducing GHG 
emissions and increasing sequestration; (ii) engaging the private sector in emission reduction s 
and providing financial support for mangrove conservation; and (iii) creating conditions to 
sustain reductions in mangrove deforestation and increase restoration efforts by strengthening 
governance and coastal management policies. The project, with a total cost of USD 45.93 million, 
will be funded by USD 36.4 million from the GCF as grant, with additional co -financing total ling 
USD 9.53 million (grants and in -kind) for a co -financing ratio of 1:0.26 .  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low  risk)  
62. CI, through its CI -GCF agency, will serve as the A E with CI Ecuador overseeing project 
execution. With a track record in conservation spanning three decades and covering Galapagos, 
marine/coastal regions, Andes Choco and the Amazon, CI has a history of supporting the 
creation and management of protected areas and collaborat ing with artisanal fisher 
associations for sustainable resource management. GCF has collaborated with CI through 
previous projects ( i.e. FP158 and FP026) in addressing mitigation, adaptat ion and sustainable 
livelihood s in Africa.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific execution risks (medium risk)  
63. Security risk : The Secretariat  note s that there are reports of threat s from criminal 
gangs engaging in violent crimes and illicit activities across Ecuador. The coastal areas, 
particularly Guayaquil, are reportedly entangled in the cocaine trade, with drug traffickers 
exploiting weak law enforcement and port vulnerabilities to smuggle drugs, exacerbating 
security concerns in the country, potentially disrupting project implementation. The AE also 
acknowledges these challenges posed by criminal gangs operating in remote mangrove areas 
and the exploitation of Ecuador ’s coastal a reas for cocaine trafficking, underscoring potential 
impacts on project activities. In its mitigation plan, the AE has developed a s ecurity plan ( annex 
6, ESMP a ppendix 11), and CI ’s Safety and Security Director will conduct a security assessment 
and develop a mitigation plan during project startup. The mitigation measures will include pre -
activity community engagement, hostile environment awareness training and ensuring easy 
identification of CI’s  staff .  
64. Political instability:  The political landscape in Ecuador has been characterized by 
instability in the past and remains unstable following the October 2023 election. Newly elected 
President Noboa was voted into office without a majority in the National Assembly. To secure political stability, the President formed a coalition with two other political parties in t he radical 
left and conservatives. Nonetheless, CI ’s 20 years of experience operating in Ecuador ’s political 
context provide a robust foundation for  implementing mitigation measures. CI has strong 
relations hips  with local and provincial government officials , and it is expected that this will help 
to deliver  proactive engagement with various stakeholders , including local communities, project 
partners and relevant authorities , to help address political challenges.  
65. Project viability (and concessionality):  The use of grants (i.e. 100 per cent 
concessionality) is justified given the country context where public and private funding for 
mangrove conservation and restoration efforts is limited and insufficient. Vulnerable 
populations in Ecuador are directly exposed to heightened flood risks exacerbated by climate 
change , and they lack adaptive capacity due to poverty. Grant funding is therefore warranted to 
create the enabling conditions for sustain ing capacity and incentiviz ing private sector 
investments in mangroves, ensuring the integration of climate resilience measures and fostering long -term sustainability.


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 118 
 
 
4.3.4.  Compliance r isk (medium risk)  
66. Ecuador is not currently subject to United Nations Security Council resolutions, nor is it 
currently identified on the Financial Action Task Force lists of high -risk jurisdictions or 
jurisdictions under increased monitoring relating to a nti-money laundering (AML)  and 
countering the f inancing of terrorism (CFT).  
67. The funding proposal noted a risk of criminal gangs operating in project areas and rated 
the probability as “medi um”. The m itigating measures described in the  security plan includ e 
staff training, mapping of high -risk areas, and a country threat and vulnerability assessment, as 
well as cooperation with local partners and authorities. The funding proposal also noted that 
project areas are located along a drug  shipping route. The AE provided further information on 
its AML/CFT controls in a nnex 20 to the funding proposal and confirmed that its AML/CFT 
policies include sanctions screening of subgrantees and EE (CI Ecuador) employees.  
68. Furthermore, as the political and security situation in Ecuador has evolved since the 
proposal was first submitted, the AE confirmed that the s ecurity plan has been updated 
accordingly, with additional security costs including in the budget.  
69. Given the aforementioned risks, as well as the ongoing uncertainty within Ecuador, this 
project is deemed to be medium risk from a compliance perspective.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)   
70. In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is immaterial.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
71. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.   
4.4 Fiduciary  
72. CI, through its CI -GCF agency, will serve as the A E for the project. CI- GCF will also be 
responsible for providing support and guidance to the EE; monitoring project results and 
outputs; reporting to the GCF; and project closure and evaluation.  
73. CI will self -execute this project, acting through its country office in Ecuador (referred to 
in this proposal as “CI” or “CI  Ecuador” ), which will be the EE  for all project activities.  
74. Therefore, financial management and procurement for this project will follow relevant 
CI policies and procedures, as well as relevant provisions in the a ccreditation master agreement 
(AMA) between CI and the GCF.  
75. An annual audit of the project will be conducted by an independent external audit firm 
in accordance with audit standards under United States Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles  and provided  to the GCF in accordance with CI ’s AMA.  Summary risk assessment  Rationale  
Overall programme  Medium The funding proposal has an overall risk 
assessment of Medium based on the  issues 
highlighted. It is recommended that the Board 
consider the above  factors in its decision.  Accredited entity (AE)/executing 
entity (EE) capability  Low  
Project- specific execution  Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 119 
 
 
76. Disbursements made to CI will be recorded to the ledger account for this GCF project, 
which can be tracked using the Business World system. Disbursements from the EE to 
subgrantee s will be made upon CI ’s receipt of acceptable progress and financial requirements as 
included in the applicable grant agreement.  
77. All procurement for this project must follow the p rocurement process standards defined 
in CI ’s procurement policy, which requires that all procurement of goods or services ensure s the 
best value and complies  with all donor funding terms and conditions, and that all goods will  be 
used only for their intended purposes and consistent ly with CI ’s code of e thics and suite of anti-
fraud policies. CI’ s procurement standards are in line with the GCF fiduciary standards.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
78. As a cross- cutting project, the funding proposal  aims to achieve a combination of 
mitigation and adaptation outcomes spanning three GCF result s areas : forestry and land use for 
mitigation ; most vulnerable people and communities , and ecosystems and ecosystems services 
for adaptation. The expected mitigation outcome is  an estimated GHG emission reduction of 
4,609,470 t  CO 2 eq over the project’s 20 -year lifespan  and 732,111 t  CO 2 eq by the end of the 
implementation period . The expected adaptation beneficiaries  amount to 89,600 and 3.4 million 
direct and indirect beneficiaries respectively. The AE submitted the necessary annex to 
demonstrate the calculation method s used for these estimates.  
79. The theory of change has been improved and refined to clearly articulate the results 
chain that connects the proposed activities, outputs, outcomes and impact. It covers pathways 
that will lead to the expected climate outcomes and co -benefits . 
80. The logical framework is consistent with the requirements of t he Integrated Results 
Management Framework . The project is expected to reali ze its paradigm shift potential through 
a combination of building community knowledge and resources for mangrove management and 
livelihoods, strengthening the enabling environment for mangrove management, and 
strengthening collaboration between the private sector  and government on mangrove 
protection and restoration. Core i ndicator 2 (adaptation beneficiaries), s upplementary indicator 
2.1 (adoption of climate- resilient livelihood optio ns), supplementary indicator 3.1 (change in 
expected losses), c ore indicator 4 (natural resources brought under improved management 
practices), supplementary indicator 4.1(natural resources restored) and c ore indicator 1 (GHG 
emissions reduced) have all been incorporated into the logical framework and relevant means 
of verification, targets and assumptions have been specified.  
81. The M&E p lan, which includes indicator -specific approaches for data collection and data 
sources, and an evaluation plan, are well provided for in the project budget and AE fees 
respectively. The budget allocation for the M&E activities is  consistent with the requirements of 
the GCF Evaluation Policy.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
82. The AMA was signed with the A E on 13 July 2017, and was amended and restated on 15 
August 2022, which became effective on 17 August 2022, for the second accreditation term.  
83. The A E has provided a legal certificate confirming that it has obtained all internal 
approvals,  and it has the capacity and authority to implement the p roject pursuant to clause 
4.13 of the AMA.  
84. The proposed p roject will be implemented in Ecuador, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add.  10 
Page 120 
 
 
assessed. The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities and a 
background note to the Government of the Republic of Ecuador on 23 February 2023.  
85. It is recommended that any approval by the Board is made subject to the following 
conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board  approval ; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat .


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 121 
 
 
   
 Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP235 
Proposal name:  Mangroves for climate: Public, Private and Community 
Partnerships for Mitigation and Adaptation in Ecuador  
Accredited entity:  Conservation International Foundation  
Country:  Ecuador  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Overview  
1. The Mangroves for c limate: Public , Private and Community Partnerships for Mitigation 
and Adaptation in Ecuador  project  is a c ross -cutting project aimed at strengthening the 
resilience of Ecuador’s coastal areas to the negative impacts of climate change, while also 
significantly reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Over a n implementation  period of six-
and-a-half years, this small -sized  project will bring together the public, private, and community 
sectors to focus on the conservation and restoration of mangrove ecosystems, which are crucial 
for coastal protection,  biodiversity , and local livelihoods. This project meets the urgent need for 
climate adaptation and mitigation in regions prone to extreme weather and rising sea levels, 
providing direct benefits to Ecuador ’s most vulnerable coastal communities.  
2. The project interventions are centered  around three main components:  
(a) Community empowerment : Enhance the management and restoration of mangroves 
through community -led initiatives, thereby improving local livelihoods and ensuring 
sustainable ecosystem services;  
(b) Private -sector engagement : Mobilize the shrimp farming sector to adopt and finance 
climate -smart practices that align with mangrove conservation efforts ; and  
(c) Create and e nabling environment : Develop and enforce policies that integrate 
mangrove conservation into broader climate strategies, supported by improved 
governance and legal frameworks . 
3. The execution of the proposed project is expected to i) protect and manage 156,633 ha 
of mangrove ecosystems; ii) reduce GHG  emissions by 4.6 million ton nes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent  (Mt CO 2 eq) over its 20 -year lifespan ; and iii) enhance the climate resilience of 
89,600 people by reducing flood risks through ecosystem -based adaptations.  
4. The total budget for the proposed project is USD 45.9 million. A substantial portion of 
this budget , USD 36.4 million , is requested as a grant from GCF. Co -financing of USD 9.5 million  
will be provided by Ecuador’s Ministry of the Environment, Water and Ecological Transition 
(Ministerio del Ambiente, Agua y T ransición del Ecuador ( MAATE )), and Conservation 
International (CI)  in the form of grants and in -kind contributions.  
5. This project is vital not only for its environmental , economic , and social benefits but also 
as a model for integrated, multisectoral climate action. It aligns with the  national climate 
strategies of Ecuador and supports global efforts under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and its Paris Agreement.


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 122 
 
 
   
 6. With CI as the accredited entity (AE) and e xecuting entity  (EE) , the proposed project will 
be implemented through a structured management approach involving a steering committee, a 
management unit, and localized implementation teams, ensuring efficient delivery and 
adherence to the planned outcomes.  
1.2 Impact potential        Scale:  High  
7. The project aims to significantly reduce vulnerability for the 89,600 direct and 3.4 
million indirect project beneficiaries, which represents about 1.8  per cent  and 20.1  per cent  of 
Ecuador ’s coastal and total populations, respectively. This wide reach focuses on the most 
vulnerable groups, particularly in impoverished rural coastal areas . However, d etailing 
strategies to ensure that the project benefits reach the most marginalized people within these 
groups, including tailored measures for varying vulnerab ility levels, could have enhance d the 
project ’s adaptation impact . 
8. From a climate -change mitigation perspective, the proposed project can reduce 4.6 Mt  
CO 2 eq over its 20 -year lifespan, primarily through the restoration and conservation of 
mangrove forests, which are significant carbon sinks . 
9. By prioritizing natural mangrove barriers , the proposed project avoids the long -term 
liabilities of climate -change -vulnerable constructions . Mangroves ’ inherent resilience and flood 
mitigation capabilities boost the adaptive capacity  of the exposed communities.  The 
continuation of activities initiated by the proposed project  could  integrate hybrid approaches, 
combining green and gr ey infrastructure where natural solutions might fall short .  
10. The proposed project directly causes GHG emission reductions from mangrove 
deforestation and carbon enhancement through restoration. Both activities combined aim to 
result in  a mitigation impact of 732,11 t CO 2 eq during the project’s six-and-a-half year 
implementation and 4.6 Mt CO 2 eq during its  20-year lifespan. The proposal includes a clear 
project method and details the calculations  behind the proposed project , clarifies measurement, 
reporting and v erification (MRV) at the project scale as well as how it is link ed to the national 
MRV system.  
11. Furthermore, t he proposed project indirectly supports low -emission practices by 
promoting sustainable shrimp -farming techniques within the private sector . 
12. The proposed project will bolster institutional frameworks and regulatory systems by 
embedding climate resilience in local and national governance. This involves improving the 
community management of mangroves and supporting legal frameworks that encourage 
private -sector conservation efforts.  
13. The proposed project promotes the generation and use of climate information in 
decision -making by partnering with scientific entities like the International Research Cent re on 
El Niño  Southern Oscillation . However, e stablishing robust feedback mechanisms to adapt and 
update practices based on the latest climate data could have further solidif ied this aspect.  
14. By emphasizing community -based management and partnerships, the project raises 
awareness and adaptive capacity among local populations. Educating communities on climate threats and sustainable practices is key to the project’s  strategy, empowering stakeholders to 
actively engage in conservation and adaptation efforts . 
15. Overall, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) considers the impact potential 
for both adaptation and mitigation of the proposed project to be h igh. 
1.3 Paradigm shift potential    Scale:  Medium  to High


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 123 
 
 
   
 16. The proposed project advocates a collaborative approach, engaging public, private, and 
community partnerships in mangrove management and restoration. By integrating the 
adaptation and mitigation benefits of mangrove ecosystems into economic and governance 
frameworks, the proposed  project will  create new market opportunities, especially in the 
shrimp aquaculture sector, to promote sustainable practices.  
17. The project ’s theory of change is coherent and well -structured, focusing on increasing 
mangrove coverage for carbon sequestration and enhanced coastal resilience, directly 
supporting global low -carbon development pathways.  
18. Furthermore, the iTAP welcomes the inclusion in  activity 3.1.1. of an explicit system for 
MRV of mangrove cover and carbon stocks, including remote sensing, community participation 
and making subgrants to competitively selected universities or n on-governmental organizations 
to collaboratively generate geospatial data and capacity that will be integrated both into the 
project monitoring and e valuation (M&E) plan and the national REDD+ MRV systems.  This 
enhanced capacity should form an important building bloc k for any future private and/or public 
sector efforts to mobilize resources based on mangrove carbon sequestration.  
19. The M&E plan targe ts the ecological, social, and economic impacts of the proposed 
project. However, the documentation (the f unding proposal and its a nnex 11) lacks extensive 
details on this plan. Improving this aspect, notably establishing a clear and fit -for-purpose 
feedback mechanism, could better ensure that lessons learned are captured and effectively 
disseminated, promoting adaptive management and replication in other contexts.  
20. The proposed project involves creating a USD 4 million  endowment in the Socio Manglar 
subaccount  (a new financing window under the Socio Bosque Fund) , securing long -term 
financial support for mangrove conservation. This strategic financial planning ensures the 
continuation of project benefits beyond the funding period. However, ongoing contributions and 
financial sustainability will require continuous reinforcement.  
21. The proposed project promotes new business activities and markets, particularly in 
climate -smart shrimp farming. The potential for market creation could have been  further 
expanded by exploring additional ecosystem services provided by mangroves that could be 
monetized  (if the legal and regulatory framework in Ecuador allows it ). By incorporating 
mangrove conservation into shrimp -farming practices, the project alters incentives for market 
participants by decreasing the environmental impact of shrimp farming,  a major contributor to 
mangrove loss. Increasing awareness and highlighting the benefits of these changes among the 
broader industry could further shift market incentives.  In addition, greater diversification of 
economic activities could also offer communities greater flexibility, which would not only help 
reduce their dependence on climate -sensitive sectors, but would also increase their resilience to 
adverse climatic conditions, including extreme events such as intense rainfall.  
22. The proposed project will address barriers such as the lack of coordinated management 
and inadequate enforcement of environmental regulations . However, barriers such as those 
relating to communities ’ legal rights seem to be beyond the project ’s reach. Furthermore, long -
term financing depends to some extent on private -sector participation, and the project ’s 
strategy for achieving this is lacking in detail.  
23. Overall , the iTAP rates the paradigm shift potential of the proposed project as medium  
to high . 
1.4 Sustainable development potential     Scale:  High  
24. The proposed project demonstrates significant potential for improving environmental 
quality and conservation. It emphasizes the restoration and preservation of mangrove ecosystems, which are vital for carbon sequestration, biodiversity conservation, and acting as


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 124 
 
 
   
 natural defen ces against coastal erosion and flooding. This aligns with Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG ) 13 (Climate a ction) and 15 (Life on l and). The project aims to reduce 4.6 Mt  CO 2 eq 
over its duration, thereby enhancing air quality and soil stability through increased mangrove 
coverage.  Given that the impacts of the project’ s planned activities on air quality are less well 
documented, the M&E  plan could incorporate this aspect.  
25. The proposed project is designed to directly benefit around 41,500 individuals  by 
supporting climate -resilient livelihoods through improved fisheries management and other 
ecosystem services provided by mangroves. It places special emphasis on gender -specific 
impacts, aiming to empower women by improving their access to resources and  decision -
making processes, aligning with SDG 5 (Gender e quality). However, ongoing efforts in gender -
focused capacity -building and ensuring equitable access to benefits are cruc ial. 
26. This project also promotes economic externalities by creating jobs, enhancing local 
industries (especially fisheries and ecotourism), and encouraging sustainable practices such as 
climate -smart shrimp farming. It is expected to bolster local and national e conomic resilience, 
aligning with SDG 8 (Decent w ork and e conomic growth). By integrating local industries with 
conservation efforts, the project aims to establish a sustainable development model that can 
attract private investment, thereby enhancing the financial sustainability of conservation 
initiatives. Achieving long -term economic benefits will require strong partnerships and ongoing 
engagement with the private sector. Furthermore, to foster innovation and skills development 
within the local job market, the proposed project could have also consider ed strength ening 
fram eworks for collaboration between industry and academia.  
27. The proposed project caters to the needs of both women and men by promoting gender 
equality through inclusive participation in activities and decision -making processes. It places 
special emphasis on empowering women in the community, acknowledging their ro le in the 
economy , and in managing natural resources. Interventions are specifically designed to reduce 
women ’s vulnerability to climate -change impacts by improving their access to resources and 
information. However, the proposed project could also have developed more tailored 
interventions that address the specific vulnerabilities of women in coastal communities, potentially by expanding gende r-focused educational and economic opportunities.  
28.  The proposed project  effectively addresses multiple facets of sustainable development, 
including environmental protection, social inclusion, and economic growth, with a particular 
focus on gender equality. To fully realize these potentials, continuous monitoring and adaptive 
management, robust local participation, and sustained funding and technical support will be 
essential.  
29. Overall, the iTAP rates the sustainable development  potential of the proposed project as 
high . 
1.5 Needs of the recipient       Scale:  High  
30. Ecuador ’s coastal region, especially its extensive mangrove ecosystems, faces significant 
climate hazards  such as sea -level rise, extreme El Niño events, and increased precipitation 
variability. These factors amplify coastal flooding risks, endangering local communities and 
economic activities that rely heavily on fisheries and aquaculture . This vulnerability is 
intensified by the ongoing deforestation of mangroves, which are crucial for flood control and 
erosion prevention. The project ’s focus on restoring and con serving mangrove areas directly 
addresses these vulnerabilities and risks.  
31. The proposed project focuses on areas that encompass a significant portion of Ecuador ’s 
coastal population, which is directly threatened by climate -induced flooding. Approximately 3.4 
million people in coastal provinces are indirectly affected by these climate risks, with 
substantial assets at stake, including the shrimp aquaculture industr y, a major economic driver


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 125 
 
 
   
 of the targeted coastal communities. Thus, the project ’s interventions are essential in protecting 
these populations and economic resources.  
32. The project identifies and aims to support groups particularly vulnerable to climate 
impacts, integrating strategies that address their needs into the broader national climate and 
development frameworks. However, the effectiveness of these strategies should be closely 
evaluated to ensure that they result in tangible benefits.  
33. The target ed regions experience high poverty rates and limited economic 
diversification, making them more vulnerable to climate impacts. By enhancing mangrove 
ecosystems that support fisheries and local economies, the proposed project promotes 
sustainable livelihoods and economic development, thereby reducing the socioeconomic 
vulnerability of these communities.  
34. The project is well -aligned with the needs of Ecuador ’s climate -vulnerable coastal 
populations, addressing both immediate and long -term climate change  related risks. Its 
comprehensive approach to enhancing both human and ecological resilience is promising.  
35. Therefore, the iTAP evaluates the need of the recipient for the proposed project as high.  
1.6 Country ownership       Scale:  High  
36. The proposed project directly supports Ecuador ’s objectives for low -emission and 
climate -resilient development as outlined in its n ational adaptation plan and n ationally 
determined contributions. It aims to help achieve Ecuador's n ationally determined contribution  
targets by reducing GHG emissions and promoting community -managed mangrove 
conservation through the Agreements for Sustainable Use and Custody of the Mangrove 
Ecosystem.  
37. The Organic Environmental Code of Ecuador and local regulations offer a solid policy 
foundation for the proposed project. However, these policies require strengthening to ensure 
effective mangrove conservation and restoration. The project aims to foster a supportive environment for reducing mangrove deforestation and enhancing restoration through improved 
governance and climate adaptation strategies.  
38. CI has extensive experience in managing climate -change initiatives. Alongside local 
partners, they have participated in previous mangrove conservation efforts, further enhancing 
their credibility and capability.  The proposed project offsets  a new opportunity to enhance local 
capacities further to ensure long -term sustainability and scalability of mangrove conservation 
and restoration initiatives in the country . 
39. The project development process included consultations with civil society, local 
communities, the private sector , and other stakeholders, with a focus on gender equality and 
sustainable livelihoods. It intends to maintain engagement with these groups throughout the 
project, adhering to environmental and social safeguards. However, creating more explicit 
mechanisms for continuous stakeholder input and feedback during implementation could  
improve adaptiveness and inclusiveness.  
40. The project engages in in-country institutions such as MAATE, along with local 
governments and community organizations, fostering local ownership and accountability. 
Strengthening these local institutions to effectively manage increased responsibilities will be 
crucial for succe ssful project outcomes.  
41. The proposed project is designed to complement and synergize with other national and 
international initiatives. This ensures that the project ’s activities are integrated and contribute 
to broader conservation and climate -resilience efforts.


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 126 
 
 
   
 42. The proposed project showcases strong country ownership by aligning with national 
priorities, receiving institutional support, engaging stakeholders, and integrating with national 
systems.  The track record of the AE/ executing entity  further reinforces this assessment.  
43. Overall, the iTAP considers the country ownership of the proposed project to be high.  
1.7 Efficiency and effectiveness    Scale:  Medium  to High  
44. The proposed financial structure, with a USD 36.4 million  GCF grant and total funding of 
USD 45.9 million  (co-financing ratio is 1: 0.21) , aims to tackle major obstacles like insufficient 
financing for long -term mangrove conservation and community engagement. However, the 
heavy dependence on grant funding indicates a need for a more diversified financial approach to 
ensure sustainability after the project ’s completion.  
45. The project’s reliance on grants reflects high concessionality, which is essential due to 
its focus on vulnerable communities and ecosystem services that offer public benefits. However, 
the proposed project could have more clearly outline d the steps taken to minimize the level of 
concessionality needed to ensure viability.  
46. The proposed project is designed  to leverage additional private and public investment 
rather than replace it. Specifically, it seeks to attract private- sector investment in sustainable 
shrimp farming and mangrove conservation. However, it would benefit from clearer metrics on 
the expected investment amounts and sources.  
47. The project expects to reduce 4.6 Mt  CO 2 eq over its lifetime, with an investment cost of 
roughly USD 10 per t  CO 2 eq based on total funding. To fully evaluate its relative efficiency, this 
cost -effectiveness could have been  more explicitly compared to similar projects.  
48. The proposed project shows a commitment to long -term financial sustainability and 
technological integration, particularly through the use of the best available technologies and 
practices in mangrove restoration and shrimp farming. Furthermore, the M&E methodology on 
which MAATE, universities and community monitors will be trained goes beyond measuring the 
area replanted with propagules, and the survival rate of propagules, to include the complex 
hydrological dynamics of mangrove ecosystems as a contributor to mangrove losses and gains. 
This reflects global best practice in mangrove monitoring, and will hopefully be shared by CI 
with other AEs overseeing GCF projects involving mangrove restoration.  However, providing 
more detail on financial plann ing for the post -GCF phases would offer stronger assurance of 
long -term viability.  
49. Overall, the iTAP assesses the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project as  
medium to  high.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
50. The proposed project is well -structured with a solid theory of change to ensure long -
term results and impact. In order to improve it, the iTAP suggests that the AE takes into account 
the following aspects:  
(a) Diversif ication of  financial strategies for long -term sustainability : While the 
project ’s dependence on grant funding is understandable given its focus, it is crucial to 
develop a more diversified financial approach. This c ould  involve establishing 
partnerships with private -sector investors, and exploring other sustainable financing 
mechanisms. Providing clearer metrics on expected investment amounts and sources 
will strengthen financial planning and ensure the project ’s viability beyond its initial 
funding period ;


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 127 
 
 
   
 (b) Promot ion of economic diversification to enhance long -term resilience  and 
mitigation impact : To further enhance the project ’s impact  and financial viability , it is 
essential to promote economic diversification within the target ed regions. This can be 
accomplished by developing and supporting alternative livelihood opportunities beyond 
fisheries and shrimp farming. By fostering a more diversified local economy, the 
proposed project can reduce communities’  dependence on climate -sensitive sectors and 
increase their resilience to adverse climatic conditions. Additionally, providing training 
and resources for these alternative economic activities can help create more stable and 
sustainable income sources for l ocal populations ; and  
(c) Integrat ion of  comprehensive monitoring , evaluation and learning plans : 
Establishing a clear and fit -for-purpose feedback mechanism within the M&E framework 
will help capture lessons learned and disseminate them effectively. This will promote 
adaptive management, enabling the project to adjust strategies as needed and enhance 
replicability in other regions and sectors.  
51. Based on the analyses presented in the above paragraphs , the iTAP recommends that 
the Board approve this funding proposal.


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 128 
 
 
Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP2 35) 
 
Proposal  name:  Mangroves  for Climate:  Public,  Private  and Community 
Partnerships  for Mitigation  and Adaptation  in Ecuador  
Accredited  entity:  Conservation International Foundation  (CI) 
Country : Ecuador  
Project/programme  size:  Small  
 
Impact  potential  
iTAP  evaluation:  High  
CI notes  iTAP’s  positive  assessment  with  thanks.  
CI acknowledges that further work can be done during implementation to ensure that the 
project benefits for coastal communities planned under Component 1 reach the most vulnerable  people  within  the target  communities.  The project  design  allows  for this flexibility 
especially through the activities planned under Project Output 1.2 “Improved livelihood 
activities and more economically productive community businesses”.  
Paradigm  shift  potential  
iTAP  evaluation:  Medium  to High  
CI agrees  with  the importance  placed  on the long -term  financial sustainability  of the project 
activities to ensure long -term benefits. This particularly applies to continuing to support 
community efforts to manage mangroves. Activity 2.2.1 is  designed to  address  this need by 
engaging with the private sector to increase the support companies operating in Ecuador 
provide for mangrove conservation and restoration.  
Sustainable  development  potential  
iTAP  evaluation:  High  
CI agrees  with  the need  for gender -focused  capacity -building  and ensuring  equitable access  to 
project benefits. These issues are highlighted in Annex 8, the Gender Assessment and Action Plan. The Plan highlights how activities are designed to ensure that women and men can 
equitably benefit from community -based management and local economic development 
initiatives.  
CI also notes the suggestion to strengthen collaboration between industry and academia. 
Activity 2.1.1, on the promotion of climate -smart aquaculture, includes a sub -activity to 
disseminate  knowledge  gathered  by the project with  partners,  including  in academia. CI will 
examine ways of strengthening this sub -activity during implementation.


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 129 
 
 
 
 
 
Needs  of the recipient  
iTAP  evaluation:  High  
CI notes  iTAP’s  positive  assessment  with  thanks.  
CI notes the recommendation to evaluate the effectiveness of strategies to address the needs 
of the most vulnerable  to climate  change. Activity  3.1.1. includes a sub -activity  to evaluate the 
socio -economic impact of project activities.  
Country  ownership  
iTAP  evaluation:  High  
CI notes  iTAP’s  positive  assessment  with  thanks.  
CI acknowledges the recommendation to create explicit mechanisms for continuous 
stakeholder input and feedback during implementation to improve adaptiveness and 
inclusiveness. Annex 7 includes the Stakeholder Engagement Plan, which explains how 
stakeholder s will be engaged in each activity  during  project implementation. CI will examine 
ways  of further  strengthening mechanisms  for stakeholder  input  and feedback  during  project 
implementation. 
Efficiency  and  effectiveness  
iTAP  evaluation:  Medium  to High  
CI acknowledges  the challenge of ensuring  long -term  financial sustainability  to bring  together 
the public, private and community sectors to secure environmental services provided by 
mangroves. Public funding for protection of mangroves is a strategic investment that  
provides substantial environmental, social and economic returns. CI agrees that diversified financing of mangrove protection is needed and has built this into the project design. The 
activities of Component 2 seek to 1) integrate mangrove conservation and restoration as 
standard practice in shrimp aquaculture operations,  and 2) attract private -sector investment 
for community managem ent of mangroves.  
Overall  remarks  from  the independent  Technical  Advisory Panel:  
CI thanks the iTAP for the thorough review of the Funding Proposal package, the 
recommendations  and the overall  positive  assessment.  The assessment  document  provides 
an excellent summary of the project as it relates to the GCF’s six assessment criteria. We 
welcome the recommendation to approve this Funding Proposal.  
CI especially  notes  the different  aspects identified  for strengthening  the project,  including  the 
three main points highlighted in the “overall remarks” section. We are confident that the


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B. 39/02/Add. 10 
Page 130 
 
 
 
 
project  design  allows  for all the points  that  have  been  raised  to be addressed during  project 
implementation.


---
*Page 131*
---

1 Mangroves for Climate: Public, Private and 
Community Partnerships for Mitigation and 
Adaptation in Ecuador  
ANNEX 8: Gender Assessment Report and Gender Action 
Plan  
Prepared by Conservation International and Saraswati Rodriguez, Asesoramiento 
Ambiental Estratégico (AAE) through a PPF grant from the Green Climate Fund  
Gender Documentation for FP235


---
*Page 132*
---

 
2 
 Contents  
Figures and Tables  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  4 
Acronyms and abbreviations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 5 
Executive summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  6 
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  8 
1.1 Project background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 8 
1.2 Purpose and methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................  10 
1.2.1 Workshops  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  11 
1.2.2 Semi structured interviews  ................................ ................................ .............................  13 
1.2.3 Surveys ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  14 
2. Situation of men and women in coastal Ecuador  ................................ .............................  16 
2.1 Legal status of women across Ecuador  ................................ ................................ ..............  16 
2.1.1 National legal framework  ................................ ................................ ...............................  16 
2.1.2 Agenda for Women  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  16 
2.1.3 Gender policy of the Ministry of Environment, Water and Ecological Transition of Ecuador 
(MAATE)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  17 
2.1.4 An NDC with a gender perspective  ................................ ................................ .................  18 
2.2 Political participation at national, provincial, and local levels  ................................ .............  19 
2.3 Socio -economic information  ................................ ................................ .............................  20 
2.4 Education  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  22 
2.5 Time use/division of labor  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 23 
2.6 Health and gender -based violence  ................................ ................................ ....................  24 
2.7 Assets and infrastructure  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 25 
3. Access, use, and management of mangroves.  ................................ ................................ .. 26 
3.1 Importance of mangroves to local populations  ................................ ................................ .. 26 
3.2 Participation and decision -making in mangrove management  ................................ ...........  26 
3.2.1 Northern estuaries (Cayapas -Mataje + Muisne)  ................................ ..............................  28 
3.3 Southern estuaries (Guayas + Jambeli)  ................................ ................................ ..............  32 
4. Vulnerability and adaptation to climate change  ................................ ...............................  36 
4.1 Impacts and response to past climate -related events.  ................................ ................  36 
4.2 Climate projections in project sites and implications for women and men  ..................  37 
Conclusion and implications for project  ................................ ................................ ..................  39 
Gender Action Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  42


---
*Page 133*
---

3 Bibliography  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  48 
Appendix 1: Interview and data collection guide  ................................ ................................ ..... 50 
Appendix 2: Sample Job Description for Gender Specialist  ................................ ......................  52 
Appendix 3: Documentation reviewed  ................................ ................................ ....................  54


---
*Page 134*
---

 
4 
 Figures and Tables  
 
Figure 1. Map showing the principal mangrove areas in Ecuador and the four estuaries/areas 
that make up the project area.  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 9 
 
Table 1. Location and name of project sites  ................................ ................................ ............  10 
Table 2. Participation in community stakeholder workshops  ................................ ...................  11 
Table 3. Participation in policy stakeholder workshops ................................ ............................  12 
Table 4. Individual interviews (2 men, 5 women) ................................ ................................ ..... 14 
Table 5. Surveys conducted with community associations  ................................ .......................  14 
Table 6. Parish board members in the project areas  ................................ ................................  19 
Table 7. Mayors in the project areas  ................................ ................................ .......................  19 
Table 8. Demographics in project site areas  ................................ ................................ ............  20 
Table 9. Household size and demographics in project sites ................................ ......................  21 
Table 10. Education in project sites  ................................ ................................ .........................  22 
Table 11. Incidence of gender -based violence  ................................ ................................ .........  24 
Table 12. Association membership in project sites  ................................ ................................ .. 28 
Table 13. Gender roles reported in Muisne -Cojimíes  ................................ ...............................  29 
Table 14. Gender roles reported in the Guayas estuary area  ................................ ...................  33 
Table 15. Gender roles reported in the Jambeli project area  ................................ ...................  34 
Table 16. Historical climate impacts on women and men  ................................ ........................  36


---
*Page 135*
---

 
5 
 Acronyms and abbreviations  
 
AFD: French Development Agency  
FFLA: Fundación Futuro Latinoamericano  (Latin American Future Foundation)  
GCF: Green Climate Fund  
GGCA: Global Gender and Climate Alliance  
GIZ: German Corporation for International Cooperation  
INEC: National Institute of Statistics and Censuses  
MAATE: Ministry of Environment , Water  and Ecological Transition of Ecuador  
NDC: Nationally determined contribution   
NGO: Non -governmental organization  
UNDP : United Nations Development Programme  
UTPL: Universidad Técnica Particular de Loja  
USFQ: Universidad San Francisco de Quito  
UIDE: Universidad Internacional del Ecuador  
UASB: Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar  
IUCN: International Union for Conservation of Nature  
WEDO: Women ’s Environment and Development Organization


---
*Page 136*
---

 
6 
 Executive summary  
 
The mangroves along Ecuador’s coast provide important economic services to local communities 
including food, income sources, and protection from flooding and storms. Across all project 
sites, w omen and men depend on the natural resources they obtain from the mangroves .   
A complex set of historical, social, cultural, and economic factors influence the project sites ’ 
current gender norms and inequalities : Firstly, there is a clear lack of political representation  by 
women in decision -making fora. Secondly, women are overburdened with work, especially 
reproductive labor, and this limits their ability to engage in community, organizational, and 
project activities. And thirdly, gender -based violence is high and furth er highlights the 
inequalities at the household level and an i mportant additional barrier that keep women from 
using their voice and agency. This situation is compounded by a number of structural problems 
associated with education, health, the provision of utilities and limited employment 
opportunities.  
In these mangrove -dependent communities, women are more vulnerable and experience higher 
rates of poverty than men. Men tend to control the main economic activity in the communities: 
the harvesting and sale of seafood. Often it is men who hold formal posit ions of leadership 
within communities and fishing associations. As Trevino & Murillo -Sandoval (2021) highlight in 
a study of mangroves in Esm eraldas province, the gendered use of mangrove resources, and 
societal gender norms, influence the strategies that  men and women use to respond to 
mangrove deforestation in the face of growing shrimp aquaculture , with women being 
disproportionately affected by the loss of mangrove forests.  
There are distinct gender differences with respect to mangrove use and management in the 
northern projects sites verses those in the south.  In the north, women are able to walk (often 
collectively) to the mangroves together and are therefore more actively  engaged in mangrove 
use and management. Mangrove associations in the north have, on average, 60% women 
members. Men have a dual role, they work in crab and black cockle extraction as well as in 
fisheries outside the mangrove area  and in the estuary.  Engag ement in  decision -making within 
the fishing associations in t he southern project sites is more male dominated with women 
engaging much less. In the south, w omen’s difficulty in participating in decision -making derives 
from the fact they are not familiar with the mangrove or legally recognized as part of the 
communities or productive organizations.  This can be attributed to  their access and use of  the 
mangrove areas  which are far from the community and must be accessed  by boat. Usually, 
women’s mangrove activities i n the  south are more individual ( each person arranges their own 
access to the area). Mangrove associations in the south have, on average, 15% women members.  
Women living in mangrove s work long days, which include  family caregiving responsibilities , 
harvesting or fishing activities , cook ing for the family and look ing after the children . The average 
working day for women is around 14 hours  and little societal value is placed on their caregiving 
or reproductive tasks . By contrast, men have much shorter days, fishing or harvesting for 
between four and five hours. This means that once their day’s fishing or harvesting is over, they 
are relieved from work.  
Rates of gender -based violence are high  (67% in project sites) and could be 
perpetuated/increased by climate change impacts that result in economic disruption.


---
*Page 137*
---

 
7 
 As a result of gender norms, men and women are impacted differently  by climate related events . 
Rising sea levels and flooding – the two major effects cited in justifying climate action  in these 
project sites  – can also have consequences like an increase in water salinity and water -borne 
diseases, which are likely to affect primarily women, who tend to be responsible for collecting 
water for the household and caring for sick family members . Likewise, men (in their primary role 
as fishers and farmers) experience  climate impacts such as  more unpredictable weather  and 
changing fish populations , which require farther (more dangerous) travel ). Furthermore, existing 
gender inequalities may be exacerbated by the dynamics of climate change in the project area.  
Our analysis included extensive review of relevant secondary information related to gendered 
uses of mangroves , the policy environment that supports gender equality in Ecuador, and 
stati stical information for the project sites. This research was complemented with primary 
information from project sites gathered through surveys (involving 80 men/19 women), 
community workshops (involving 223 men/40 women) and semi -structured key informant 
interviews (involving 5 men/2 women).  
The analysis points to several key areas of intervention for the project, as laid out in the project’s 
gender action plan. These include mangrove use agreements that integrat e gender 
considerations, tailored and specific support to women in mangrove associations (including the 
two women’s  associations ), setting targets (5 0/50) for women’s and men’s benefit from the 
adoption of diversified and climate resilient livelihoods options linked to mangroves, and 
ensuring that project staff and delivery partners are  trained on gender equity principles and the 
importance of mitigating gender inequalities in the project, including gender -based violence.


---
*Page 138*
---

 
8 
 1. Introduc tion  
1.1 Project background  
 
Climate change will result in significant impacts on local environmental conditions along the 
coast of Ecuador, including a rise in sea levels, El Niño events, and changes in the intensity and 
variability of rainfall, flooding, and atmospheric temperatures . Based on models generated by 
NASA, climate change could cause sea levels to rise by up to 27 cm by 2100 (NASA -GISS, n.d.) . 
Considering that the 1997 -1998 El Niño event led to a 42 cm increase in sea levels, periods of 
heavier rainfall are expected to worsen the rise in sea levels .  
The risk of flooding is a major concern for the coast of Ecuador. The Dartmouth Flood 
Observatory has recorded 22 major floods since 1987, displacing over 506,000 people 
(Dartmouth Flood Observatory, n.d.) . Based on current assessments, 39% of areas within 5 km 
of the Ecuadorian coast are already at high risk of annual flooding (Secretaria Nacional de 
Gestion de Riesgos , 2018) .  
Ninety -nine percent (99%) of mangroves are concentrated along the shores of the country’s 4 
main estuaries: Cayapas -Mataje, Muisne, Guayas, and Jambelí. These areas  are home to 2.9 
million people and have very high poverty rates.  These people  rely heavily on fishing and 
harvesting crabs and black clams.  
There are 4,556 registered members of mangrove management associations devoted almost 
exclusively to these activities (Ministry of Environment of Ecuador, 2020) . These management 
associations cover approximately 43% of Ecuador’s mangrove forests , meaning that the true 
number of people who fish and gather seafood from the mangroves may be at least double the 
number of registered members of associations (Zambrano, N., personal communication) . With 
4.04 family members dependent on each fisher (INEC, 2010) , the  total population directly 
dependent on fishing in mangroves is likely to be around 43,000.  
Despite their importance, a lmost 25% of Ecuador’s mangroves have been deforested since 1969 
(CLIRSEN, 1999, 2007; Ministry of Environment of Ecuador, 2019) . In 2018, there were 156,633 
ha of mangrove remaining in mainland Ecuador. While the introduction of new regulations 
requiring shrimp farms to restore mangrove areas in order to operate and export legally  has 
contributed to an increase in net reforestation, there continues to be  significant gross 
deforestation.  
 
The ongoing mangrove deforestation in these areas is the result of a combination of (i) an 
increase in illegal mangrove logging, (ii) poor enforcement of environmental regulations that 
penalize causing damage to mangroves, (iii) pollution from liquid and s olid waste, and (iv) poor 
spatial planning by local governments for mangrove conservation (Carvajal & Santillán, 2019) .  
 
Given their importance, and in the face of future impacts from climate change , the government 
of Ecuador has made it a priority to reduce  the risks faced by coastal communities and promot e 
the ecosystem services provided by mangroves in its National Climate Change Strategy 2012 – 
2025, its National Climate Change Plan 2015 -2018, and other national frameworks.  
 
In this context, this project seeks to build resilience and a coordinated adaptive capacity along 
the entire coast and in the sectors most vulnerable to climate change, in particular coastal 
communities and the fishing/shrimp sectors.  The project has 3 components :


---
*Page 139*
---

 
9 
 Component 1: Mangrove areas under effective and climate -adapted management 
increased, including through community -based management (AUSCEMs) and protected 
areas implementing climate adaptation plans.  
 
Component 2 : The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing 
GHG emissions and providing financial support to conserve and restore mangroves that 
increase climate resilience for other coastal populations.  
 
Component 3: Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove 
deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by strengthening governance, climate 
change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.  
 
 
Ecuador’s  mangroves provide important economic benefits to local communities who harvest 
white fish, black clams, crabs, fish, shrimp, oysters, mussels, blue crabs and sea snails for self -
consumption and sale. The forest is also used for beekeeping and logging/char coal production 
CIFEN/AAE (2019) . 
 
Figure 1. Map showing the principal mangrove areas in Ecuador and the  four estuaries/areas that 
make up the project area.  
 
 
Mangrove dwellers are a heterogeneous group in terms of rac e. In the northern estuaries , the 
mangrove -dependent population is chiefly Afro -Ecuadorian, while in the southern provinces, 
mangrove populations are made up of mestizos  (mixed -race population) and cholo  fishermen 
(cholos pescadores ; Latorre, 2012).  
Occupational identities  as crab or seafood harvesters, combined with situations of social 
vulnerability and poverty, play a more important role in self -identification  than ethnicity . In 
general, mangrove dwellers experience low wages, informal employment and exploitation by 
intermediaries, malnutrition, low levels of education and inadequate infrastructure and public 
services (Latorre, 2012).


---
*Page 140*
---

 
10 
 Despite the mangrove dwellers’ age -old occupation of the area and shared management 
practices, this ecosystem, like the entire intertidal zone, is considered a “National Asset for 
Public Use” ( bien nacional de uso público ). This means that the mangrove swamp is owned by 
the state and renders the intertidal zone inalienable, immovable, and imprescriptible.  
 
Table 1. Location and name of project sites  
Province  Name of estuary  
Northern  project areas   
Esmeraldas  (1) Muisne  
(2) Cayapas -Mataje  
Southern  project areas   
Guayas  (3) Guayas River  
El Oro  (4) Jambelí  
 
From a gender perspective, the two northern estuaries are general ly similar to each other, with 
both men and women actively  engaged in mangrove use and management , while the southern 
two estuaries are more male dominated with women engaging much less than in the north.  
With this in mind, we have organized this gender assessment and action plan to focus on these 
two specific areas (north and south).  
 
1.2 Purpose and methodolog y 
 
The purpose  of this gender assessment and action plan is to  identify key information on the 
roles, activities, needs, opportunities, interests and rights  of men, women, boys and girls that 
live in the project area in order to understand how the project can support their resilience to 
climate change . In doing so, t he gender assessment  exposes the gaps and inequities that exist 
between males  and females , particularly in relation to the environment and climate change. 
Finally,  we also took an intersectional le ns, recognizing that many other social characteristics 
(e.g., wealth, education, marriage status, age, etc.) also contribute to women’s and men’s 
climate vulnerability and resilience.  Within this framework, the gender assessment took a 
phased approach to data collection and analysis:  
Collection of secondary  information . This process involved reviewing existing documentation  
from government, academics, and organizations that work in this area.  This includes statistical 
information, background data, information on the area, and documents and bibliographic 
references to support the gender analysis. A list of the key documents can be found at the end 
of this document. The documents  include  information of previous  consultancies carried out in 
mangrove areas , reports of the Fishing Authority , and press bulletins related to production and 
marketing activities.  Statistical informati on from official sources,  including the national census 
(2010) and living condition surveys (2014 & 2019) , were  used to determine the characteristics 
of the social and economic conditions of the people living in the estuaries .  
Collection of primary information . Primary  information was collected through various 
instruments de termined based on the stakeholder group  and as described in this image:


---
*Page 141*
---

 
11 
  
 
 
 
1.2.1 Workshop s  
 
In August and September 2019,  we conducted 4  workshops1 in 3 of the estuaries (Muisne, 
Guayas and Jambeli) with men and women from local associations  that focus on crab  and cockle 
harvest . The workshops included  Afroecuadorian communities and Cholos Pescadores  in Guayas 
and Jambel í. Following the observation above that woman  are more engaged in mangrove  use 
in the north, it is unsurprising to see (in Table 2) that women were much more present in the 
workshop in the north compared to those in the south.  
The main objectives were:  
• Obtain participants’ general information related to time of residence in the area, 
economic activity, organization and activities of  women  and men  in mangrove areas . 
• Obtain information of potential reforestation sites, types of mangroves to plant and 
their benefits . 
• Identify the perceptions that men and women have of the impacts of current climate 
conditions (wind, rain, presence of water holes, temperature, etc.) and marine 
conditions, o n their communities and mangrove area concessions . 
• Identify what kind of mangrove products are currently used , who uses them,  and how 
they  could be used in the future.  
 
Table 2. Participation in community stakeholder workshops  
Workshop/Loca
tion Stakeholders  Men  Women  TOTAL  
Northern  region   
Bunche – 
Muisne – 
Esmeralda  Members and leaders from the communities of 
Bunche – Muisne, Chamanga , Pedro Carbo, 
Salinas and Bellavista. Representatives of the 
German Corporation for International 
Cooperation GmbH (GIZ), Ministry of 13 25 38 
 
1 Workshop reports can be found in the Stakeholder Engagement section  Tools
Semi structured intervews
Surveys
WorkshopsType of actors
Fisheries organizations
Community leaders
Women of the community
Leaders of the associationsInformation 
Relationship between gender, 
environment and productive activities
Leadership and participation dynamics
Socio -economic dynamics with a 
gender perspective
Organizational structures


---
*Page 142*
---

 
12 
 Environment (MAE) and the Tourism 
Association.  
Southern region  
Guaya s estuary 
(Puerto Roma)  Members and leaders from the communities of 
Puerto Roma, Cerritos de los Morreños, Santa 
Rosa, Bellavista, Puerto Salinas, Puerto Libertad 
and Guayaquil.  134 1 135 
Guayas estuary  
(Balao ) Leaders from  the Asociación de Cangrejeros 
Balao, Nuevo Porvenir, Puerto El Morro Marines, 
Puerto El Morro Apamupen, Puer to El Morro 
Porteño and Puerto El Morro Forjadores de 
Futuro.  59 6 65 
Jambeli  
(Puerto Bolívar ) Members and leaders from the communities of 
Costa Rica, Mar de Galilea, Isla Pongalilla, Amor 
y Esperanza, Puerto Bolívar Unio n, 17 de Enero, 
24 de Octubre.  17 8 25 
 
Some gender -related information was also generated during the project’s stakeholder 
engagement workshops, facilitated by the MAE and CI. The main objective of the workshops was 
to develop an analysis of the conservation policies and use of the mangrove ecosystem, and 
their contribution in the generation of ecosystem services and the wellbeing  of the population. 
While gender as a theme was included as one topic, it was not extensive. Two workshops were 
held in the Guayas estuary (southern) in 2016:  
 
Table 3. Participation in policy stakeholder workshops  
Location  Stakeholders  Men  Women  TOTAL  
Playas del 
Villamil, 
Provincia 
del 
Guayas  Representatives from the Secretary of Aquaculture, 
Association of Shellfish and Artisanal Fisherman Las 
Huacas, Ministry of Environment (MAE), Ministry of 
Tourism, National Institute of Statistics and Census, 
German Corporation for International Cooperatio n 
GmbH (GIZ), Secretariat of Water, Provincial Directorate 
of Guayas Environment, CONDESAN, National Institute 
of Fishery, Catholic University of Guayaquil, Association 
of Users of the Manglar Cerrito de Los Morreños, 
SENPLADES, Litoral Polythenic Universi ty, Municipality 
of Guayaquil, Conservation International (CI -Ecuador), 
Association of Crabbers and Artisanal Fisherman 21 de 
Mayo – Puerto Roma, National Institute of Biodiversity, 
Association of Crabbers 6 de Julio and National 
Secretariat of Planning and Developing.  21 11 32


---
*Page 143*
---

 
13 
 Ciudad de 
Guayaquil  Representatives from the Ministry of Environment 
(MAE), National Institute of Biodiversity, CIIFEN, 
SENAGUA, Ministry of Tourism, National Institute of 
Fishery, ESPOL, Conservation International ( CI-Ecuador), 
TNC and CONDESAN.  8 9 17 
 
 
1.2.2 Semi structured interviews  
 
To supplement the workshops  and desk review , targeted interviews were conducted with 7 
representatives  from Muisne, Guayas and Jambeli estuaries.  The aim of the interviews was to 
increase stakeholder input into the identification of social and environmental risks of the 
planned project. Interview questions therefore included the following risk -related topics:  
• Discrimination against women on the basis of their gender, especially with regard to 
participation in the design and implementation and access to opportunities and 
benefits .  
• Limitations in women's ability to use, develop and protect natural resources, taking 
into account the different roles and positions of men and women in accessing 
environmental goods and services .  
• Threats to women in the context of occupational health and safety .  
• Other gender equality concerns related to the project . 
• Indirect impacts on biodiversity or the ecosystem services on which the livelihoods of 
affected communities depend.  
• Adverse effects in terms of inequality or discrimination for affected populations .  
• Possible restrictions in the availability, quality and access to basic resources or 
services .  
• Adverse impacts on “indigenous peoples” ( i.e., here Afro -Ecuadorians and Cholos 
Pescadores) .  
• Negative effects on the development priorities of “indigenous peoples” as defined by 
themselves .  
• Adverse impacts on the enjoyment of human rights by the affected population and 
particularly by marginalized groups.  
• Aggravation of conflict or generation of violence between affected communities and 
individuals.  
The interviews confirmed the risks that had been identified during the workshops  and provided 
further detail on the situation in different places and the unique perspective s of women  and 
men . The following table provides an overview of the interviewees2.  
 
 
2 Interviewees were asked whether the information they provided could be recorded and did not 
request to remain anonymous.


---
*Page 144*
---

 
14 
 Table 4. Individual interviews (2 men, 5 women)  
Male president of a  Fishing Cooperative  with  150 members (30 women)  in the south.  
Members are crab collectors, fisher s and women linked to activities such as gastronomy 
and crab pulp.  
Male, former president of an Association in the south that has 105 members who are 
fisher s and collect shells  and crabs . At the moment, all members are men, but the plan is to 
involve women at some point in crab pulping.   
Afro -Ecuadorian female m ember of a Women’s Forum in the north.   
Female president  of a fishers association in the south (40 men + 20 women)   
Afro -Ecuadorian female president of a Women’s Forum in the north with  35 members .  
Female former President of an Association in the south. 67 men + 200 women.  
Female p resident of an association of fishers (1 men + 19 women) in the north.  
 
1.2.3 Surveys  
 
Another important source of primary information was  surveys conducted with  99 local leaders 
and association members  (80 males/ 19 females) during the same time as the workshops . The 
surveys gathered information about : (i) mangrove benefits like landscape, recreation, air 
purification, capture of commercial species and for self -consumption, bird habitat, obtaining 
honey and wood for house construction.  (ii) the perception of changes in the weather (iii) drivers 
of impacts on mangrove ecosystem (iv) mangrove restoration , and (v) ecosystem services.  
 
Table 5. Surveys conducted with community associations  
Area  Association   Local leaders  Members  
Northern  Balao   27 
Puerto El Morro   7 
Naranjal   2 
Miraflores   1 
Puerto Baquerizo   1 
Recinto Nuevo Porvenir   1 
Puerto Roma  6 9 
Machala   9 
Puerto Bolivar  7 4 
Isla Pongalillo   2 
Isla Costa Rica   1 
Sauces II   1 
Southern   Naranjal  1 1 
Puerto El Morro  1 1 
Bunche  1 2 
Bunche  1 1 
Pedro Carbo  1 1 
Salina -Muisne  1 1 
Chamanga  1 1


---
*Page 145*
---

 
15 
 Pedro Carbo  1 1 
Muise  1 3 
Total    22 77 
 
The gender assessment and subsequent gender action plan follow the Guidelines outlined in the 
Green Climate Fund (GFC) Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects and the 
Updated Gender Policy and Action Plan 2018 –2020, as well as Conservation Inte rnational -GCF’s 
Gender Policy in their latest (November 2020) Environmental and Social Management 
Framework. The purpose of the assessment is to ensure that the proposed project is gender 
responsive, meaning it will substantially help to overcome historica l gender biases. Measures 
have been put in place by this project to ensure that both women and men benefit and that the 
burden on women in particular, as a result of their gender roles, is not increased but reduced by 
the project activi ties.


---
*Page 146*
---

 
16 
 2. Situation of men and women in  coastal Ecuador  
2.1 Legal status  of women across Ecuador  
 
This section describes the national legal framework in terms  of gender and the international legal 
framework for gender and the environment that the country has been following and with which 
it has been bringing itself into line.  
 
2.1.1 National legal framework  
 
Ecuador has made significant progress in terms of national regulations to support women’s 
rights. For over 10 years, in the Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador, the principle of non -
discrimination contained in Paragraph 4 of Article 66 has been further underpinned by 
Paragraph 2 of Article 11, which p rohibits discrimination based on certain suspect classifications 
including sex.  
Article 11 of the Constitution includes the concepts of direct and indirect discrimination. It 
makes reference to direct discrimination with the phrase “that has the purpose of impairing or 
nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of rights” and i ndirect discrimination with the 
phrase “that has the effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of 
rights.”  
Also included are a series of obligations incumbent upon the state to achieve effective gender 
equality. These are a series of affirmative actions promoting true equality for rights holders in a 
situation of inequality. They include developing and implemen ting policies to achieve equality 
between men and women; including a gender perspective in plans and programs; promoting 
equal representation of men and women in leadership and decision -making positions; bringing 
about conditions that guarantee the rights and principles recognized in the Constitution, in 
particular equality in diversity and non -discrimination, with an obligation to prioritize actions for 
groups needing special attention due to ongoing inequalities, exclusion, discrimination or 
violence; and  adopting the necessary measures to guarantee equality for women in access to 
employment, professional and career training and advancement, fair pay, and self -employment 
initiatives.  
Also enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic are the principles of parity, equity and rotation 
of power as cornerstones of the electoral system. Therefore, consideration must be given to 
alternating men and women in electoral lists. Similarly, the Co nstitution establishes the principle 
of parity between men and women in appointing judicial officers.  
 
2.1.2 Agenda for Women  
 
As of 2018, the National Council for Gender Equality, a national authority with powers aimed at 
mainstreaming gender equality in the country, has a key instrument to implement policy: the 
National Agenda for the Equality of Women and LGBTI People 2018 -2021 , which includes lines 
of action, policies and actions to be undertaken by institutions and civil society based on the 
principle of fair treatment.


---
*Page 147*
---

 
17 
 The guide is divided into several lines of action that include autonomy and a culture of peace, 
and addresses issues relating to a life free of violence, actions in education and public policies in 
health, sexual and reproductive rights, or in fields such as sport. Another line of action is 
centered on sustainability of life and combines issues such as reproduction and sustainability, 
while also establishing an environmental policy that sets forth the need to generate statistics 
and promote conservation and  reforestation programs and initiatives with the goal of improving 
ecosystem services and water sources.  
The agenda also includes a section on leadership and the transformation of sociocultural 
patterns and discusses the monitoring and assessment of actions undertaken to promote 
equality.  
 
2.1.3 Gender policy of the Ministry of Environment , Water and Ecological Transition  of 
Ecuador (MA ATE) 
 
The Ministry of Environment , Water  and Ecological Transition  of Ecuador (MA ATE) is responsible 
for complying with international instruments signed by Ecuador in matters relating to 
environmental management and sustainable development. However, the country has made 
some important advances in gender.  
The MA ATE must therefore actively define policies, mechanisms, and strategies conducive to 
introducing interculturality and gender perspectives in programs, projects, and actions that 
come under its area of authority.  
In this context, the General Coordinating Office for Environmental Planning defined the 
“Strategy for the Institutionalization of Interculturality and Gender Perspectives” as a 
methodological approach and a mechanism for advocacy within the National Enviro nmental 
Policy (PAN). This initiative aims to comply with Constituent Assembly legislative decrees and 
urgently address issues that have been put off or rendered invisible. The goal is to recognize 
spaces to exercise citizen rights and consolidate democrat ic processes, strengthening the 
institutional framework of the National Councils for Equality (Peoples and Nationalities, Women; 
Afro -Ecuadorians, the Montubio people, among others), proposals linked to the democratizing 
role of the state with a decentrali zed and territorial approach, and the application of the cross -
cutting themes of gender equity, interculturality and the environment.  
The MA ATE has proposed this strategy as a policy proposal to include social perspectives in 
environmental management. It is also consistent with major strategic lines proposed by central 
government and reflected in various public management instruments.  
Furthermore, the constitution clearly shows the state’s obligation to ensure fair treatment of 
men and women and of different peoples and ethnic groups, and respect universal human rights 
inherent to every human being, including the right to a safe environ ment.  
On January 30th, 2019, the environment minister, Tarsicio Granizo, and the deputy resident 
representative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Nuno Queiros, signed 
the Project Appraisal Committee, an enabling document with which it will be possible to begi n 
a broad process to include a gender approach in developing Ecuador’s nationally -determined 
contributions (NDCs). This project was undertaken within the framework of the NDC -SP (NDC 
Support Programme).


---
*Page 148*
---

 
18 
 Also in 2019, the MA ATE and the National Council for Gender Equality signed an 
interinstitutional cooperation framework agreement, through which the two institutions 
committed to leading and ensuring the inclusion of gender equality policies to create and 
strengthen effective, efficient interventions in climate change -related projects. This agreement 
is the starting point for the joint development of the Gender and Climate Change Action Plan, 
which will serve to define national priorities and goals that res pond to the specific needs of, and 
differential impacts faced by, women, men, and diverse peoples in the face of climate change, 
taking into consideration age, ethnicity, disability and/or human mobility.  
 
2.1.4 An NDC with a gender perspective  
 
Ecuador is defining its NDC through a participatory process led by the MAE, with support from a 
number of aid agencies: the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the French Developme nt Agency (AFD), 
the NDC -Partnership, the German Corporation for International Cooperation (GIZ), Euroclima 
Plus, the Consortium for the Sustainable Development of the Andean Ecoregion (CONDESAN), 
and Cooperación Española (FIIAPP).  
The NDC Support Program is being implemented through, among other groups, the Technical 
Roundtable on Gender and Climate Change,  which is led by the MAE with support from the 
UNDP. This group also includes representatives from Fundación Futuro Latinoamericano (FFLA), 
which provides facilitation support, the National Council for Gender Equality, the German 
Corporation for Internatio nal Cooperation (GIZ), Grupo Faro, CARE, Universidad Técnica 
Particular de Loja (UTPL), Universidad San Francisco de Quito (USFQ ), the Rosa Luxemburg 
Foundation, Heifer International, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and 
Fundación Altrópico. The Technical Roundtable on Gender and Climate Change was founded in 
response to a need to establish links between a cademia, non -governmental organizations and 
international aid, and create a space for interaction between different agents that contribute to 
the study, incorporation and strengthening of a gender approach in climate action in Ecuador.  
In addition, with the support of Corporación Grupo Randi Randi (CGRR), a participatory 
methodology was developed to include a gender approach.  
a) National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (PLANACC) and gender mainstreaming .  
The PLANACC establishes a need to identify and create programs and activities based on areas 
of work or sectors that evidence has shown, in theory and practice, to be most vulnerable to 
climate change and to cause the most economic, social and environmenta l harm to the country 
as a result of the impacts of climate change. In this respect, one of the implementation criteria 
mentioned by the plan is the relationship with the social, economic or environmental system. 
Equally, the sectors prioritized for climat e change adaptation in Ecuador can be grouped 
according to their relationship with the social, economic and environmental systems (MAE, 
2012, 87).  
In this sense, and taking into account the scope of adaptation initiatives, there are more 
opportunities to include women and sectors considered at risk or vulnerable.


---
*Page 149*
---

 
19 
 2.2 Politic al participation at national, provincial, and local levels  
 
Female voting  in Ecuador increased from 76% to 84% between 2009 and 2018 . However , since 
the National Assembly was established in 2009, it has not included an equal number of men and 
women : in 2009,  only 40 (32.3% ) of the 124 elected assembly members  were women. (National 
Electoral Council, 2019)  
In the project areas, there is  low female representation at the parish  and mayoral  level. It is 
interesting to note the differences of gender parity in parish candidates  verses election: it is 
clear that women candidates are not as successful in being elected. It is also interesting to note 
there is not much difference in northern vs. southern project sites. Women are highly 
underrepresented at the mayoral level in both candidates and elected positions , with particular 
starkness in the northern sites where there are no female mayors.  
 
Table 6. Parish board members  in the project areas  
Provinc e Estuar y Candid ates  Elected  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
Northern sites  
Esmeraldas  Muisne  
Cayapas  705 (44%)  900 81 (28%)  204 
Southern sites  
El Oro  Jambelí  485 (44%)  610 69 (28%)  176 
Guayas  Guayas  446 (45%)  539 50 (34%)  95 
Source: National Electoral Council, 2019  
 
Table 7. Mayors  in the project areas  
Province  Estuary  Candidates  Elected  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
Northern sites  
Esmeraldas  Muisne  
Cayapas  7 (15%)  40 0 (0%)  7 
Southern sites  
El Oro  Jambelí  11 (16%)  58 1 (7%)  13 
Guayas  Guayas  35 (17%)  166 5 (20%)  20 
Source: National Electoral Council, 2019  
 
Looking at the gender gap in politics can be a useful indication of women’s perceived standing 
in society, as well as highlight some of the historical inequalities that continue to persist. In this 
instance, it is clear that the project areas have larger g ender gaps than the rest of the country, 
especially when it comes to actually begin elected to a position of power and influence. The 
reasons are likely multifaceted, including long -held societal/gender norms that privilege men in 
elected positions, fewer women who have achieved the level of education  needed to


---
*Page 150*
---

 
20 
 successfully compete, and  unequal burden of household chores that often keep women from 
pursuing leadership outside of the home.   
 
2.3 Socio -economic information  
 
At a national level, the statistics and gender diagnosis presented in the Agenda for Women 2018 -
2021 (National Council for Gender Equality, CNIG) have shown that relations between men and 
women have been asymmetrical and have gone unchallenged throughout h istory. This has been 
a root cause of inequalities. At a macro level, and especially in rural settings, women have found 
themselves relegated to the private sphere, with little chance to undertake productive labor, 
while men have greater opportunities to e ngage in the public sphere, in making decisions that 
affect the community and their families, and in business dealings with external stakeholders.  
Overburdening caused by the role s played by women in the home is another issue identified by 
community members. “In general women are responsible for the home, children, husbands,  and 
family members, both in terms of providing general care and financially. Women have the most 
important role in society because they play a part in all the different spheres of activity: the 
home, productive labor, and the community,” (data collection workshop, comment by one 
female participant).  Likewise, men (in their roles as fishers) also face increasing s ocio -econo mic 
challeng es such as reduced fish populations, drug trafficking, and illegal fishing. This is forcing 
fishers to travel even farther out to sea  where open waters are dangerous. Men’s fishery -based 
livelihoods are changing  as Beitl & Gaibor (2018) explain, the lack of employment in recent years 
has drive n more men to  enter the cockle fishery.  
The n ational unemployment levels have shown a clear decline over the last five years and stood 
at 4.4% in March 2017. The unemployment rate was higher for women than for men – in 2019 
5.7% of women in the economically active population were unemployed, while fo r men this 
figure was 3.8%. Overall, female labor force participation is limited, at 49% compared to 79% of 
men. In the artisanal fishing sector, the conditions of poverty and extreme poverty are high in 
all the cases analyzed.  
 
Table 8. Demographics in project site areas  
Municipality   Estuary   Pop-
ulation1  % 
men  % 
women  Ethnic Groups  (% of total ) % 
Poverty1  
Mestizos  Afro 
descendents  Montubio  Other  White   
 El Guabo    Jambelí                     
59.536  50,7  49,3 91,2  3,9 1,7 0,7 2,3 74%  
 Machala    Jambelí                   
306.309  49,2  50,8 86,8  6,8 1,7 0,9 3,8 56%  
 Santa Rosa    Jambelí                     
80.299  49,2  50,8 94 2,6 0,8 0,7 1,9 56%  
 Eloy Alfaro    Cayapas 
Mataje                     
46.305  49,2  50,8 11,3  67,9 2,2 18,1 0,6 94%  
 Muisne    Muisne 
Cojimíes                     
36.426  50,6  49,4 53,4  38,8 3,2 2,7 1,8 98%  
 San Lorenzo    Cayapas 
Mataje                     
48.391  47,7  52,3 9,9 83,9 0,6 5,1 0,4 84%  
Guayaquil    Guayas                
2.746.403  48,9  51,1 85,2  6,9 2,3 1,5 4,1 47%


---
*Page 151*
---

 
21 
  Naranjal    Guayas                     
83.691  50,1  49,9 86 4,5 5,8 0,8 2,9 74%  
  Total                
3.407.360                   
Source : 1 INEC 2022 ; 2 INEC 2010  
 
Communities in the northern Cayapas -Mataje and Muisne -Cojim ies estuar ies (and the northern 
area more broadly)  are generally small: 74% have between 4 and 28 households, only 13% have 
more than 130 households, and the largest (Pampanal) has only 225 households. The average 
number of household members is 4.46. Houses are usually small and 88.7% are built from wood, 
55% of which are made from mangrove wood. Others are made from a combination of wood 
and other materials, like brick and concrete. Almo st all roofs are made of corrugated iron 
(Ocampo -Thomason, 2006)  
Communities in the southern Guayas and Jambeli estuaries, are bigger than those in the north. 
The average number of members (and families) in each association is 128. The largest 
association based on the number of members is Hualtaco at Jambeli estuary with 369 
households. The average number of people per household is 4 .05. Another characteristic is that 
in the  south there is a larger  number of families that are female as head of the family (33% in 
the north vs. 36% in the south) as Table 9 shows. This situ ation is important to highlight as only 
19% of the associations has more than 30% women as  members .  
Widespread machismo is one hurdle to achieving equity in the productive, reproductive and 
community spheres in these areas. “The fact that men are considered masters of the home 
amounts to a lack of education because it’s machismo; we are equal with differ ent ways of 
thinking, but the woman’s main role is in the home. But when women are left on their own, they 
take on both roles,” (data collection workshop, comment by one female participant) (MAE, 
2018).  
 
Table 9. Household size and demographics in project sites  
 Homes   Economically active population 
and occupation  
Estuaries  Average Size  Index of average 
female head  in the 
municipality  EAP (% of total ) Occupation  
(% of EAP ) 
Northern  
Cayapas -Mataje  4,3 39,0  38,03  91,78  
Muisne -Cojimies  4,31  26,85  33,75  90,23  
Southern  
Guayas  3,9 34,6  43,11  91,81  
Jambelí  3,7 37,5  43,26  94,56  
Total  4,05  34,50  39,54  92,10  
Source: INEC 2010


---
*Page 152*
---

 
22 
 Across all project sites, w omen and men depend on the natural resources they obtain from the 
mangroves, namely crab, black clam, and resources from fishing in general. In exceptional 
circumstances, such as during the closed season, men find they need to earn an income outside 
the ho me. In all project areas , men and women depend on the outside market as they do not 
have basic commodities. In most cases, family money is used to cover these expenses. Income 
specifically obtained from small businesses and selling essentials can be used b y women for 
expenses considered luxuries. To support the family, basic foodstuffs, clothing,  and other 
consumables need purchasing.  The specific gendered uses and management of mangroves is 
detailed in a section below.  
 
2.4 Educa tion 
 
Since 1990, the education gap  in Ecuador  between females  and males  has narrowed . On 
average, males and women attend school for 7 years  with difference of 2 years between the 
estuaries at north and south . Illiteracy rates nationally are 6,7 males, 9,6 females  with a 
difference in gender that we didn’t find in the estuaries .  
In the project sites:  
 
Table 10. Education in project sites  
 Illiteracy  Years of schooling  
Estuaries  % total  % men  % 
women  Total  Men  Women  
Northern  
Cayapas -Mataje  13,29  13,55  13,02  6,92  6,78  7,07  
Muisne -Cojimies  14,19  14,50  13,85  6,67  6,63  6,51  
Sourthern  
Guayas  3,90  3,80  3,99  8,36  8,36  8,36  
Jambelí  4,38  4,31  4,45  8,24  8,17  8,23  
Average   8,94  9,04  8,83  7,55  7,49  7,54  
Source: INEC 2010  
 
Inequality in education and literacy can be a product of gender inequality in society and can  
directly influence women’s ability to participate, engage, and influence climate activities. In this 
situation, however, it is encouraging to see that literacy and schooling is  relatively equal 
between males and females  in the project sites.  
Education is limited to the primary level. Secondary education can only be pursued in the larger 
towns of the cantons, which are several kilometers away. This is a hindrance for women because 
it limits their access to education – “leaving” their communitie s requires money for transport. 
In addition, as victims of violence and sexual harassment, they feel vulnerable at having to travel 
long distances on paths with little infrastructure before reaching a means of river or land


---
*Page 153*
---

 
23 
 transport. Lastly, women’s responsibility toward caregiving makes this their priority within their 
communities, leading them to give up the chance to pursue education.  
The rural population does not have access and full coverage to attend primary, secondary and 
higher education. Formal education presents limitations, especially  at high school , whose 
percentages of attendance are lower in comparison  to elementary school , in most rural parishes  
(Rengel 2020) . In the case of islands  in the Guayas estuary  this situation is even wors e, where 
parents prefer not to send their kids to the school on another island because of security issues 
with piracy  (personal communication) .  
 
2.5 Time use /division of labor  
 
In all project  areas , caregiving dynamics are similar and, for the most part, are the responsibility 
of women. Described below is an example of a daily routine encompassing the different 
experiences in the project  areas  during field data collection . 
Women living in mangrove swamps work long days, which begin with family caregiving 
responsibilities and then harvesting or fishing activities. They return to cook for the family and 
look after the children, and then cook dinner and finally rest. The averag e working day for 
women is around 14 hours , and little societal value is placed on caregiving or reproductive tasks, 
rarely seeing them as a social investment.  
By contrast, men have much shorter days, fishing or harvesting for between four and five hours. 
This means that once their day’s fishing or harvesting is over, they are relieved from work. This 
situation changes when they work externally and find themselve s compelled to work as day 
laborers in shrimp farms or on a country estate or ranch ( finca ), in which case they leave home 
at around 7 a.m. and return around 4 or 5 p.m. They take a packed lunch and return home at 
different times depending on how far away their place of work is.  
In this context, spare time is virtually unheard of for women. They rarely leave home, while men 
get together on the playing areas in the afternoon or have time to rest after lunch.  Problems 
with alcohol  were mentioned, but not ubiquitous. Some interviews made mention of the fact 
that when decisions on how use financial resources are left entirely to men, a good share is 
spent on alcohol.  
These observations and surveys are validated  by a  gendered  time use survey  conducted  earlier 
(INEC 201 0) in the north ern provide of Esmeraldas . The study  highlights a similar  unequal 
division of labor , with women performing – on average – 2 hours of labor more than men. The 
difference in male and female time use is  especially notable in unpaid labor, particularly 
housework, which is primarily undertaken by women, for an average of four  hours a day 
compared to just one hour a day for men.  
Together, this data  reveals  the excessive burden faced by women in work both inside and 
outside the home. In sum, they spend their time tending to household members, obtaining 
resources to support their families, and engaging in community activities. The situation becomes 
yet more co mplex when women are the head of a household where resources need to be 
obtained on a daily basis in order to subsist.


---
*Page 154*
---

 
24 
  
2.6 Health and gender -based violence  
 
Life expectancy in Ecuador is approximately 76.4 years (73.7 for men and 79.1 for women).  The 
maternal mortality rate across Ecuador is 59/100,000 live births ; infant mortality is 
approximately 17 deaths/1,000 births.  Healthcare is available in the main towns of each canton, 
but accessing it requires having the financial means to leave the area. Pregnant women, for 
instance, leave the communities one or two months before they are due and stay with relatives 
so they can receive care in nearby hospitals in the cities of Machala, Gu ayaquil or Esmeraldas.    
Table 11. Incidence of gender -based violence  
Location  Percentage  
National  64.9 
Urban  65.7 
Rural  62.8 
Esmeraldas (north)  68.2 
Guayas (south)  63.1 
El Oro (south)  70.2 
Afroecuadorians  71.8 
Mestizas  65.1 
Indigenous  64.0 
Montuvias  58.4 
Global*  35 
Perú  70 
*WHO.2013. Estimaciones globales y regionales de la violencia contra la mujer.  
 
Rates of gender -based violence are very high and are linked to the socioeconomic dynamics of 
exclusion and poverty.  The table above presents the magnitude of the issue and manifestations 
of violence most common. Further, it reveals that incidents are relatively similar in both urban 
and rural areas. Rates of violence in the project sites are similar to those at the national rate, 
which is nearly twice as high as the global average of 35%.  
The importance of gender -based violence was underscored during our field data gathering: o ne 
female leader reported that almost all women had endured this kind of violence at some point 
in their life. Many women attending the workshop nodded in agreement, their body language 
confirming that they had experienced or witnessed this type of violence.  
The increase in gender -based violence in disaster situations and places experiencing economic 
tension has been well documented. Both of these factors are closely linked to climate change 
on the coast of Ecuador. When communities and families are unable or unprepared to deal with 
the effects of climate change and climate -related disasters, this gives rise to heightened social 
and financial tensions that may cause gender violence to escalate. Disasters increase existing 
gender inequality and given that Ecuado r already has a high rate of gender violence at over 60%, 
the phenomenon is likely to worsen as the effects of climate change become more severe. At Source : INEC, 2020, ENCUESTA NACIONAL SOBRE RELACIONES FAMILIARES Y VIOLENCIA DE GÉNERO CONTRA LAS 
MUJERES – ENVIGMU 2019 Retrieved in January 2020


---
*Page 155*
---

 
25 
 the same time, as Ecuador remains stuck in the grip of the COVID -19 pandemic, the effects of 
which will be felt for many years to come, it is also important to stress that gender -based 
violence has increased drastically throughout the country as a result o f the shutdowns and 
economic tension. A 2017 report by the Red Cross on gender violence on the Ecuadorian coast 
(the Manabí and Esmeraldas provinces) following the 2016 earthquake found a lack of gender 
sensitivity in the disaster response mechanisms and c alled for better prevention and an 
improved response to gender -based violence in disasters.  
If gender -based violence is rooted in , and triggered by,  economic stress, then relieving that 
stress can help to mitigate and reduce the incidents of GBV. Proactively working with men and 
women to adapt and buffer their livelihoods to climate change impacts, which can then 
hopefully reduce economic stress, can be an important mitigation tactic.  
2.7 Assets and infrastructure  
 
Local dynamics in regard to  economic and financial matters and other assets are similar  across 
the project  areas.   Women have scarce opportunities to access resources because they are 
unable to access credit, with the exception of savings plans and small loans for household 
consumption. Women have no capital to post as collateral to access credit (information from 
interviews, August 2019).  “There are many resources here, in tourism, in fishing, there are belief 
systems, there are many other options possible. Sadly, there is no way to  put them into effect 
because we cannot access credit,” (data collection workshop, comment by one female 
participant) (MAE, 2018).  
Men, on the other hand, have higher earning potential and greater opportunities to access 
formal loans. Additionally, benefits were recorded from the rural social security program for 
small -scale agricultural workers, Seguro Social Campesino , in one area in the north (Muisne).  
As far as infrastructure is concerned, the field visits showed there was electricity  in all sites , 
while Muisne and Jambeli  had running, non -potable water, and in Puerto Roma in Guayas 
Estuary  water ha s to be managed on the islands, generally by collecting rainwater . Some women 
sell fresh water  they have collected or purified water that is brought in from the mainland.   
In the areas close to cities, t hey do have access to cellular phone and Internet services, which 
has helped connectivity , especially in Muisne and Guayas Estuaries . The service is weak and at 
times non -existent, but it does at least enable communication with neighboring areas.  
The roads to the main towns of the cantons are usually paved, with gravel roads serving to 
connect communities. Transport services are limited both in number and frequency. This creates 
a sense of vulnerability for women, as they have to walk long days, of ten without public lighting.  
Speedboats are available to travel by river between Jambelí and Machala, and between 
Guayaquil and Puerto Roma and other islands. In Muisne, transport is available from the back 
road to the town center. River transport is safer because boarding takes place  in the town center 
and the place of arrival has better infrastructure .


---
*Page 156*
---

 
26 
 3. Access, use, and management of mangrove s. 
3.1 Importance of mangroves to local populations  
 
The mangroves provide a livelihood for fishing communities, mestizos, settlers, and Afro -
Ecuadorians, who all live in the project  areas.  The information on ecosystem services that was 
generated in participatory workshops with the community showed that it was the provisioning 
service s that the population most valued , for the consumption and sale of products derived from 
mangroves. The community reported that the effects of climate change are impacting the  
provision of these ecosystem  service s. The regulating service was identified in coastal protection 
in both the northern and southern project sites , and in the provision of clean air, with 
reforestation efforts undertaken by both men and women, in the case of southern Guayas . The 
cultural services, meanwhile, are geared toward the devel opment of ecotourism and the use of 
ancestral knowledge to cure diseases with the bark and roots of mangroves. These activities are 
performed both by men (extraction) and women (preparation), while in the case of ecotourism, 
it is women who feature most pr ominently, through the cuisine they offer tourists.   
While outdated, an excellent account of gendered use of natural resources comes from the 
northern Esmeraldas providence (Veach 1996). In this example, ocean fishing is done exclusively 
by men with highly specialized knowledge and from motorized canoes, oft en being their main 
source of income. Women generally do the bulk of the fish processing, with men usually 
marketing the fish. Other livelihood activities performed primarily by men include carpentry, 
agriculture, logging, charcoal production, and hunting.  In contrast, resource use done primarily 
by women includes collecting concha (mollusks) which, while the income potential is less than 
fishing, is considered to be more reliable.  
More recent r esearch with mangrove communities in Esmeraldas highlighted the impacts that  
expanding shrimp aquaculture is having on gendered use of mangrove resources, wit h collapsing 
fishing livelihoods leading  more men into mangrove exploitation and displacing women’s 
traditional mangrove -dependent resources and livelihoods ( Trevino & Murillo -Sandoval 2021) . 
This overuse of the mangrove resources is leading to depletion of mangrove cockle populations 
and putting the community in a vul nerable positions as everyone is increasingly dependent on 
this fishery to subsist (ibid).   
3.2 Participation and decision -making in mangrove management  
 
Women are largely  inactive  in discussions and  decision -making in their communities , while men  
are usually more vocal in meetings and better represented in the boards . It is at these meetings 
that d ecisions about things like monthly payments of the members, defin ing the rule s for crab 
extraction (amounts extracted by each member, defin ing the extraction areas, or number of 
hours in the  areas) . Some  organizations , particularly those associated with their activitie s (e.g., 
mollusk collection) , include female members, and this can be an important place to build their 
capacities. Certain roles within mixed organizations are more feminized, such as secretary and 
treasurer which tend to have less clout in decision -making.  Within c ommunity processes for 
mangrove management, women’s specific interests are rendered invisible, which can deepen 
divides in terms of access, use, and control.  Women’s limited participation can be attributed to 
several reasons:


---
*Page 157*
---

 
27 
 1. One recurring problem in women’s participation is their lack of leadership. In the words 
of one community leader, “women know everything, the only thing they lack is 
leadership, they already know the rest.” The fact that women do not feel they have that 
capacity makes them uneasy. Certain restrictions faced by women have to do with the 
issue of leadership, as many women still fear coming into confrontation in assemblies 
and standing up for their rights as women.  
2. Women are held back by their families/spouse and the household responsibilities they 
largely shoulder. “you can’t go because you have to cook for me.”  
3. Transportation and accessibility to meeting spaces is also limited. Interviews revealed 
that o nly men hold knowledge about fishing and how to operate motorboats , and this  
knowledge allows them to move around the area with ease and facilitates their 
participation in various decision -making fora. Women do not own the canoes or 
outboard motors, only their labor power.  
It is important to mention that women engage to a greater extent when it comes to attending 
meetings involving securing one or more basic services for coastal communities. In other words, 
women are overrepresented in activities that support community servi ces and works but are 
lacking in community decision -making regarding natural resource management in the mangrove 
ecosystem.  
The mangrove management organizations in project sites were established with the aim of 
promoting the use of mangroves and accessing communal benefits. The mangrove use 
agreements are drawn up by the associations, which have a specific objective. While t here are 
no formal limitation in terms of access rights, as mentioned above, due to customary practices, 
women have limited decision -making power even though they may be association members. In 
one community, access to discussions and decision -making regarding the mangrove is 
particularly challeng ing as women’s responsibilities are geared toward caregiving; there is no 
interest or receptiveness toward identifying spaces to provide or promote activities associated 
with women’s  use or exploitation of mangrove resources.  
One other organizational aspect that should be mentioned is that there are community boards 
(organizations directly associated with the mangroves) with  boards of directors in associations 
generally made up of 5 people , who were  selected by all members of the Association . Leadership 
positions are generally held by men. The women who participate do so as secretaries or board 
members with no additional specific  decision -making  tasks.  
There are also organizations of fishermen, crabbers and black clam harvesters. They also have 
boards of directors that handle and address sporadic needs to achieve and improve on their 
objectives. Depending on the area, women play a minimal role on the boa rd, but this depends 
on the particular nature of each organization.   
Below is a table that describes the number and gender make -up of the mangrove associations in 
the four project estuaries. There  is a remarkable difference in gender make -up between the 
northern and southern estuaries. In the south , women’s difficulty in participating in decision -
making derives from the fact they are not familiar with the mangrove or legally recognized as 
part of the communities or productive organizations.  This can be attributed t o their access and 
use of the mangrove areas. In the  north , women can walk  to the mangrove s in groups , but in the 
south the mangrove areas are far from the community,  so they have to take a boat. Usually,  
women’s mangrove activities in the  south are more individual ( each person arranges their own


---
*Page 158*
---

 
28 
 access to the area). This is why women are les s involved in mangrove -related  activities in the  
south.   
 
Table 12. Association membership in project sites  
Project site  Women’s representation in mangrove associations  
Total  # of associations  Average % of women in associations  
Northern  
Muisne  
 6 60%  
Cayapas -Mataje  14 62%  
1 association entirely female  
Southern   
Guayas River  23 11%  
Jambelí  24 20%  
1 association entirely female  
Source: MAAE 2020  
 
 
3.2.1 Northern estuaries ( Cayapas -Mataje + Muisne)  
Cayapas -Mataje estuary  
 
The population in the northern Cayapas -Mataje estuary is chiefly Afro -Esmeraldian and in 
sociocultural and local development terms is dependent on exploiting natural resources from 
the mangroves, particularly black clams and blue crabs, and fishing in general.  
In Cayapas -Mataje, men and women work harvesting black clams and other resources. In terms 
of natural resource management, women are especially remarkable as they have great 
knowledge of how to carry out this arduous task. Lastly, it is women who control t he sale of 
black clams and use the earnings to purchase certain products to feed their families.  
Typically, each community in the northern Cayapas -Mataje estuary  has specific areas for black 
clam harvesting, which are usually respected by other communities. Traditionally, black clam 
harvesters use small wooden canoes with oars, which limits the distances they travel to harvest. 
In addition, women prefer to harvest  in areas close to their communities. Fishermen tend to 
alternate areas, leaving some areas undisturbed for a few weeks so that the black clams are able 
to recover. Traditionally, harvesters r eturn the “mother” (with young) so she may reproduce, 
and they also return small clams (under 4.5 cm long) to allow them to grow.  
Black clam harvesting has traditionally been performed by women. One reason for this is the 
fact that black clams are gathered individually by hand, so no investment of capital is required. 
The harvesting areas are close to communities, which allows women to take their children with 
them and makes it easier for them to combine black clam harvesting with housekeeping chores. 
Black clam harvesting is the most popular form of work undertaken by women in the area. In 
the 99 households that reported black clam h arvesting as their main livelihood, 82.4% of 
harvesters are women (Ocampo -Thomason, 2006). In addition to the women who harvest, a 
further 2.4% of women purchase black clams to sell them on to external intermediaries. One of


---
*Page 159*
---

 
29 
 the most significant findings is that 20% of female -headed households depend almost 
exclusively on black clam harvesting, and in 10% of mixed households, both spouses harvest 
black clams as their main, and in some cases only, livelihood.   
Black clam harvesting is the livelihood of 16% households. Other shellfish are also gathered at 
the same time as black clams, but they have little market value and are used to provide protein 
for household members (Ocampo -Thomason, 2006).  
Interestingly, today 17.6% of black clam harvesters are men. The interviews revealed that men 
have taken up black clam harvesting as they have no other source of income, having been driven 
out of farming after selling their land to the shrimp industry (Oca mpo -Thomason, 2006).  
In Cayapas -Mataje, day -to-day livelihoods  revolve around productive labor and livelihoods. They 
derive their income primarily from black clam harvesting (known as “concheo”), crab harvesting, 
and fishing. To a lesser extent, they perform agricultural work like sowing and picking coconuts 
or other  plants, or gathering smaller mangrove shellfish, but these activities are more for self -
consumption, subsistence, or barter for other foods.  
The work carried out by Cayapas -Mataje associations is traditional in nature. For example, no 
processing technologies are used after the resources are harvested. Some expenditure is 
incurred by men for the purposes of aquaculture, but women face gender dis crimination due to 
the scant value placed on their work, which is evident in the restrictions they face in accessing 
credit and other financial services.  Women encounter structural challenges  in accessing credit 
and the financial system itself. For example , only 9% of the loans for female heads of household 
did not require any type of guarantee, compared to 29% of male heads of household.  Women 
have, on average, 10% less access than men to an account at a financial institution. In addition, 
the average labor income of a man with a job is 1.27 times higher than the income earned by a 
woman with a job in Ecuador  (BCE 2018) , 31% of female heads of household access credit from 
informal sources, while this happens to 25% of men.  This situation occurs at different l evels and 
in urban and rural areas.  
 
Muisne  
 
Muisne Cojimíes  is notable for the high level of participation by women as members and leaders 
of these associations.  
 
Table 13. Gender roles reported in Muisne -Cojim íes 
Activity  Women  Men  
Caregiving tasks  Feeding, childcare, help 
with homework, among 
others.  Help at times  
Black clam harvesting 
(concheo )  Cooking, fishing, and 
selling  Fishing and selling


---
*Page 160*
---

 
30 
 Crabs, including blue crabs 
and mangrove ghost crabs  Fishing, selling, and 
cooking  Fishing, sorting, and selling  
Catching, selling and sorting  Cooking, fishing, and 
selling  Fishing, sorting, and selling  
Tourism  Culinary activities, 
running tourism 
businesses, trail guides  Operating small boats guiding 
tours, providing tourist 
presentations, culinary activities  
Seedbeds for species  Group cleaning work, 
management workshops  Group cleaning work, 
management workshops  
On the mangroves  Reforestation activities  
Use of mangroves 
(medicine)  Strip the bark off to make infusions  
Coastal protection  Refuse collection  
 Source: Survey on Perception of Environmental Standards in Mangroves, CIFEN / AAE, August 
2019  
 
Most land in the mangrove area is communally owned. However, wom en are only minimally 
included in decision -making because they do not feature explicitly in the regulatory framework. 
Furthermore, cultural practices maintain the sexual division of labor and continue to exclude 
women from mangrove conservation activities.  
Often, it is men who hold formal positions of leadership within communities and fishermen’s 
associations. Women, on the other hand, are responsible for homemaking, caring for family 
members, and cooking; very few are able to generate their own income throu gh sales in small 
businesses like retail stores.  
In Muisne , women engage in housework and caregiving activities but are also involved in 
collecting black clams. Crab and black clam harvesting is the main economic activity, performed 
on a daily basis in the morning. Men work harvesting crabs in the mangrove and als o engage in 
small -scale fishing. Women as young as 13 get involved in harvesting the black clams. In this area 
it is also common to find women who are the heads of their households and who, for various 
reasons, take charge of productive labor.  
Those being the two main economic activities associated with the mangrove swamp, men and 
women have developed adequate know -how to improve harvesting in tough conditions: mud, 
brackish water, mosquitoes and poor mobility.  
It was reported that a hundred clams fetch $2.50 USD and a string of 20 crabs $3.00 USD. The 
women do not get involved in selling what they harvest – that is the responsibility of the men. 
However, situations arise in which intermediaries come into the com munities to purchase the 
seafood gathered.


---
*Page 161*
---

 
31 
 In these communities, men have a greater chance of engaging in productive labor in the 
surrounding areas. Both black clams and crabs are sold on the local market to intermediaries who 
transport the products to large cities in the north of the country.  
There is a month -long closed season between February and March, with a permanent ban on 
harvesting black clams below a certain size. The aim of these bans is to ensure the reproduction, 
growth and conservation of the species. The local population is aware of the dates and regulations 
of the closed season as the Ministry of Environment (the controlling agency) works to disseminate 
the dates and specifics of the closed seasons.  
“The women are well aware that they must only collect black clams greater than 4.5 cm, as 
provided by law, and the rest must be returned to the mangrove. Similarly, they know the dates 
of the closed seasons for crabs by heart (even though they may not know  why it is forbidden to 
harvest them). As for fishing, they know they can engage in artisanal fishing without using 
chemicals, and they use traditional methods of fishing, with a casting net or “wide -meshed” fishing 
net. Other than that, they know little o r nothing about environmental conservation, resource 
management, recycling, proper waste disposal, and being kind to animal and forest species,” 
(interview with female community leader).  
During the closed seasons, men and women from the local populations struggle to access 
economic resources as there are limited job opportunities, especially for women, who have less 
training or formal education and have caregiving responsibilities. It was reported in the 
interviews that very few women are able to leave the home to engage in paid work, as women 
bear full responsibility for reproductive activities. Furthermore, the existing work opportunities 
can be summarized as follows:  
o Shrimp farms, where shrimp are bred and harvested. This work is carried out in the water, 
by day and in full -day shifts; this is also due to the use of pollution -causing chemicals. The 
nature of the work means that it is mostly considered a man’s job.  
 
o Farm work, which includes sowing, reaping, cleaning, and harvesting crops. Working hours 
are from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m., which a short lunch break. These tasks are considered a man’s 
job and very few women access this type of work on private land.  
 
o State institutions generally look to employ people with at least a high school diploma. Given 
the requirements and difficulties women experience in accessing formal education, a very 
low percentage of women are able to access this kind of work.  
 
Meanwhile, men work as day laborers on the crops of nearby farms and in stocking and tending 
shrimp. Men are able to travel to nearby towns to offer their labor as construction workers or 
any other type of service. However, this is more difficult for women  as it is not culturally 
accepted.  
This analysis clearly shows gender inequalities in the use of, access to and control of mangrove 
resources in the project’s three regions. With the goal of guaranteeing gender equity and 
sustainability in mangrove conservation, substantial efforts will be deployed to ensure that both 
men and women participate and reap the full benefits of this project. This analysis includes a 
detailed gender plan and will contain specific recommendations, activities, staffing details, and 
the budget.


---
*Page 162*
---

 
32 
  
3.3 Southern estuaries ( Guayas + Jambeli)  
Guayas  
 
The mangrove forest in Guayas is notable for being very near the city of Guayaquil. The 
mangroves can be reached by land and water , and t his has shaped the socio -productive 
landscape among the population. The Guayas River estuary contains 80% of the country’s  shrimp 
farms.  
In the Guayas River archipelago, the local population possesses ancestral community property 
under land legislation that ensures ownership of community land and the recognition, allocation 
and titling of the lands and territories of indigenous communes, co mmunities, peoples and 
nationalities, the Afro -Ecuadorian people and Montubio people, under the Constitution and 
international agreements and other instruments regarding collective rights (Organic Law on 
Rural Lands and Ancestral Territories, 2016). Howeve r, the land is located in protected areas 
over which the Ministry of Environment has influence, and therefore they are required to draw 
up an Agreement on the Sustainable Use and Stewardship of the Mangrove Ecosystem 
(AUSCEM).  
Due to socio -cultural dynamics, women and men have different experiences in terms of access 
to and use and control of natural resources, as summarized in the following table.  
Women  Men  
They do not know the mangrove forest and it 
does not appeal to them as a place to visit or 
get to know. They operate in populated 
areas.  
Women do not take part in decision -making 
processes and take primary responsibility for 
care giving activities.  Men know the mangrove forest, use it 
and decide which areas will be harvested 
for mangrove ghost crabs.   
 
They sign the mangrove use agreements.  
 
The area is subject to a ban on crab and black clam harvesting for one month between February 
and March to enable the species to reproduce and grow. During this period, the population is 
able to support itself financially through other activities, particul arly tourism.  A significant 
number of men work in the community  as service providers for the construction, agro -exports 
and shrimp farms. In comparison, t his is more common  in the south because in the  north these  
economic options  do not exist .  
On the other hand, due to the geographical position of the Puerto Roma and Balao area (an 
estuary with remnants of mangroves), the population devotes itself fully to harvesting crabs and 
black clams.  This work is the responsibility of men, who go out to the surrounding areas on a 
daily basis to harvest. This work takes up about 4 hours of their day. They also fish for their own 
consumption.  
Women, on the other hand, are responsible for caregiving duties. Some attempt to earn an 
income from removing and selling crab pulp. They also work selling clothes or cosmetics or invest 
in small stores that serve the basic needs of the local population. S ingle women generally live


---
*Page 163*
---

 
33 
 with their parents or family and rejoin the family nucleus. The following table further clarifies 
the different roles of women and men in the Guayas estuary.  
 
Table 14. Gender roles reported in the Guayas estuary area  
Activity  Women  Men  
Caregiving tasks  Feeding, childcare, help with 
homework, among others.  Help at times.  
Black clam harvesting 
(concheo ) Sale of clams.  Harvesting.  
Crabs  Removal and sale of crab pulp.  Harvesting and sale.  
Oysters  Shucking.  Harvesting and sale.  
Tourism   Tour guides, boatmen, provide 
demonstrations, take tourists 
fishing.  
Beekeeping  No involvement.  Cleaning and inspection, 
performed by the over -60s. 
Use of mangrove bark  Strip the bark off the mangrove 
and make infusions to control 
sugar levels.    
White fishing  Prepare products to sell to 
tourists, door -to-door sales, the 
scales are used to make 
handicrafts.  Fishing and sale.  
Exploratory activities  Guides.  Work as guides.  
Seedbeds  Collect seeds for reforestation.  Reforestation, refuse collection.  
Trading  Clothing, cosmetics, stores.    
Source: Survey on Perception of Environmental Standards in Mangroves, CIFEN / AAE, August 2019.  
 
In terms of vulnerabilities or impacts, a lack of water for human consumption and difficulties 
securing healthy food that meets the population’s nutritional requirements are plain to see. 
Lastly, it is worth pointing out that the population is highly depen dent on larger towns to obtain 
food, reducing opportunities to fulfill dietary needs. The inhabitants see themselves as cut off 
from the economic system as they live in an island environment that can lead to difficulties 
accessing services, workspaces, and  life options (interview with a female leader from Guayas).  
One other important subsistence activity is gathering honey for sale. For women, this remains 
difficult and they do not get involved in the sales process.   
The problems cited in terms of vulnerability to climate change include flooding and a loss of 
livelihoods caused by environmental pollution.


---
*Page 164*
---

 
34 
 Jambeli  
 
The mangrove forests of the province of El Oro are located in the Jambelí estuary, a special 
management zone on the outskirts of Puerto Bolívar, an area accessed by boat and inhabited by 
a number of communities. Socioeconomically it is challenging for those living in the area, as 
services are limited and they are unable to produce food, and so they are plainl y dependent on 
the mainland. This situation directly affects gender dynamics.   
The characteristics of the management zone  complicate land ownership as there is no land 
titling. Populations or communities living in the areas are not formal owners but  have houses 
and buildings that have been maintained for over 50 years, since the first settlers arrived. In 
addition to the local population, men and women from the city of Machala come to the 
mangrove to fish for a living.   
In this particular context, women have limited opportunities to engage in fishing; many work 
shucking crabs. Those living in the areas surrounding Jambelí may fish and sell what they catch.  
In the Puerto Bolívar  area, black clam and crab harvesting takes place in the Guayas River estuary, 
where there are remnants of mangrove forests. Over the last 20 years, the local population has 
come under intense pressure from shrimp farming companies that have sought to cut down 
mangrove forests for their own benefit.  
In this area, the productive labor carried out by men and women can be characterized as 
follows.  
 
Table 15. Gender roles reported in the Jambeli project area  
Activity  Women  Men  
Caregiving  Mostly the responsibility 
of women.  Help out, without taking full 
responsibility.  
Tourism  Food preparation.  Boat rides, transportation 
within and outside the 
islands, guiding and leisure 
activities around the islands.  
Mangrove ghost 
crab and lobster 
harvesting  Pulp removal, some sell to 
small restaurants locally.  Use traps to catch crabs.  
Dive in rocky coastal areas to 
catch lobster.  
Black clam 
harvesting  Collect clams from the 
mangrove swamp and sell 
them.  Harvesting.  
Fishing  Some women fish with 
their husbands. This is not 
their explicit 
responsibility, but rather 
they “help out”.  Fishing in the estuary. Net or 
rod fishing by day; they only 
work a few hours in the 
morning.  
Oyster  Collection and sale.   
Group cleaning   Collect waste, sort it and sell 
whatever can be recycled.  
Source: Survey on Perception of Environmental Standards in Mangroves, 
CIFEN / AAE, August 2019.


---
*Page 165*
---

 
35 
  
Women engage in artisanal fishing more frequently here than in other areas and, in fact, some 
are members of artisanal fishing organizations. As mentioned in the table, the type of fishing 
equipment used in the area allows women to access and take part in fishing activities. In this 
sense, women experience som e difficulties in accessing, using, and controlling natural resources. 
Women do not own the canoes or outboard motors, only their labor. This means that in 
community mangrove management processes, their own specific interests become invisible, 
which may ex acerbate divides in terms of access, use, and control.  
Lastly, the Jambelí River estuary has one association made up exclusively of women and some 
other associations have female leaders.


---
*Page 166*
---

 
36 
 4. Vulnerability and adapt ation to climate change  
 
It is clear that , as a result of gender norms, men and women are impacted differently  by climate 
related events . Global evidence has shown that in places with high gender inequality, women 
and children are much more likely to die because of  natural disasters. Rising sea levels and 
flooding – the two major effects cited in justifying climate action in these project sites – can also 
have consequences like an increase in water salinity and water -borne diseases . Both  are more  
likely to  directly  affect women, who ten d to be responsible for collecting water for the 
household and who  have the responsibility of caring for sick  family members.  Likewise, men, 
who are primarily responsible for sea fishing and agriculture are negatively impacted by 
increasingly unpredictable weather .  
 
4.1 Impacts and response to past climate -related events.  
 
The project’s areas of influence are places of high climate risk and vulnerability. As islands, they 
run the risk of flooding and pests that would affect the human population, together with 
pollution from waste brought over by currents from the mainland.  
In order to  understand how previous climate -related events have impacted women and men in 
the project sites, we asked workshop  respondents to describe their past experiences.  The data 
collection process included identifying perceptions of climate change vulnerability. This exercise 
was devised based on the last 20 years and the characteristics identified.  
 
Table 16. Historical climate impacts on women and men  
Project 
site Year  Event  Differentiated impacts  
Women  Men 
Northern  
(Muisne ) 
1970 El Niño 
phenomenon  The fish left and they were 
unable to work. They emigrated 
elsewhere and worked the land 
(cacao, rubber, banana); 
economic impact, loss of life and 
disease.  Less black clam harvesting, they 
moved to other areas to collect black 
clams (an hour and a half away). They 
emigrated to work in Atacames (in 
restaurants and cafeterias) and 
“ditched their children.”  
2000 
- 
2001 La Niña 
phenomenon  
 Many emigrated to other 
countries (Spain, USA, and Chile) 
and were left jobless. They were 
no longer able to sell larvae to 
shrimp farmers.  Economic impacts; they had no work 
or income; migration, many men left 
the country; loss of life. They were no 
longer able to sell larvae to shrimp 
farmers.  
 
Good quality and quantity of 
clams, but prices on the local 
market fell.  When fish were abu ndant, prices on 
the local market f ell.  
Southern  
(Guayas)  
 1980 El Niño 
phenomenon  Epidemics and diseases.  
Children were underweight and 
malnourished.  Loss of livelihoods.  
Areas of mangrove flooded.  
Lack of job opportunities.  
Shrimp farms had no production so 
were not hiring.  
2005 La Niña 
phenomenon  Impact on families’ financial 
situation; they were unable to 
sell seeds to the shrimp farms, Fish left due to the red tide.  
There were no crabs because the 
ground “went hard”.


---
*Page 167*
---

 
37 
 the economic impact led to 
difficulties providing for families.  Difficulty fishing due to the death of 
species, higher water temperature.  
Very heavy rainfall preventing fishing.  
2009 Ocean current  Often they had to help push the 
boats.  Rivers filled with silt and boats were 
unable to move, so they had to push 
the boats or wait for high tide.  
Southern  
(Jambeli)  
 1998  El Niño 
phenomenon  They were left with no sources 
of work due to the loss of crabs; 
overburdened with household 
cleaning.  They sought work outside the 
mangrove, such as on banana 
plantations and in the construction 
industry.  
2004  Swell  Impact on families’ financial 
situation.  Loss of crabs and black clams in the 
area, loss of source of work.  
2017 
and 
2019 Red tide  Women who fished for these 
species were left without work.  Direct impact on people working with 
shellfish.  
Source : Field data collection through interviews and participatory workshops, August 2019.  
 
4.2 Climate projections in project sites and implications for women and men  
 
Climate change will result in significant impacts on local environmental conditions along the 
coast of Ecuador, including a rise in sea levels, El Niño events, and changes in the intensity and 
variability of rainfall, flooding, and atmospheric temperatures .   
Based on models generated by NASA, climate change could cause sea levels to rise by up to 27 
cm by 2100 (NASA -GISS, n.d.) . Considering that the 1997 -1998 El Niño event led to a 42 cm 
increase in sea levels, periods of heavier rainfall are expected to worsen the rise in sea levels .  
The risk of flooding is a major concern for the coast of Ecuador. The Dartmouth Flood 
Observatory has recorded 22 major floods since 1987, displacing over 506,000 people 
(Dartmouth Flood Observatory, n.d.) . Flooding was particularly severe during the El Niño events 
of 1972/73, 1982/83, 1997/98, and in 2008 and 2012, affecting  between 184,000 and 222,000 
ha (Ocles Padilla, 2018) . Flooding of coastal areas will increase as a result of the sea level rise 
(SLR), particularly due to extreme sea level (ESL) event s in which periodic storm surges and wave 
setup (an increase in the mean water level due to the presence of breaking waves) are worsened 
by projected increases in the relative sea level (Kirezci et al., 2020) . Higher sea levels will lead 
directly to an increase in coastal flooding in Ecuador (Reguero et al., 2015) . 
Given their regular contribution to sea level rise, the El Niño events are of particular concern. 
The mean projected increase in sea levels due to climate change is only comparable to sea level 
changes experienced during El Niño events. The increase in sea  levels, together with 
exceptionally high rainfall associated with El Niño on the coast of Ecuador, limits the discharge 
of river systems into the ocean, causing flooding inland. This will lead to impacts on drainage 
along the entire coastal region, which are not fully captured in existing  models of  coastal and 
river flooding. Based on current assessments , 39% of areas within 5 km of the Ecuadorian coast 
are already at high risk of annual flooding ( Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos , 2018).   
Existing gender inequalities may be exacerbated by the dynamics of climate change in the 
project area. That said, the impacts and challenges are expected to be greater in the following 
areas:


---
*Page 168*
---

 
38 
 • Having access to water fit  for human consumption. At present they only have rainwater 
or tap water, pointing to substantial difficulty in adequately securing this resource, 
especially if droughts become longer or unpredictable. The water problem affects the 
general population becau se they lack adequate water, both in terms of quantity and 
quality , however i t is women who are responsible for collecting water  and therefore 
directly impacts on their time burden.  
• Depending on the market for food of adequate quantity and quality. This may be a 
challenge and could widen gaps in access for men and women because all the basics 
need to be purchased with money, and the money is usually controlled by men.  
• Women and men in four estuaries  live in uncertain socioeconomic contexts and 
situations of extreme poverty, and lack access to general resources: land, tools, and 
formal education for gainful employment. This situation hinders their access to options 
to improve their living conditions a nd the dynamics of violence .  While th is situation is 
true of both, as explained in previous sections, women do tend to be at higher risk and 
with fewer assets.  
• Men during non -take season are usually forced to search for work in other municipalities 
and provinces they live, leaving their families behind. Main sources of work are banana 
plantation, construction and commerce.  
• The most vulnerable groups are elder men, divorced, widowed or single women, who do 
not have the financial support of members of a community organization or of a family 
with male income earners. They find themselves compelled to adopt extremely insecure 
livelihoods. The problem of single, widowed and divorced women is complex and in this 
respect the interviews did not provide sufficient information. The elderly related to 
artisanal activities usually can’t generate incomes during their last years and don’t have 
social networks to relay on.  
• The gap in access to employment may be worsened by a lack of access to formal 
education and natural resources. For example, the women in the communities visited 
have no formal education, making it difficult for them to access key information to make 
approp riate, timely decisions and manage risks, and they are excluded from formal 
education settings. This occurs as a result of the lack of education available and because 
their relationship with the market is different.  
• Artisanal fisheries in general and mangrove fisheries in particular , perpetuate 
conceptions of masculinity that, prevent fishermen from taking initiatives to break the 
cycle of poverty and environmental  degradation . The pressure that derives from the 
social obligation to comply with the role of suppliers, pushes fishermen to irresponsible 
fishing behavior, justifying the non -observance of environmental regulations. Attitudes 
of negligence and conformism emanate from  the need to prove to be a man and not fal l 
into attitudes that show weakness or any trait considered feminine, repressing feelings 
to reaffirm their masculine position, defining themselves as someone without fear or 
pain, with a heroic attitude, giving little importance to the consequences.  
Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that women will continue to spend a substantial amount 
of time on caregiving, lessening their chances of being able to truly participate in decision -making 
and in managing the use and exploitation of mangrove resourc es.


---
*Page 169*
---

 
39 
 Conclusion and implications for project  
 
This gender assessment highlights the comp lex set of historical, social, cultural,  and economic 
factors that influence the project site’s current gender norms and inequalities.  Firstly,  men and 
women are vulnerable and susceptible to the impacts of climate change in differentiated ways; 
they also have different coping mechanisms. Secondly, there is a clear lack of political 
participation by women in community -based mangrove/fishery decision -making fora. Thirdly , 
the data presented suggest that women are overburdened with work, especially reproductive 
labor , and this limits their ability to engage in community, organizational, and project activities . 
And finally , gender -based violence is quite high and further highlights the inequalities at the 
household level and an important additio nal barrier that keep women from using their voice 
and agency . This situation is compounded by a number of structural problems associated with 
education, health, the provision of utilities and limited employment opportunities. All these 
factors come together to shed light on a violation of rights, with gender inequit ies affecting 
women of all ages.  
In these mangrove -dependent communities, while both men and women are vulnerable to 
climate change impacts, women often have higher  vulnerab ility due to  higher rates of poverty ,  
fewer livelihood alternatives, and less access to decision -making/information spaces compared 
to men . Men tend to control the main economic activity in the communities: the harvesting and 
sale of seafood. Often it is men who hold formal positions of leadership within communities and 
fishing associations. Women, on the other hand, t ake care of housekeeping, caregiving for family 
members and cooking; very few are able to generate their own income.  
Taking a holistic and proactive approach, the project’s gender action plan will ensure that the 
projects’ goals and activities take into account the complex realities that women and men face  
and help to improve  the resilience of the mangrove -dependent communities .


---
*Page 170*
---

 
40 
 Gender evaluation for the project  
Root causes  Sociocultural norms 
regarding land access 
do not recognize 
women as 
organization 
members or 
landowners.  Limited work 
opportunities for 
women and men in 
mangrove areas , 
becoming more 
difficult with climate 
change.  Lack of formal education 
for both sexes.  Structural and 
sociocultural dynamics 
are maintained 
through control over 
income.  Culturally, caregiving is 
seen as a woman’s job.  
Implications /causes    Difficulties 
participating in 
decision -making.  Women & men find it 
more difficult to 
generate income ; turn 
to changes in 
livelihoods (e.g., 
migration, men enter 
traditionally female  
fisher ies – black clam, 
cockle ) Difficulty making informed, 
knowledgeable decisions 
on conservation and work -
related issues.  Gender -based 
violence.  Women devote long 
hours to caregiving 
duties, limiting their 
ability to access other 
environments and 
activities.  
Immediate effects  Women do not 
participate in 
decisions on the 
mangrove.  Families do not have 
sufficient food to meet 
their nutritional 
requirements . 
Additional pressure on 
resources.   Women are left out of 
discussions on the 
environment and 
biodiversity conservation.  Women do not 
participate in 
community life.  Women are confined to 
the home and are highly 
dependent on a partner 
or male family members.


---
*Page 171*
---

 
41 
  
  Effects  Women of all ages 
fail to access 
conservation benefits  
(including increased 
CC resilience)  Total dependence on 
the market for 
subsistence.  Reduced 
efficiency of women’s 
harvest.  Women of all ages fail to 
access conservation 
benefits  (including 
increased CC resilience)  Policies and decision -
making does not 
necessarily take into 
account women’s 
needs.  Women do not gain 
access to socio -
productive activities.


---
*Page 172*
---

 
42 
 Gender Action Plan   
Given the gender assessment above, there are several areas where this project can integrate gender -responsive actions to help close gender gaps in mangrove 
management in order to support more efficient, effective, and equitable mangrove conservation.  These opportunities are largely concentrated in the support 
to mangrove associations  where direct collaboration  with the women and men who depend on, and manage, the mangroves will occur. Activities within the 
gender action plan have been included in the proje ct’s budget, as noted. The project will have one CI safeguards specialist  and one CI gender specialist in the 
project management unit, two CI field social specialist s in the Guayas and Jambeli estuar ies, and one  PUCESE staff  in the northern estuaries  (4 CI staff costs 
total USD  1,575,580 , 1 PUCESE staff cost USD 85,546 ). Together, these individuals will drive the implementation and accountability of the GAP, in collaboration 
with the entire project team and partners. Travel for these positions has also been included in the project budget ( 4 CI Staff Travel USD 95,202).  CI’s global 
Gender Advisor will also support the project’s implementation and monitoring of the GAP (USD 66,531  in staff cost,  USD  6,704 in travel).


---
*Page 173*
---

 
43 
  
Project Component  1:      Mangrove areas under effective and climate -adapted management increased, including through community -based management (AUSCEMs) 
and protected areas implementing climate adaptation plans.  
 
Gender outcome:  Women and men are able to equitably benefit from c ommunity -based management and local economic development initiatives , thus contributing 
to increased resilience to climate impacts  (as monitored by the project monitoring system livelihoods assessment  & mangrove cover ).   
Output  Activity  Indicators  Baseline  Goal  Timeline  Entity 
responsible  Budget  
 
1.Community -based 
mangrove conservation 
and management 
contributes to  closing 
gender gaps and 
reducing exposure to 
flood risk of 3,465 
vulnerable people (est. 
50%M/50%F).  1.1 Revise existing mangrove 
use and stewardship 
agreements (and support new 
agreements) that supports 
women’s and men’s equal 
engagement in management 
and grants women and men 
equal rights to concessions and 
use of NTFPs in protected areas. 
This may include i ndicating a 
minimum number of seats on 
the association body for women.  Number of 
revised/new 
agreements with 
language that allows 
for equal decision -
making, rights to 
concessions, and 
use of NTFPs.  No prior 
information.  
59 
agreements  100% of the 59 
existing 
agreements 
and 100% of 
new 
agreements 
include gender 
considerations.  Third year 
of project 
implemen
tation.  Mangrove 
technician  + 
gender/social 
specialists.  Included in 
AUSCEM training 
workshops 
(Activity 1.1.1). 
Total USD 
297,801  
1.2 Work closely with the 
project’s mangrove association 
partners to support and 
encourage women’s equitable 
and meaningful participation, 
recognizing and responding to 
potential elevation of GBV.  
 Percentage of 
women association 
members who have 
received tailored 
leadership training 
(e.g., technical skills, 
public speaking, 
etc.) and productive 
activities.  0 50%  
(1078 women 
association 
members - 
total)  End of 
project  Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist, social 
specialists.  Included in 
AUSCEM 
training 
workshops 
(Activity 1.1.1;  
Total USD 
297,801) and 
local exchange 
visits for 
women leaders 
in AUSCEMs 
(Activity 1.2.1; 
Total USD 
51,477 )


---
*Page 174*
---

 
44 
 Number of 
mangrove 
associations and 
individuals that 
have received 
training on gender, 
joint decision 
making, reducing 
GBV, etc.  0 
associations  60 associations  
By end of 
project  Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist, social 
specialists.  Included in 
AUSCEM 
training 
workshops 
(Activity 1.1.1;  
Total  USD 
297,801) and 
specialists’ 
duties  0 men/0 
women  800 association 
members  
Number of women 
in associations  1078 (24% 
of all 
association 
members)  50%of all 
association 
members are 
women  By e nd of 
project  
1.3 Document and share lessons 
learned, examples of women 
leaders, success stories, etc. to 
inform and influence other 
mangrove conservation 
activities to be gender -
responsive  Number of 
communication 
pieces that share 
information on 
gender approach in 
this project  0 At least 2/year  Annual  Gender & SG 
specialist  Costed as part 
of the 
specialists ’ 
duties.  
2. Socio -manglar 
investment plans 
include gender 
considerations   
2.1 Contribute to the 
development of Socio -Manglar 
investment plans to ensure 
gender considerations are 
incorporated in community 
mangrove conservation/ 
management initiatives.  Number of Socio 
Manglar investment 
plans that include 
gender -responsive 
activities and the 
equitable input of 
women and men.  0 4 (one for each 
estuary)   Third year 
of project 
implemen
tation.  Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist.  
Social specialist.  Costed as part 
of the 
specialists ’ 
duties.  
3.Males and females in 
mangrove areas benefit 
from adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient options and 
business practices linked 
to mangroves  3.1 Provide tailored technical 
support for current economic 
activities, or new activities that 
are priorities for women and 
men.  Number of males 
and females in 
mangrove areas 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified , climate 
resilient livelihood 
options  and 0 41,500 (50% 
female /50% 
male ) Second 
year  Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist.  
Social specialist.  Costed as part 
of the 
specialists ’ 
duties.


---
*Page 175*
---

 
45 
 business practices 
linked to mangrove s  
3.2 Include gender consideration 
into the competitive fund for 
associations.  
  % of accepted 
proposals that have 
gender 
considerations, as 
relevant.  
 
 0 100% of 
relevant 
projects  
3.3 Provide tailored support to 
the 2 women -only associations 
to develop strong proposals.   # of proposals 
developed by the 
women 
associations.  2 proposals  
4. Project team has the 
technical capacity to 
advance gender -
responsive project 
activities.  4.1 Provide ongoing gender 
training/dialogue  to CI and 
MAAE personnel   Number of regular 
training /refresher/d
iscussion  sessions 
given to CI and 
MAAE personnel on 
gender  and 
mitigating/reducing 
GBV in the project.  0 8 
2x/year in 
years 2, 3, 
4,5 Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist.   Costed as part 
of the 
specialists ’ 
duties ; 8 
workshops on 
awareness 
raising and 
capacity 
building on 
gender 
included (total 
USD 17,014 ) 4.2 Ensure project’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism is gender 
sensitive, prepared to respond 
to GBV -related incidents.  Number/% of 
grievances that are 
related to gender  N/A – no target, 
simple 
reporting  
Project Component  2:  The private sector becomes a transformational agent for change by reducing GHG emissions and providing financial support to c onserve and 
restore mangroves that increase climate resilience for other coastal populations.  
Gender outcome: S hrimp aquaculture sector is more inclusive of communities, including women, minorities, and vulnerable men.  
Output  Activity  Indicator  Baseline  Goal  Timeline  Responsible  Budget


---
*Page 176*
---

 
46 
 5. Aquaculture 
farms owners 
are more aware 
of the need for 
inclusion.  5.1 Sensitize the members of 
the Chamber of Aquaculture on 
the Aquaculture Stewardship 
Council’s social impact 
standards on inclusion, human 
rights, and equity.  Percentage of 
aquaculture farm 
owners that attend 
the training.  0 30% of 
membership  Year 2, 3, 
4 Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist  & 
Private Sector  
 Costed as part 
of the 
specialists ’ 
duties.  
Workshop costs  
on inclusivity, 
human rights 
and equity USD 
6,269 plus 
trainings on 
climate smart 
shrimp (total 
USD 273,963 ) 
Project Component  3:  Create the enabling conditions for sustaining reductions in mangrove deforestation and increased mangrove restoration by stre ngthening 
governance, climate change adaptation strategies, coastal management policies, and legal enforcement.  
Gender outcome: Local governments  have included gender considerations & targets in their PDOT  (Coastal Development + Zoning Plans)  
6. Support local 
governments to 
improve and/or 
implement 
PDOTs that are 
gender 
sensitive.   
6.1 Provide guidance and 
support to local governments on 
how to apply a gender approach 
to PDOT implementation.   
# of subnational 
PDOTs with gender 
approach  0 9 Year 2,3 Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist  & 
Adaptation 
specialist  Costed as part 
of the 
specialists ’ 
duties.  
Workshop costs 
covered under 
Activity 3.2.1 
(total USD  
39,884 ) 
7. Project’s 
socioeconomic 
surveys are 
gender 
disaggregated 
and analyzed to 
identify gender -
related changes 
in mangrove -
dependent 
communities, 7.1 Survey instrument is gender 
informed  Gender & safeguard 
specialist is involved 
in survey design 
(Y/N)  N Y Each year  Gender and 
safeguard 
specialist  Costed as part 
of the 
specialists ’ 
duties.  Socio 
economic 
surveys 
budgeted 
separately


---
*Page 177*
---

 
47 
 which is then 
shared with 
relevant 
governments to 
inform policy.


---
*Page 178*
---

 
48 
  
Bibliogra phy  
 
Carvajal, R., & Santillán, X. (2019). Plan de Acción Nacional para la Conservación de los Manglares del 
Ecuador Continental. Ministerio del Ambiente de Ecuador . Conservación Internacional Ecuador, 
Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura (UNESCO) y la Comisión 
Permanente del Pacífico Sur (CPPS). Proyecto Conservación de Manglar en el Pacífico Este Tropical  
CEDEAL. (2014 ). Agenda de las mujeres de la Provincia de Esmeraldas [Women’s Agenda in the Province 
of Esmeralda].  
CIFEN/AAE (2019) . Estudio de Línea e Base Sobre Emisiones de Carbono Cuantificadas, Vulnerabilidad e 
Impactos Proyectados del Cambio Climático  
CLIRSEN. (1999). Estudio Multitemporal de manglares , camaroneras y áreas salinas de la costa 
ecuatoriana mediante el empleo de la información de sensores remotos.  Centro de Levantamientos 
Integrados de Recursos Naturales por Sensores Remotos.  
CLIRSEN. (2007). Actualización del Estudio Multitemporal de Manglares, Camaroneras y Áreas Salinas en 
la Costa Continental Ecuatoriana al año 2006. Convenio de Cooperación Técnica entre el CLIRSEN y el 
PROGRAMA DE MANEJO DE RECURSOS COSTEROS (PMRC).  Centro de Levantamientos Integrados de 
Recursos Naturales por Sensores Remotos.  
Consejo Nacional Electoral  (CNE). 2019. Participación política de la mujer [Political participation of 
women]. Quito. CNE  
Consejo Nacional Electoral  (CNE). 2014. Indicadores de participación política de la mujer ecuatoriana 
[Indicators of political participation of Ecuadorian women]. 2014 sectional elections. Quito. CNE  
Dartmouth Flood Observatory . (n.d.). Retrieved July 15, 2020, from 
http://floodobservatory.colorado.edu/  
Encuesta sobre percepción de los Patrones Del Ambiente En Los Manglares [Survey on Perception of 
Environmental Standards in Mangroves], CIFEN /AAE, August 2019  
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos - INEC. (2010). Censo de Población y Vivienda CPV 2010.  INEC.  
Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas y Censos [National Institute of Statistics and Censuses]. Ecuador. 
www.ecuadorencifrascapituloeducación.gob.ec   
INEC. 2011. Encuesta de Relaciones Familiares y Violencia de Género contra las mujeres [Survey on 
Family Relationships and Gender -Based Violence Against Women]. Quito, Ecuador.  
INEC. 2012.  
Kirezci, E., Young, I. R., Ranasinghe, R., Muis, S., Nicholls, R. J., Lincke, D., & Hinkel, J. (2020). Projections 
of global -scale extreme sea levels and resulting episodic coastal flooding over the 21st Century. Scientific 
Reports , 10(1), 11629. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -020-67736 -6


---
*Page 179*
---

 
49 
 Latorre, Sara. 2012. “Territorialities of Power in the Ecuadorian Coast: The Politics of an Environmentally 
Dispossessed Group”, desiguALdades.net Working Paper Series, No. 23, Berlin: desiguALdades.net 
Research Network on Interdependent Inequalities in La tin America.  
 
León, Magdalena , & Carmen Diana Deere (2002). Género, propiedad y empoderamiento: Tierra, estado 
y mercado en América Latina  [Gender,  ownership and empowerment: Land, state and market in Latin 
America] . Mexico City : Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México & FLACSO Ecuador.  
MAE . 2012. Estrategia nacional de Cambio Climático  [National Climate Change Strategy] .  
Ministerio del Ambiente [Ministry of Environment]. 2018. Diagnóstico para el proceso de 
transversalización del enfoque de género y de participación en la Reserva Ecológica Manglares Cayapas -
Mataje , Provincia de Esmeraldas [Diagnosis for the gender mainstreaming and participation process in 
the Cayapas -Mataje Ecological Mangrove Re serve]. Ministry of Environment of Ecuador (MAE), 
Conservation International Ecuador, Humanist Institute for Cooperation with Developing Countries 
(HIVOS), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and the Global Environment 
Facility ( GEF). Guayaquil, Ecuador.  
MAAE. 2019. Mapa de cobertura vegetal del Ecuador. Ministerio del Ambiente de Ecuador.  
MAAE. 2020. Base de datos de AUSCEMS. Guayaquil. Ministerio del Ambiente y Agua del Ecuador.  
NASA -GISS, n.d.)  
Ocampo -Thomason, P. 2006. Mangroves, People and Cockles: Impacts of the Shrimp -Farming Industry 
on Mangrove Communities in Esmeraldas Province, Ecuador P. School of Geography, Politics and 
Sociology, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom . CAB International 2006. 
Environment and Livelihoods in Tropical 140 Coastal Zones (eds C.T. Hoanh, T.P. Tuong, J.W. Gowing and 
B. Hardy)  
 
Ocles Padilla, A. (2018, June 20). IV Plataforma Regional para la Reducción del Riesgo de Desastres en las 
Américas, Cartagena, Colombia. 
https://www.paho.org/disasters/index.php?option=com_docman&view=download&alias=2616 -
proyectos -de-infraestructura -para -control -de-inundaciones -ecuador&category_slug=meetings -
4&Itemid=1179&lang=es  
Reguero, B. G., Losada, I. J., Díaz -Simal, P., Méndez, F. J., & Beck, M. W. (2015). Effects of Climate 
Change on Exposure to Coastal Flooding in Latin America and the Caribbean. PloS One , 10(7), e0133409. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0133409  
Secretaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos. (2018). Atlas de espacios geográficos expuestos a amenazas 
naturales y antrópicas. Zonas susceptibles a inundaciones. Escala 1:25.000  [Map]. Secretaría Nacional de 
Gestión de Riesgos.


---
*Page 180*
---

 
50 
 Appendi x 1: Interview and data collection guide  
 
1. Objetive:  
• Identify the dynamics of participation, decision making.  
• Show the impacts differentiated by gender  
 
2. Agenda  
 
Time   Activi ty Methodology   
30 min  Presentation 
of the activity  
Awareness 
through the 
dynamic  
"I never e ..."  The activity will be presented, additionally, the ice will be broken. 
Participants will be asked to make a circle. A ball will be handed 
out at random and will request that when they receive the ball, 
they can say their names and which organization they come from. 
In addition,  they are asked to mention something that they were 
not allowed to do as children because they were women and 
men”. The facilitator will make the first presentation as an 
example.  
40 min  Community 
map  How has the landscape in which they live changed and what are 
the effects of climate change?  
Show differences in women and men both in the illustration and in 
the evidence of impacts.  
30 min  Identification 
of benefits 
and risks with 
a gender 
perspective  Work will be done on identifying the main negative impacts of 
climate change for women and men, as well as identifying the 
main benefits and risks.  
They will be recorded on paper.  
To close the activity, the session will be closed based on the 
following guiding questions:  
- What are the coincidences and differences between the 
responses of the groups regarding heat, rain and wind?  
- What are the coincidences and differences between the 
responses on impacts on crops and animal husbandry?  
- Compare the responses of the different groups and 
analyze who has greater responsibility for maintaining 
crops and raising animals that are affected by changes in 
the climate, men or women?  
- How does this affect the daily work of women related to 
taking care of the home and their diet?  
- Do these impacts represent a threat to the food security of 
the family and the community? Why?  
 
40 min  Prioritization 
of gender 
issues for 
women and 
men.  Once the problems and possible benefits and risks have been 
identified, the impact areas (community, productive, reproductive 
and community) will be identified.  
We will use the tree of life and post it for prioritization.  
The prioritization will be based on:


---
*Page 181*
---

 
51 
 - Pink: priority 1, the most important to address and 
improve the impacts of climate change on the lives of 
women.  
- Orange, priority 2, moderately important to address and 
improve the impacts of climate change on the lives of 
women.  
- Green: priority 3, nothing important to address and 
improve the impacts of climate change on women's lives.  
 Conclusions and closing  
 
 
Matrix: Identification of impacts of climate change  
Differentiated impacts on nature  Differentiated impacts for women 
and men  
Landscape / natural 
resources  Animal s Women  Men  
    
    
 
 
 
Adaptation / 
incentive 
measure  Activi ties  Who 
participates? 
(% men,% 
women)  How do 
women and 
men 
participate?  How are 
the 
benefits 
shared?  Obstacles to 
the 
participation 
of women  Strategies for 
the 
participatory 
inclusion of 
women  Improve 
irrigation 
(systems, 
technification) .   Activi ty 1      
Activi ty 2      
Activi ty 3      
Vegetable 
nursery  Activ ity 1      
 Activi ty 2      
 Activ ity 3      
 Activi ty 4


---
*Page 182*
---

 
52 
 Appendix 2: Sample Job Description for Gender Specialist  
 
Summary:  
Conservation International is looking for a Gender Specialist  to be based in Guayaquil City. This position is responsible 
for oversight, coordination, and technical support for the implement ation of  the project’s Gender Action Plan  (GAP) .  
 
Key Responsibilities : 
 
• Coordinate/oversee the implementation and execution of the GAP  within the framework of the 
GCF Gender Mainstreaming Policy . 
 
• Develop and deliver appropriate capacity building for colleagues and delivery partners that is well -
designed, clear, tailored to the context, and practical.  
 
• Monitor gender -related outcomes through established project -specific indicators and through 
qualitative information gathering.  
 
• Accompany project teams to the field to ground truth progress on gender outcomes: meet with 
women/women’s groups, collect qualitative information, help project teams to problem solve, 
propose adaptive changes, participate in reports and other activities.  
 
• Identify opportunities/entry points to support and encourage a diversity of women’s leadership 
through project activities . 
 
• Develop relationships with gender and women -focused NGOs/CSOs/government entities in order 
to learn and share lessons.  
 
 
• Communicate internally and externally to share materials, project results, and lessons learned 
among project/program stakeholders and external audiences .  
• Be the point person for any gender , Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Harassment (SEAH)  or 
Gender -based Violence  (GBV ) related grievance that may come through the project’s grievance 
mechanism.  
 
• Collaborate with CI’s global gender program to ensure consistency in gender approach across the 
institution.  
 
Required Qualifications .  
• Experience in leading the implementation  of gender/social analyses and gender action plans  in 
conservation /climate/NRM -related  projects involving  Indigenous and rural populations.  
• Work experience in implementing projects with a gender approach.  
• Experience/understanding of taking a survivor -centered approach to respond to GBV issues.  
• Strong facilitation and training skills.  
• Bachelor's degree  with a focus in social science, international development, or related discipline , ideally 
with postgraduate studies (specializations, diplomas, master 's degree , etc.).


---
*Page 183*
---

 
53 
 • Spanish and English language proficiency . (TOEFL, IELTS, TOEIC certificate etc.)  
• Excellent skills in written and verbal communication.   
• Executive and analytical capacity to implement projects, manage multiple tasks and adapt to a dynamic 
environment.  
• Ability to work well in an interdisciplinary, multicultural, diverse, and dynamic team environment.  
• Strategic, creative, flexible, and able to work under general supervision and take initiative to solve 
problems.  
• Competencies with Microsoft Office 365.


---
*Page 184*
---

54 Appendix 3: Documentation reviewed  
Abad , E. 2016. Criterios Metodológicos Para La Valoración  Económica De Manglares Del Ecuador . 
Alava , J. Lindop , A. & J. Jacquet . 2015 . Marine Fisheries Catch Reconstructions For Continental Ecuador: 1950 -
2010 .  
Alongi , D. 2008 . Bosques de manglares: resiliencia, protección contra tsunamis y respuestas al cambio climático 
global .  
Arizala, Y. 2019. Análisis del comportamiento socioambiental en la zona de amortiguamiento del refugio de vida 
silvestre Manglares Estuario Río Esmeraldas.  
BCE. 2018. Determinantes del acceso al crédito desde una perspectiva de género para el Ecuador. Banco Central 
del Ecuador.  
Beitl, C. & Gaibor, N. (2018) Rights -based Approaches in Ecuador’s Fishery for Mangrove Cockles. FAO. 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/static/tenure -user -rights/root/volume1/C3%20Rights -
based%20Approaches%20in%20Ecuador%E2%80%99s%20Fishery%20for%20Mangrove%20Cockles%20.pdf
Beitl, C., et al. 2019. New valuation for defying degradation: Visualizing mangrove forest dynamics and local 
stewardship with remote sensing in coastal Ecuador.  
Bodero , A. 2007 . El Bosque De Manglar De Ecuador .  
Bravo , Y. 2018 . Valoración Económica De Manglares Del Sur De La Reserva (Remacam) Próximos A Camaroneras 
Mediante El Método De Reposición De Daño  
Burgess, P., Siyu Qin, and Xiangyi Li. 2015. Mangroves in Ecuador: An application and comparison of ecosystem 
service models.  
Calderón , C., A burto , O. & Ezc urra. 2009 . El valor de los manglares . 
Carvajal , R.& Santillán , X. 2019 . Plan de Acción Nacional para la Conservación de los Manglares del Ecuador 
Continental. Ministerio del Ambiente de Ecuador, Conservación Internacional Ecuador, Organización de las 
Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura (UNESCO) y la Comi sión Permanente del Pacífico Sur 
(CPPS). Proyecto Conservación de Manglar en el Pacífico Este Tropical  
Castillo , E. &  Ortiz , J. 2018 . Acumulación De Biomasa Y Materia Orgánica En El Manglar Del Refugio De Vida 
Silvestre Manglares Estuario Río Esmeraldas .  
Cusme , K. 2017 . Evaluación de las especies del manglar establecidas en el Parque Histórico Guayaquil  
Guerrero , A. 2017 . Evaluación de efectividad de manejo de la concesión de manglar Isla  Bellavista en la provincia 
de El Oro .  
Donato, D., J. Boone Kauffman, Daniel Murdiyarso, Sofyan Kurnianto, Melanie Stidham and Markku Kanninen. 
2011. Mangroves among the most carbon -rich forests in the tropics.  
Fedelea, G. Camila I. Donattia,, Celia A. Harveya, Lee Hannaha, David G. Holea. 2019. Transformative adaptation 
to climate change for sustainable socialecological systems.


---
*Page 185*
---

 
55 
 Hamilton, S & Stankwitz, C. 2012. Examining the relationship between international aid and mangrove 
deforestation in coastal Ecuador from 1970 to 2006 .  
 
Hamilton , S and Clare Stankwitz . 2012 . Examining the relationship between international aid and mangrove 
deforestation in coastal Ecuador from 1970 to 2006.   
 
Hamilton , S. 2013 . Assessing The Role of Commercial Aquaculture In  Displacing Mangrove Forest .   
 
Hamilton S,  2020 . Introduction to Coastal Ecuador. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol 
33. Springer, Cham .  
 
Hamilton S.  2020 . Assessing 50 Years of Mangrove Forest Loss Along the Pacific Coast of Ecuador: A Remote 
Sensing Synthesis. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol 33. Springer, Cham .  
 
Hamilton S.  2020 . Botany of Mangroves. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol 33. 
Springer, Cham .  
 
Hamilton S.E.  2020 . Shrimp Farming. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal Research Library, vol 33. Springer, 
Cham .  
 
Hamilton S.E. 2020 . Discussion: Local Actions with Global Consequences. In: Mangroves and Aquaculture. Coastal 
Research Library, vol 33. Springer, Cham .  
 
Herrera. P. Calles, A., Pozo, M., Villa, G., Ortega, D., Coronel, J. & Almeida, M. 2017.  Políticas Públicas De 
Conservación De Los Manglares y Bienestar De Pescadores Y Recolectores En El Golfo De Guayaquil. Guayaquil. 
Guayquil: Espol -Ci-Condesan -Mae.  
 
Hutchison, J., Mark Spalding and Philine zu Ermgassen.  2014 . The Role Of Mangroves In Fisheries Enhancement .  
 
Lee, S., Stu Hamilton, Edward B. Barbier, Jurgenne Primavera and Roy. R. Lewis II. 2019. Better restoration policies 
are needed to conserve mangrove ecosystems.  
 
López, O. & Acosta, G. 2018. Evaluación de la actividad antibacteriana y antiinflamatoria in vitro del extracto 
vegetal seco de mangle rojo (Rhizophora mangle L.)  
 
Keene, S., Meltzoff y Edward LiPuma. 1986 . The Social and Political Economy of Coastal Zone Management: 
Shrimp Mariculture in Ecuador  
Olguín, J., Hernández , M., y Sánchez -Galván , G. 2007 . Contaminación de manglares por hidrocarburos y 
estrategias de biorremediación, fitorremediación y restauración.  
 
Meaden, G.J., Aguilar -Manjarrez, J., Corner, R.A., O’Hagan, A.M. & Cardia, F. 2016 . Marine spatial planning for 
enhanced fisheries and aquaculture sustainability Its  application in the Near East.   
Molina, N . & Moreno , K. 2018 . Estructura Y Zonación De La Vegetación Arbórea Del Manglar De La Comunidad 
Masa 1 .  
 
Moreira , E., Muñiz Vidart Luis . 2013 . Evaluaci ón del estado actual de las concesiones de áreas de manglar 
entregadas a comunidades ancestrales en la provincia del Guayas: Maestría en Ciencias Manejo Sustentable de 
Recursos Bioacuáticos y Medio Ambiente . 
 
Moreira . 2014 . La Reforestación del Manglar como factor de desarrollo de las  comunidades ancestrales que 
colindan con el sector camaronero en el Archipiélago de  Jambelí .


---
*Page 186*
---

56 Nacipucha  X. 2014 . “Implementación De Un Protocolo De Reforestación del Género Rhizophora, En Tres Sectores 
De La Provincia del Guayas.”  
Nuñez , A. 2016 . Delineación de un modelo metodológico básico enmarcado en Evaluar la Efectividad de Manejo 
de los Acuerdos de Uso Sustentable y Custodia de Manglar .  
Ochoa -Gomez , J., Elisa Serviere -Zaragoza, Daniel B. Lluch -Cota, Victor H. Rivera -Monroy, Walter Oechel, Enrique 
Troyo -Diguez, and Salvador E. Lluch -Cota.  2019. Structural Complexity and Biomass of Arid Zone Mangroves in the 
Southwestern Gulf of California: Key Factors That Influence Fish Assemblages.  
Ochoa -Gomez, J., Salvador E. Lluch -Cota, Victor H. Rivera -Monroy, Daniel B. Lluch -Cota, Enrique Troyo -Dieguez, 
Walter Oechel,, Elisa Serviere -Zaragoza. 2019 . Mangrove wetland productivity and carbon stocks in an arid zone 
of the Gulf of California (La Paz Bay, Mexico .  
Pifarré , D., & Briansó . 2017 . Análisis de los servicios ecosistémicos producidos por los manglares a partir de la 
percepción de la comunidad de Curral Velho.  
Rivera -Monroy, V., Cattelino, J., Wozniak, J., Schwartz, K., Noe, G., Castañeda -Moya, E., and G. Koch. 2018. The 
Life Of P: A Biogeochemical and Sociopolitical Challenge in the Everglades .  
Rovai, A., P. Riul , R. R. Twilley, E. Castañeda -Moya, V. H. Rivera -Monroy, A. A. Williams, M. Simard, M. Cifuentes -
Jara, R. R. Lewis, S. Crooks, P. A. Horta, Y. Schaeffer -Novelli, G. Cintrón, M. Pozo -Cajas and P. R. Pagliosa.  2015 . 
Scaling mangrove aboveground biomass from site -level to continental -scale .  
Rodríguez , G. 2015 . Determinación De La Estructura, Diversidad Y Abundancia De La Vegetación Del Manglar De 
Palmar Provincia De Santa Elena Durante Octubre 2014 / Marzo 2015.  
Rodríguez, G., Gabriela Alexandra Aguirre León, Frank Grey Chiriboga Calderón.2016. La Gestión Ambiental 
Empresarial, su Función Frente A Cambios Climáticos Globales. Camaroneras, Caso: Manglares De Ecuador.  
Sierra , S. 2016 . Determinación de las proteínas solubles y clorofila en Rhizophora Harrisonll  mediante 
Espectrofotometría de luz visible como indicadores de polución en un sector del puerto de Guayaquil . 
Solá, M. 2016 . Impacto económico de la pérdida de los servicios ambientales del manglar en Guayas.  
Smith Im, Robblee , M.,  Wanless , H., and T . Doyle . 2014 . Mangroves, Hurricanes, and Lightning Strikes Assessment 
of Hurricane Andrew suggests an interaction across two differing scales of disturbance.  
Trevino, M. & Murillo -Sandoval, P. (2021) Uneven consequences: Gendered impacts of shrimp aquaculture 
development on mangrove dependent communities. Ocean & Coastal Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2021.105688  
Twilley , R., Pozo , M., Garcia , V., Rivera -Monroy , V., Zambrano , R., Bodero , A. 1997 . Litter dynamics in riverine 
mangrove forests in the Guayas River estuary, Ecuador .  
Yáñez -Arancibia, Y., John W. Day, Robert R. Twilley y Richard H. Day. 2014. Manglares: ecosistema centinela 
frente al cambio climático, Golfo de México .  
___________