=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20231002143020+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.6.20320
/ModDate: D:20231002220934+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.6.20320
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
Meeting of the Board  
23 – 26 October  2023  
Tbilisi, Georgia  
Provisional agenda item 12 GCF/B.3 7/02/Add.1 5 
2 October 2023  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum  XV 
Funding proposal package f or FP22 4 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following s ix parts:  
a) A funding proposal  summary  titled "Renewstable Barbados Project ” submitted by 
International Finance Corporation ; 
b) No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure ;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
f) Gender documentation  of the funding proposal . 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “ Renewstable Barbados Project ” submitted by  
International Finance Corporation is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to B oard 
Members and Alternate Board Members  to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally 
privileged,  or commercially sensitive  information of the entity.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.37/02 /Add.15  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  1 
No-objection letter (s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  56 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure  58 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   60 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  66 
Gender documentation  69


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project/Programme title:  Renewstable Barbados Project  
Country(ies):  Barbados  
Accredited Entity:  International Finance Corporation  
Date of first submission:  2023/06/1 8  
Date of current submission  2023/ 09/27 
Version number  V.010


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.10.0 | PAGE 0  
 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposal s exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Private  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)   
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
 
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution  
Mitigation  total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Energy generation and access  100 % 100 % 
☐  Low-emission transport  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Forestry and land use  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Most vulnerable people and communities  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Health and well -being, and food and water security  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  693,000 tCO2 e  (over a 25-
year lifespan)  A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)   
N/A N/A 
N/A N/A 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  169 million  USD   
A.9. Project size  Medium (Upto USD 250 
million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  41 million  USD


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 2 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding   
☒  Grant  1000000   USD  
☒  Loan  40000000  USD  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  24 months  A.12. Total lifespan  25 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
11/16/2023  
 A.14. ESS category   
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence   
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information   
RENEWSTABLE (BARBADOS) INC., a company incorporated under the 
Companies Act Cap. 308 of the Laws of Barbados (“ RSB ”). Registration 
Number: 43324  
 
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION , an international organization 
established by Articles of Agreement among its member countries including 
Barbados (“ IFC”). Executing Entity  (EE) in connection with some Technical 
Assistance activities.  
 
As part of the due diligence carried out by IFC in connection with the pre -
investment engagement launched in August 2022,  IFC has met with the 
Executing Entit y at various levels and assessed their competence to carry out 
the project. IFC has also carried o ut Integrity Due Diligence /Know Your 
Customer  assessment in connection with reputational aspects and potential  
accusations of  corruption, fraud, etc. Based on IFC’s initial due diligence, there 
were not red flags raised  that would prevent IFC from doing business with the 
EE on reputational or competence grounds.   
 
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 3 
 The Renewstable Barbados project will be the first large -scale hydrogen storage solution in the 
country . The solar PV power generation with batteries and hydrogen storage will provide clean firm 
capacity at night, morning and evening peak -hours providing  6 percent  of the country’s electricity 
demand , avoiding 693,000 tCO2e GHG emissio ns over the life of the project and creating 120 jobs at 
construction and ten permanent jobs.  
 
The government of Barbados (GoB) has set ambitious decarbonization targets for 2030, including a 
target of achiev ing a  100 percent  renewable energy matrix.  The Barbados’ Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) targets GHG emissions reduction of 44  percent  compared to its business -as-usual 
scenario by 2030. At the same time, electricity demand is projected to increase to 1,277 GWh in 2030 
under a base scenario, implying a 35  percent  increase from its 2019 levels. Given the current power 
generation matrix that is around 95  percent  based on fossil fuel generation1, steam generation plants 
(totaling 40MW) are to be decommissioned as soon as possible and gas turbine s (totaling around 100MW) 
that are not suitable for continued operation are expected to be used only as backup and emergency 
generation. Barbados has abundant solar resources with high irradiation and capacity factor s thanks to its 
location close to the equator. A 10 MWp solar power plant is already operating, but developers of 
additional solar plants are facing difficulties in obtaining necessary permit s to connect to the grid . The 
permitting process is slowed by concerns about grid stability , which emerge d after the construction  of the 
existing  solar plant.  
 
Barbados is subject to hurricanes and other regional climate events . These climate events can cause 
disruptions  to the grid and generation facilities and, consequently, loss of power to various areas in the 
island, particularly th ose more distant from the existing generation facilities. Another level of resilience 
challenge relates to the access to and pricing of f ossil fuels that currently are needed for most power 
generation in Barbados. Geopolitical developments such as the recent Russian  invasion of Ukraine 
highlight the vulnerability that this dependency on imported fuels can pose to countries around the world 
and particularly to small island economies such as Barbados.  
 
The proposed RenewStable Barbados (RSB)  project will use intermittent solar PV generation and 
combine it with short -term battery storage and long -term green hydrogen storage to provide a clean 
generation facility that can be dispatched 24 hours a day. The solar plant is oversized (50 MWp), so that it 
can make available sufficient capacity (13 MW) to dispatch electricity to the grid during the day , while also 
generat ing additional electricity to f ully charge a Battery Electricity Storage System (BESS) . Once charged, 
the BESS  can cover 15 MW of demand capacity during peak hours and produce sufficient green hydrogen 
through water electrolysis to then convert back to electricity at a lower capacity of  3 MW throughout the 
night. This design responds to the requirements of the vertically integrated power company Barbados Light 
and Power Company (BLPC) and is based on the demand profile for the grid and the dispatch profile of 
thermal power plants that ar e being decommissioned. The RSB p roject will enable the decommissioning of 
a gas and diesel turbine (GT02) that was originally scheduled for  2019, in which case arguably the GHG 
emission mitigation could be linked to the emissions of this plant in the order of 55,555 tCO2/year. 
However, a more conservative approach has been used taking into consideration the average emission 
factor of the grid  that results in mitigation of at least 27,719  tCO2e per year, for a total of 693,000 tCO2e 
over the 25 -year lifetime of the RSB project.  
 
 
1 IRENA (https://www.irena.org/ -
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Statistics/Statistical_Profiles/Cen tral%20America%20and%20the%20Caribbean/Barbados_Central%20Americ
a%20and%20the%20Caribbean_RE_SP.pdf)


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 4 
  
The RSB p roject  is designed to withstand  extreme weather and high wind loads during climate 
events .  The RSB project will be located in the southeastern  area of the island , rather than in the west 
where most of the generation is currently located.  This location ensures  access to power for people on this 
part of the island  in the event that transmission lines  are affected  by a severe climatic event . The RSB 
project  is designed to be able to operate in an “island mode”  if disconnected from the rest of the generation 
plants , allowing  residents in the vicinity of the project to not only have continued access to electricity , but 
also to other services that rely on electric power, such as water  (pumping stations are close to the RSB 
site), health services, telecommunication s, and other vital servic es. The modularity of the  project’s  design 
means that each of its component s (solar generation, BESS and hydrogen storage) can  operate 
independently  improving the resilience and flexibility of operation. For instance, if the solar plant is 
temporarily out of servi ce, the storage capacity of the BESS and storage system can dispatch at 3 MW for 
up to 4 0 hours  if fully charged .  
 
Finally, the  project generates electricity solely from solar panels. This means that the RSB plant relies on 
local resources  and not on imported fuels  thus making the system more resilient to disruptions in the 
sourcing and logistics  associated with importing fossil fuels.  The RSB p roject  will also help reduce the fuel 
cost volatility which is today fully passed through  to the end -users’ monthly bills  and fix the production cost 
of this baseload asset for the country over the next 25 years.  
 
The RSB project pro vides an innovative solution to address the intermittency challenge of non -
conventional renewable energy sources such as solar and wind . This innovative solution is based on 
technologies that are well known including batteries and electroly zers/fuel cells.  Although the price trend is 
downward as industrialized production is streamlined and competition increases, the price of these 
technologies today is still relatively high  and only make s sense in  specific contexts such as  island 
countries where current HFO/ diesel -based  generation is very expensive.  Retail tariffs in Barbados are very 
high, at a weighted average rate of approximately  USD 0.27 per kilowatt -hour (kWh) well above the LAC 
average of around  USD 0 .15 kWh2. The GCF concessional financing, in addition to contributing to 
make possible this innovative decarbonization solution, will be critical in keeping the average end -
user tariff below the current levels  and bridge the gap between the Barbados tariff s and LAC 
average  as much as possible . With a fixed equity return and fixed commercial terms from the IFC and 
other lenders involved in the transaction, the conce ssionality of GCF will be fully passed through in the 
Power Purchase Agreement ( PPA) tariff for mula  with BLPC . GCF concessional financing will also be key 
in enabl ing a project that can demonstrate an innovative solution to leverage intermittent renewable energy 
resources , which will  provide increase  energy security to Barbados, diversification of its power generation 
sources, and a potential for replicability in Barbados  and other small islands and isolated grids.  
 
NOTE: GIVEN THE TIMING OF THE EXPECTED FINANCIAL CLOSE BY THE END OF 2023, IT IS 
IMPERATIVE THAT THIS PROJECT BE PRESENTED AT GCF’s OCTOBER 2023 BOARD MEETING 
IN ORDER FOR  THE CONCESSIONALITY COMPONENT TO BE IN CLUDED IN THE TARIFF 
NEGOTIATIONS WITH  BARBADOS  FAIR -TRAD ING COMMISSION.  
 
2 “Latin America and the Caribbean Energy Price Report ”, World Bank /OLADE, 2021 .


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 5 
 
  
3 Stennett -Brown (2019) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0219250.g008   
4 Barbados, Energy Profile, IRENA Report 2019 . 
5 https://www.blpc.com.bb/index.php/customer -care/fuel -clause -adjustment  
6 https://smartenergybarbados.com/energy -division/energy -smart -fund/  
7 https://energy.gov.bb/tag/public -sector -smart -energy -programme/  
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
 
Climate Change Problem  
Barbados is among the most vulnerable Caribbean nations to climate change .3 The Barbados electricity 
grid is centralized and vulnerable to hurricanes. Since 2010, hurricanes Tomas (2010), Ernesto (2012), 
Harvey (2017), and Elsa (2021) and the tropical storms Matthew, Maria, Kirk and Gonzalo (2020) have 
impacted the island, causing  power outages and enormous damage to the people in Barbados. Unlike its 
neighboring  island countries, Barbados do es not benefit from a geothermal potential . Power plant s burning 
local biomass would typically be very land -intensive for this SIDS country. Adding to the se challenges with 
the current energy landscape of Barbados is its high  dependen ce on imported fossil fuels , which accounts for  
95 percent of the total energy supply.4 This arrangement leaves Barbados extremely vulnerable to global oil 
price fluctuations that directly impact the cost of electricity. The country spends about 7  percent  of its GDP 
on importing expensive fossil fuels. Retail tariffs are high at a weighted a verage rate of approximately USD 
0.27 per kilowatt -hour (kWh) , almost  double  the LAC average of around USD 0.15 per kWh, and outages are 
common (Energy Transition Initiative, 2020). The cost of fuel purchased is recovered by the utility and directly 
applied to all customers through the Fuel Adjustment Clause which has represented USD 0.21 kWh on 
average in 2022.5  
 
Climate Targets and Strategies  
The government of Barbados (GoB) developed a National Energy Policy (NEP) for 2019 -2030, 
targeting 100  percent  renewable energy and carbon -neutral island -state transformation by 2030.  In 
2019, about one -third of the country ’s GHG emissions c ame from its energy sector, according to Climate 
Watch. Barbados’ NDC targets GHG emissions reduction of 44  percent  compared to its business -as-usual 
scenario by 2030. In absolute terms, this represents a decrease of 23  percent  compared with the baseline 
year, 2008. The Integrated Resource and Resiliency Plan for Barbados (IRRP) developed by Mott MacDonald 
projects electricity demand to increase to 1,277 GWh in 2030 under a base scenario, implying a 3  percent  
increase from its 2019 levels. At the same time, the IRRP recommends that steam generation plants (totaling 
40MW) be decommissioned as soon as possible and that gas turbines (totaling around 100MW) are not 
suitable for continued operation and expected to be used only as backup a nd emergency generation. The 
NEP’s ambitious targets are then likely to be met by tapping into the country’s proven renewable energy 
potential, including wind, solar PV, waste, and biomass (primarily sugarcane bagasse). To this purpose, the 
GoB has already  supported investment vehicles such as the Energy Smart Fund6 that provides financial and 
technical support to Renewable Energy (RE) and Energy Efficiency (EE) projects in Barbados through 
subsidized loans, technical assistance grants, and replacement reb ates for air conditioning units  and the 
Public Sector Smart Energy Program7 consisting of (a) retrofitting of public lighting and public buildings 
with EE technology, and installation of solar PV panels in government buildings, (b) a fleet of government 
electric vehicles and a prospectus/study for an ocean power plant, and (c) ca pacity building for the 
government  of Barbados  on sustainable energy . These initiatives aim at developing public and private 
projects focused on climate resilience, energy efficiency, and renewable energy generation, showcasing the 
increased political inte rest and will to support renewable energy projects.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 6 
 
  
8 https://www.climatewatchdata.org/countries/BRB?end_year=2020&start_year=1990   
9 Note that GHG emissions are measured in carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2eq). This means non -CO2 gases are weighted by the amount 
of warming they cause over a 100 -year timescale.   
Mitigation Benefits  
The RSB project is expected to have a significant impact on GHG emissions mitigation with high 
efficiency and effectiveness.  Based on Climate Watch8, in 2020, Barbados was estimated to have emitted 
3.79 million tonnes of CO2e or 0.013  percent  of global emissions. This represents around 13.21 tonnes CO2e 
per capita annually. GHG emissions9 from energy generation at 1.07 mTCO2e are the second sector after 
waste and followed b y industrial processes.  All in all, the plant will generate 56GWh/year of electricity, save 
27,719  tCO2/year, contribute with approximately 6 percent  of the Barbados grid capacity from renewable 
sources, and benefit more than 21 thousand persons with up to  25 years lifetime. A diesel plant with similar 
dispatch profile  as the RSB plant is past its useful life and will be decommissioned once the RSB plant comes 
in line (13MW gas turbine "GT02" running on diesel has been scheduled to be decommissioned  since 2019). 
Under the scenario of displacing a diesel plant, the GHG emission avoidance is up to 55,555   tCO2/year.  
 
Table 1 – GHG Emissions Calculation  
Parameter  Unit Value  Reference  
Renewable generation 
(daily)  MWh/day  182 8am-5pm 13MW , 7-9pm 13MW ; all 
other times 3 MW 
Renewable generation 
(yearly)  GWh/ year  56 
GHG emission factor  
gCO2/kWh  484 IFI Grid Emission Factor Database  for 
firm energy provision  
GHG emission 
reductions  tCO2/year                       
27,719    
Lifespan  years  25   
GHG reductions over a 
lifespan  tCO2  692,981    
 
 
Adaptation Co-benefits  
The RSB project will result in higher resilience of the power system in Barbados.  By shifting from 
imported heavy fuel oil and diesel to local, clean solar PV resources, the project is improving the energy 
security and resilience of the electricity system, as well as reducing the price volatility and increasing reliability 
of power gen eration in a more decentralized arrangement. The project will probably not reduce regular grid 
outages, but rather provide a separate source of base -load power generation that does not depend on logistic 
infrastructure for fuel.


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 Given the vulnerability of Barbados to extreme precipitation events,  such as tropical storms and hurricanes, 
this project will increase the resilience of the population by reducing dependence on fuel imports, whose 
delivery depends on the fair weather. In addition, the project increases the resilience of all the population of 
Barbados, and particularly the residents of its southe ast region where the project will be located. During an 
extreme precipitation event, it  is likely that batteries and hydrogen tanks will be charged/filled to capacity and 
rationed after the even t. As long as the batteries or fuel cells are connected to the grid, electricity can be 
dispatched very quickly; this is particularly important because some thermal plants require a start -up period. 
The 90MWh hydrogen storage capacity plus the 30 MWh battery storage capacity would allow for a dispatch 
at a non -peak rate of 3MW capacity of 4 0 hours, even if the solar plant is temporarily out of service . (This 
level of damage is unlikely because of the solar plant ’s climate -resilient design) . Furthermore, the project’s 
location in southeastern Barbados is strategically located to increase resilience since it provides grid 
independence to this area, which currently relies on national grid  and generation p lants located the west 
coast . In the event of a hurricane, where transmission lines from the national grid are damaged and power to 
this area is cut off, the project can operate in “island” mode (especially because the cable layout within the 
plant and the  substation will be underground so that they are more resilient), guaranteeing energy to the 
residents of this region. Ensuring energy to this region will also help in maintaining its water supply , given that 
water pumps near the site can use the electrici ty from the project to operate.  Also, if other sources of electricity 
in the country are damaged because of an extreme precipitation event (e .g. a thermal facility gets flooded  or 
port terminal damaged ), and the transmission lines are not damaged, then ele ctricity can also be delivered to 
the areas of the country being serviced by the damaged facility.  
 
The project itself will be Paris Aligned for power resilience , in line with the  Climate Risk assessment that was 
conducted  for the project .  
 
Barriers and risks to climate change  
 
• Barbados electricity grid is susceptible to the impacts of climate change and highly dependent 
on imported fossil fuels:  
Barbados’ macroeconomic vulnerabilities are aggravated by dependency on fossil fuel imports to meet 
its energy needs. Almost all energy in the island country is imported, leaving a bill of around 7  percent  
of GDP and exposing Barbados to adverse effects of oil price volatility. Half of fossil fuel imports go 
directly to the industry and t ransportation sectors, and the rest is  centrally transformed into electricity, 
resulting in a polluting energy matrix dominated by oil products (92  percent ), with non -fossil fuel 
product participation declining since 2000 to 3  percent . Unsolicited applicat ions for licenses to 
generate electricity are allowed under the regulation for up to 20 MW capacity, while two consecutive 
feed-in-tariff (FiT) programs have allowed and encouraged projects with a size up to 10 MW. Recent 
additions of solar generation have  already created a situation of saturation of certain feeders, 
exceeding the stabilization capacity of existing spinning reserves. BLPC is reluctant to connect more 
intermittent generation facilities such as solar or wind, without storage. This situation m akes it difficult 
for Barbados to achieve its goal of carbon -neutrality by 2030 and highlights the need for non -
intermittent, renewable solutions such as the proposed project. The plant is expected to provide 13MW 
during the day and 3MW during the night. W ith this capacity, the plant will supply 6  percent  of the 
country’s current electricity demand and will be designed to sustain hurricanes. The plant does not 
require feedstock and can run on island mode if needed. A large -scale hybrid solution with mature 
technologies and long -term energy storage is the quickest, most competitive, and bankable way to 
deploy locally produced clean firm power.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 8 
 
  
10 FiT for a 10 MW solar PV  plant up to March 2021 would be BD$ 21.75 cents/KWh . 
(https://support.blpc.com.bb/support/solutions/articles/42000060831 -applying -for-interconnection -to-the-grid ) • High cost associated with battery storage and green hydrogen equipment : 
Green hydrogen is a technology that, although already mature, is quickly becoming cheaper, but early 
projects need some concessionality while the price of electroly zers and the cost of renewable energy 
continues to drop to levels that would make it fully commercial. The level of concessionali ty needed 
is intended to address relatively higher country and technology risk perception resulting in a higher 
cost of financing at this early stage. Over time, similar projects are expected to be financed on a purely 
commercial basis, but GCF funding can  help demonstrate technical feasibility in the country context, 
accelerate implementation and provide a successful example to be replicated in Barbados and other 
islands . Equity contributions for the HDF project in Barbados will be provided by private spon sors, and 
potential ly local credit unions . Part of the debt is expected to be financed by development banks and 
local banks on a commercial basis, further leveraging the concessional funds from GCF.  
 
• Current electricity tariff makes the renewable energy so lution less viable:   
The proposed solution is competitive when compared with diesel generation, which is the most 
obvious alternative, but dependent on a fuel  that has high and volatile prices, is imported (resulting in 
lower energy security) and is polluting. The RSB p roject would provide a natural hedge against a 
possible rise in international fuel prices, reduce fuel imports and international reserve depletion and 
improve the country trade balan ce. Ninety percent  of the oil and gas required to operate the plants is 
imported due to the lack of refining infrastructure . Oil and gas imports  impact  the competitiveness of 
Barbados’  economy and cost s on average 7  percent  of GDP every year.  The project will help fix the 
production cost of  this baseload asset for the country and r educe  the fuel costs volatility currently 
passed to the end -users monthly bills  (100 percent  of the fuel cost via the Fuel Clause Adjustment) . 
Initial studies indicate that a sol ar plus batteries only solution would result in slightly lower pricing than 
the proposed solution given that batteries only last around four hours of discharge, so a few banks of 
batteries at the nominal capacity would be needed. Other solutions such as bi omass and wind are 
being explored but are at an earlier stage of development. The proposed project could be viable in 
the absence of concessional support but at a higher tariff for the electricity sold to the grid by the 
project. However, this would ultima tely impact the end consumers that would have to pay a higher 
electricity bill. End consumers in Barbados already pay much higher electricity tariff ($0. 27/kWh) than 
the LAC region  ($0.15/kWh) . The GCF funding is therefore not so much a liquidity solution as a critical 
concessional source of funding which would  help keep tariffs at the same or lower level for the people 
of Barbados  (i.e. maximizing the concessionality in an otherwise set financin g plan will directly benefit 
the tariff) . The regulatory framework in Barbados  allows for a feed -in-tariff10 for renewable projects, 
but only for plants with an installed capacity below 10 MW  and aimed mainly to intermittent generation 
(solar and wind) . Thus , it would not apply to the proposed project ,. The tariff in the PPA for this project  
is being negotiated with the Barbados Fair Trading Commission (FTC) and involves a mechanism for 
the project to recover the investment and return based on the up -front capital investment and other 
factors  through a capacity (availability) payment . The concessional loan of GCF allows for the PPA 
tariff that BLPC would pay the project to be lower. The impact of this lower tariff is then fully transferred 
to the end user  and shared across all customers in Barbados through the BLPC grid. Since Barbados 
is not ODA -eligible, concessional funding for the proposed project is difficult to come by, making GCF 
support particularly relevant. The concessional funding is needed at t his stage given the relatively 
high cost of electrolyzers and fuel cells. However, the per -unit price of electrolyzers and fuels cells is 
expected to fall as the scale of their production increases  , the same that happened in the solar PV 
and wind industr ies decades ago . Therefore, replication of this model in Barbados or elsewhere  is 
expected to be viable with  fewer  or no subsidies in the future.


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 Key characteristics and dynamics of the sector or market  
The political feasibility of renewable energy in Barbados is unique because the country  does not have large 
petroleum reserves that would provide competing  energy from fossil fuels with embedded subsidies . This is 
a problem that is characteristic of countr ies in other regions such as North America and the Middle East. The 
tropical climate of Barbados makes it  an ideal location for wind and solar energy. Barbados averages 8.3 
hours of sunshine per day and 5.6 kilowatts of solar irradiation per square meter. However, the intermittent 
nature of these renewable sources of energy can create instability in the power grid. Natural disasters in the 
past and the COVID -19 pandemic have highlighted the need for a more diverse economy in Barbados. The 
current generation  matrix consists mostly of centralized fossil fuel generation with 54.5 MW LSD Engines, 
73.5 MW gas turbines, and 20 MW steam turbine, located in three sites near the coast in the south and 
southwest of the island. A 10 MW solar power plant in the north is  the first utility -sized photo -voltaic solar farm 
in Barbados. All of this generation is currently owned by Barbados Light and Power Co. (BLPC), a private 
utility that also is the concessionaire for transmission and distribution in the island. There is als o an increasing 
amount of distributed solar generation that adds up to 25MW and, under a recent change to the regulatory 
framework (2015), the potential for Independent Power Producers (IPP) to sell to the grid.  
 
BLPC is a regulated, vertically -integrated electric utility on the island of Barbados. It operates the monopoly 
on generation, transmission, and electricity distribution through a concession that expires in 2028. BLPC is 
wholly owned and controlled by Emera  Group (BBB/Baa3/BBB), an inter national energy and services 
company with revenues over US D 5.5 billion  that owns utilities and infrastructure assets in Canada, the USA, 
and the Caribbean. The electricity tariffs in Barbados are regulated by the country’s Fair Trading Commission 
("FTC") and allow BLPC to recover all prudently incurred fuel costs quickly through a pass through. BLPC 
plans to continue operating in Barbados for the long run. The company plans to compete with other IPPs in 
nascent RE market.  On this point, t he terms of the PP A that is being negotiated are for Capacity Payments , 
which  would mitigate the risk of a preferential dispatch of BLPC power plants over the RSB project . 
 
IFC's current activities in the resilience space include working closely with the Minister of Economic 
Affairs and Investment of Barbados.  As part of the Roofs to Reefs program, an integrated public -private 
investment roadmap for improving the social and environmental circumstances of Barbadian households, IFC 
is helping the GoB using data to ident ify and prioritize the pipeline of investment opportunities, focusing on 
the interventions across all infrastructure sub -sectors that hold the highest potential for supporting the 
country's resilience plan . A component of this work involves outlining which projects currently underway are 
at risk of not progressing due to legal and regulatory environmental barriers or are being held up by procedural 
inefficien cies and which specific changes would be helpful to advance their implementation.  
 
In addition to the IFC intervention above, the World Bank has also approved a US D 100 million financing in 
January 2023 to support Barbados’ low -carbon economic development and resilience to climate change. The 
Barbados Green and Resilient Recovery Development Policy Loan  has two main pillars. One of these 
pillars aims at facilitating Barbados’ low -carbon and resilient infrastructure development th rough the 
implementation of new standards for agency -level disaster management plans, institutional reviews of 
national emergency management agencies, as well as increased renewable energy capacity and support for 
climate change adaptation and mitigation e fforts. These engagements nicely complement the work to be 
supported by this GCF proposed project.  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram )


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 10 
 
  
Barbados has very ambitious decarbonization targets, including those aimed at improving  its power grid.  
Going from around 95  percent  fossil fuel electricity generation to the target of 100  percent  renewable 
energy requires a paradigm shift. Barbados has plentiful solar and wind resources to generate clean 
energy. However, these resources of renewable energy are inherently intermittent. The grid has started 
incorporating solar generation from a 10MW  grid-connected plant and distributed generation for residential, 
commercial and industrial users. But this limited amount of generation is already starting to create instability 
in the grid.


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 11 
 
  
The proposed project presents a solution that will provide in stalled capacity for solar power generation, thus 
avoiding GHG emissions  and reducing national reliance on fossil fuels.  The RSB project  will allow  the 
electricity to be stored and dispatched at times when it is needed so that customers benefit from firm p ower 
day and night and the grid stability is not negatively affected. This  renewable energy -based solution  will 
promote a paradigm shift and s et the basis for an enabling regulatory framework for similar independent 
power producers.  
 
Figure 1: Theory of Change Diagram  
 
 
Firm power is added to the grid using solar resources  and GHG emissions are being reduced . 
(Outcome 1:  Reduced GHG emissions from solar energy generation )  Thanks to the 50 MWp of solar PV 
generation capacity built under “Output 1:  Installed renewable energy capacity of Barbados is increased  ” 
that would  be able to generate  66GWh per year using clean solar resources , thus mitigating GHG 
emissions of more than 690,000 tonCO2e over the 25-year lifespan of the Project . 
“Activity 1. 50 MWp Solar Power Plant :  Installation of solar panels/inverters and interconection to the grid ” 
is a critical input to Output 1 that will provide electricity to the grid during the day  with a peak capacity of 13 
MW. This activity involves site preparation, civil works, procurement of solar panels and inverters, 
installment and interconnection of equipment  (including to storage and control systems) , interconnection 
line to the substation, commissioning and testing. The a dditional  capacity is then used to (a) produce green 
hydrogen  through  the electrolyzer that is stored in tanks and (b) recharge the batteries of the BESS . The 
assumptions that support this activity include that (i) the GoB continues to show strong support to this


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 project and commitment to the announced decarbonization goals ; and, (ii) e nd-user tariff (including GCF 
concessionality) is agreed by the Fair -Trading Co mmission (FTC) and reasonable in the context of 
Barbados.  
The main barriers related to this activity refer to  the fact that  (i) new solar power plants are not being 
connected to the grid due to concerns of grid instability; (ii)  power generation in the country is dominated by 
fossil fuels with yearly increasing electricity demand ; (iii) Barbados lacks resources for traditional ren ewable 
energy technologies with firm dispatch (i .e. hydro, geothermal, biomass) ; (iv)  grid operators lack the 
capacity to operate systems with higher share of variable renewable energy and, (v) regulatory framework 
for independent power producers is relat ively new and there is lack of track record . 
 
Electrical energy  is being stored to be used when needed . (Outcome 2:  Access to firm dispatch power 
and increased  grid resilience ) by providing (i) green hydrogen long-term storage that will make available 3 
MW of capacity throughout the night “Output 2:   Short -term electricity storage capacity is installed  ”, and (ii) 
15 MW capacity for 2 hours of short -term storage ( 30 MWh) through a BESS to address demand during 
peak -hours and respond quickly to variation of demand or changes  in solar generation supply  supporting  
“Output 3 :   Long -term electricity storage capacity is installed  ”, which combined together and with the solar 
PV plant provide a complete solution that is clean, relies on local solar resources, and promotes a more 
distributed generation matrix resulting in higher gri d stability, sustainability and resilience.  
Activit y “2.   Battery Storage System (BESS) and  Green Hydrogen Storage System : Installation of Li -ion 
batteries. Installation of electrolyzer, hydrogen storage tanks, fuel cells. Construction of water adduction and 
installation of water storage tanks and harvesting and treatment facilities ,” enable s Output 2 and Output 3 to 
materialize. For this activity, some sub -activities include : site preparation and civil works ; procurement and 
installation of batteries, electrolyzer, hydrogen storage tanks, fuel cells, and ancillary equipment; 
interconnection of equipment (including to solar PV plant and control system); commissioning and testing.  
These activities are supported in particular by the assumptions that (i)  the GoB continues to show strong 
support to this project  and commitment to the announced decarbonization goals ; (ii) t he green hydrogen 
storage component performs at the expected efficiency levels ; and, (iii) e nd-user tariff (including GCF 
concessionality) is agreed by the Fair -Trading Com mission (FTC) and reas onable in the context of 
Barbados.  
Barriers and risks related to the storage component of the project include that (i) new solar power plants are 
not being connected to the grid due to concerns of grid stability; (ii) cost of battery and hydrogen storage, 
although dro pping, is still high and results in low expected profitability of operations;  and, (iii) Barbados 
lacks resources for traditional renewable energy technologies with firm dispatch (ie. hydro, geothermal, 
biomass) . 
 
Regulatory framework  is being improved . The technical assistance work that will be provided  related to 
capacity building to government and ministerial officials  will facilitate the  closing of the debt financing for the 
project and entering into a power purchase agreement with the power distribution company BLPC  that is 
bankable by international standards “Output 4 : Financing is closed/PPA is signed; strengthen ed regulatory 
framework ”. Being amon g the first independent power producers (IPP) in the country, the financing 
structure and contractual arrangements are expected to serve as a basis for future power plants  that are 
planned as part of the IRRP  and to achieve the ambitious decarbonization target s that the GoB has 
established.   
Output 4 is enabled by Activity “4.  Technical Assistance: Capacity building to Government; local skill 
building on clean energy; knowledge sharing;  assessment and monitoring; and,  gender related activities ” 
that is in turn related  mainly  to the assumption that  (i) final contractual arrangements are bankable for


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 financial institutions and acceptable to investors , but also to the assumption that (ii) the GoB continues to 
show strong support to this project and commitment to the announced decarbonization goals.  The technical 
assistance will also help facilitate the implementation of the project through training and skill building  for 
local workers (women and men) in clean energy related topics, share the knowledg e and lessons learned of 
the project in Barbados and the Caribbean region, and support the assessment and monitoring of 
vulnerabilities and gender related actions.  
This activity is particularly addressing the identified barrier s that (i) the regulatory framework for 
independent power producers is relatively new and there is lack of track record on its use , and that (ii) grid 
operators lack the capacity to operate systems with higher share of variable renewable energy . 
 
In addition to the  outcom es mentioned above, the project will result in important co-benefit s: 
Adaptation: In case of a natural disaster , the project will provide an alternate source of power generation in 
a location of the island where generation is not present at the moment  (fossil fuel generation is conveniently 
located on the western coast where port terminals a nd logistics infrastructure are nearby ) and able to 
produce electricity from local resources (ie. solar and storage). In the likely event that such a disaster  
affects transmission and distribution line s connecting to other generation facilities, the RSB p roject could 
provide electricity to residential customers nearby as well as  as hospitals, water pumps  and first response 
units.  
Environmental : Air pollution will be  reduced, including avoiding GHG emissions in excess of 690,000 
tonCO2e over 25 years . Particulate emissions  are also avoided with this clean solution instead of fossil fuel 
alternatives.   
Econom ic: A more reliable clean energy source  is available and at an affordable energy tariff, fully enabled 
by the level of  concessional financing  provided by GCF  (i.e the more concessionality, the more affordable 
the tariffs become, noting the significant gap today between Barbados tariff and the LAC average) . The 
ability to reduce and even eliminate the use of fossil fuels for power generation will result in a significant 
strengthening  of energy security and a reduction of Barbados’  reliance o n costl y imported fuel.  
Social /Gender  – Job Creation  (Women/Men) : The project will generate local jobs  during construction 
(around 100) and operation (around 10) . Through the Technical Assistance component and the related 
initiatives for skill development and gender actions, the project will promote the participation of Barbadians 
in qualified positions in  the project with a bias in favor of female  employees/interns.


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
cities , 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1  X ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 2  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1: 
Adaptation: 
“Island Mode” 
operation in 
case of disaster  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2:  
Environmental: 
Air pollution is 
reduced  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 3: 
Econom ic: 
More reliable 
and affordable 
energy with  
less reliance on 
and cost of  
imported  fuel ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 4: 
Social/Gender: 
Jobs created 
during 
construction 
and operation 
(women/men)  
 ☐ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
 
The RSB p roject scope includes the design, financing, construction, operation and maintenance under a 
PPA scheme of a renewable energy plant in the easternmost end of the island. The project site is in 
Harrow, Saint Phillip Parish region, 17 km east of Bridgetown, the capital city of Barbados. The project will 
be based on a 73.4 -hectare  plot. 
 
The plant consists of a system delivering a stable baseload and dispatchable energy through  the folllowing 
components:  
1. 50 MWp solar power plant, as a primary source of electr icity when the sun is shining  
2. 90 MWh hydrogen  storage system produced using  electricity and a 15 MW electrolysis system 
during the day  
3. 3 MW hydrogen fuel cell that transforms the stored hydrogen into firm electricity at night  and when 
required.  
4. 15MW/30MWh Li -Ion battery storage system that provides peak power from  7 pm to 9 pm and, in 
combination with the hydrogen storage, ensures the stability of the plant power service.  
 
Figure 2: RSB Project Diagram  
 
The plant will generate clean firm power at a level of 13 MW baseload (i) during daytime (8 am to 5 pm) and 
(ii) during the two-hour block from 7 pm to 9 pm when Barbados' energy demand and energy costs are the 
highest . The plant will also generate  3 MW firm power during the rest of the off -peak, including overnight 
hours.   
The ultimate capacity of the renewable power plant is  56GWh/year of elec tricity, saving 27.7 thousand tons 
of CO 2e/year ( 693,000 tCO 2e avoided emissions over lifespan), contributing with approximately 6  percent  of 
the Barbados grid capacity from renewable sources, and benefitting more than 21 ,000 people during its 
expected  25-year lifetime.  
One key input for the electrolysis is water. The RSB p roject will procure water from the Barbados Water 
Authority (BWA). The estimated water demand of the plant is around 65 m3/day, of which 60 m3/day for the 
hydrogen production and 5 m3/day for other uses. The project includes five-day onsite storage of water for 
reliability purposes. Unlike higher locations in the western coast of the island (such as St. Lucy), the area 
where the project will be located has no issues with water stress. BW A has confirmed existing production of 
around 11,000 to 19,000 m3/day sourced from four different wells . There is  plenty of capacity available to 
supply the project , as well as  the ability to increase production to 26,000 m3/day. The RSB project could 
contribute to the resilience of the water system (and other critical facilities) by providing a new independent 
source of electricity for water pumping that is generated from solar resources and has storage capability.  RSB 
plant will have an annual commercial contract with BWA and , although  a separate supply guarantee cannot 
be granted, the project is  applying two potential plans to ensure uninterrupted supply:   Functional Plan  ( the 
regular water supply through a pipeline to the project as an indust rial customer)  and Emergency Plan  (supply


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 of sufficient water to keep the plant running by means of cistern trucks in case the pipeline is off service due 
to an emergency situation .) 
 
Project activities  
Component 1:   Solar PV Base Load Generation Plant  
Activity 1: Installation of a new source of decentralized renewable energy generation  
The 50 MWp solar photovoltaic (PV) plant would enable the country to produce more energy locally, and 
lower supply risk or political dependence. Its decentralized power generation is designed to sustain hurricanes 
and does not require feedstock to run. The sol ar PV plant is an intermittent renewable source of energy. Its 
output can partially be predicted in advance based on data analysis. When the solar plant is gen erating, part 
of the power output is dispatched to the grid in a stable way, while the balance is split to the electrolyzer and 
the battery  following a  linear  optimization algorithm . The charging capacity of the combined storage (hydrogen 
and batteries) ma ximizes the use of solar  PV production. An Energy Management System (EMS) will be an 
integral part of the project that will act as the brain of the power plant and manage the optimal energy dispatch 
between the different subcomponents of the hybrid power p lant at any given time . When the solar PV output 
is not sufficient to deliver the required power, the EMS will command the battery or the fuel cell to provide 
power.  
 
The plant can run on an island mode if necessary  to provide electricity to those affected by any potential 
disaster  and, with the support of GCF concessional funding, would have a competitive set price of electricity 
over 25 years for renewable and dispatchable baseload power that can also replace basel oad assets and 
peaking gas turbine . The project would thus reduc e the fiscal burden of imported fossil fuel and help Barbados 
achieve its renewable energy target. Barbados spends approximately USD 350 million on imported energy 
each year and relies on trad e to meet its energy needs. Consequently, a momentary disruption or trade 
imbalance can lead to uncertainty in access to energy as prices fluctuate on the world market. GOB’s NEP 
for 2019 -2030 targeting 100  percent renewable energy is expected to cost arou nd USD 4 billion and yield  
USD 3.9 billion per year in economic benefits over the 2020s as the country reduces its import of fossil fuels.  
 
Although not a core component of the project, a sheep farming initiative is being planned  as a social 
enterprise. It  responds in part to a requirement from the planning conditions to grant the approval to RSB, 
which is related to the land’s current use designation for agribusiness activities. The operation is intended to 
be outsourced to a sheep farming entity that will  be allowed to use the plant site for grazing. This operation 
will provide vegetation maintenance services which would otherwise need to be performed mechanically, thus 
reducing the total cost of maintenance for the plant. There is no revenue stream consid ered from the sheep 
farm in the financial model. The project will donate the sheep pens, feed silos, water harvesting facilities, 
some necessary equipment and manure management facilities, and provide support in development of value -
added products and serv ices which may offer supplemental revenue streams to the farm. RSB would enter 
into a lease agreement with the farm entity (with or without nominal payment) for the use of the land and 
donated assets.  
 
The project’s mixed land use contributes to Barbados’ food security goals and helps create the circular 
economy envisioned in the Roofs to Reefs program, by providing grass and other vegetation for native Black 
Belly sheep to graze between the solar panels, while enjoyi ng the shade provided by the panels. It is worth


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 noting that there is already an established benchmark of a similar arrangement at what is currently the largest 
solar facility in Barbados located in Trents, St. Lucy, with a capacity of 10MW owned and opera ted by BLPC.  
 
Activity 2: Install ation of  a short -term battery energy storage system (BESS) and a long-term green hydrogen 
storage system  
There are many technologies on the BESS market, but the current leading technology and most  suitable for 
RSB is the Li -ion BESS. For this project, the 1 5MW/30MWh Li -ion BESS is complementary to hydrogen, 
being used as a short -term energy storage and for power regulation. Several suppliers on the market offer 
preassembled enclosures solution for an easy plug -and-play integ ration that integrates their own firefighting 
and safety systems in the enclosure. Equipment typically has a lifetime of 15 years assuming one 
charge/discharge cycle per day , after which a full replacement would be needed . Round -trip efficiency for Li-
ion batteries is around 85  percent  to 90  percent , and degradation is estimated at 70  percent  capacity by the 
end of the useful life.  
 
The hydrogen storage system is comprised of three major components: electrolyzer, storage tanks, and fuel 
cell.   
Electrolyzer : Water  electrolysis is an electrochemical reaction known since the 19th century.  Different 
technologies of electrolyzer exist on  the market: alkaline, proton exchange membrane (PEM) and solid oxide. 
The main difference between the technologies is the electrolyte used. Two technologies are suitable for the 
RSB project: alkaline and PEM. The electrolyzer for the project is expected to be a 1 5 MW electrolyzer 
operating during daytime when the solar  PV plant is generating. Suppliers offer solutions which can 
be containerized or which are pre -assembled and integrated in a building.  Electrolyzers are estimated to 
have a lifetime of 80,000 hours (around 20 years if operating at 10 hours per day) after which the degradation 
should result in a 10 to 15  percent  inefficiency. The energy consumption of the electrolyzer is around 55 to 
60 KWh per Kg of hydrogen produced.  
Hydrogen Tanks : Hydrogen storage will take place in large vessels (50 to 110 m3) at “low -pressure” (around 
30 bar). These steel vessels, especially designed for hydrogen storage, are of a technology widely used in 
the chemical and petrochemical  industry . The storage  of hydrogen  in gaseous form in large vessels is the 
simpler and safer solutio n. The total capacity will be equivalent to the hydrogen needed for 90MWh of 
electricity generation.  
Fuel Cell s: As with the electrolyzer, different technologies of fuel cell exist on the market: alkaline, PEM and 
solid oxide. The only technology suitable for RBS project is PEM. The fuel cell is a strategic brick because of 
the very few suppliers capable of building a multi -MW fuel cell. HDF Industry will be the supplier of the fuel 
cell, which is containerized for an easy  plug-and-play integration into the plant. HDF has already installed a 
one MW fuel cell in Martinique that is currently in operation.  Fuel cells are estimated to have a lifetime of 
30,000 hours (around 7 years if operating at 12 hours per day) after which  the degradation should result in a 
15 percent  inefficiency and a refurbishing of internal parts will be needed. The energy generation of the fuel 
cell requires around 60 to 65 kg of hydrogen per 1 MWh of electricity generated.  
In addition to the main thre e components of the green hydrogen system, related balance of plant such as 
water treatment, compressors, pipelines, civil works, etc. will also be needed.  
 
Component 2:   Capacity building and knowledge sharing  
Activity 3: Technical Assistance: Capacity building and support with contracts; knowledge sharing


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 Given the innovative nature of the project and the potential for replicability of similar power plants as well as 
for other applications of green hydrogen in the decarbonization strategy of Ba rbados, it is important to  
complement the implementation of the RSB power plant with a multipron ged scope of technical assistance . 
The project intends to use the technical assistance grant funds for  capacity building at various branches of 
the government  of Barbados, for developing technical skills in the labor force, and to share knowledge and 
promote exchanges in Barbados  and the Caribbean region. Some funds will also be allocated for project 
related assessment , implementation and monitoring in connection with MRV requirements and gender - 
related activities.  The proposed scope of work of this activity is  as follows:  
1. Government assistance for sustainable energy policy development for large infrastructural 
projects:  
a) Legislation development  
b) Rate set ting – regulatory assistance in development of capacity models for integrated 
power and storage projects:  
i. Tariff structures and modelling  
ii. Private sector case study development  
c) Technical support to regional organizations such as CARICOM in strengthening the 
regional policy, legislative and tariffs frameworks for energy sector development.  
 
2. Ministerial training in strengthening government institutions ’ capacity to unlock non -recourse 
project financing:  
a) Gaining access to finance from multilateral organizations such as GCF  
b) Unlocking private sector finance and investment ( private sector investing for medium/ large 
scale energy projects)  
c) Understanding and overcoming bankability issues for DFIs  
d) Project and blended financing for acceleration of large -scale energy projects (business 
financial modelling and investment support)  
 
3. Capacity building and skills development for the clean energy sec tor to elevate the local skills 
market in hydrogen and hydrogen power specialties. Scholarships  to be offered  in: 
a) Medium and high voltage electrical applications – installation technicians, electrical 
engineering, PV plant design, etc.  
b) Technical and legal  specialties – transition of experienced energy specialists to hydrogen 
specialties in production, transport, storage, maintenance, policy, financing, legislation, 
regulation, etc.  
c) Renewstable® plant management technicians  
d) Training in financial management  and integrity capabilities for the project  
 
4. Knowledge sharing:  
a) Study o f potential applications of green hydrogen for small island states; success stories 
of GH2 projects in developed countries harnessing lessons learned and best practices. 
This study wil l entail, at a minimum:  
i. Main drivers for success and failure risks  
ii. Technical challenges typically faced during construction and operation  
iii. Safety aspects to be considered regarding workers and neighboring  communities  
iv. Examples of regulatory framework highlighting best practices and potential 
pitfalls


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 v. Approach to green certification and quantification of mitigation and adaptation 
benefits  
vi. Tariff calculation methodology and impact of GCF concessionality to reduce cost 
to end user;  
vii. Trends and fu ture expectations  
b) Convening of a Caribbean Green Hydrogen Network.  
c) Launch event to present the results of the study in (a) above and to launch the CGHN in 
(b) above; identify champions to spearhead next steps  
d) Workshop on lessons learned from the Renewstable® plant installation  
 
5. Assessment and monitoring:  
a) Vulnerability assessments including a results chain and MEL  (monitoring, evaluation and 
learning)  plan (MRV  – monitoring, re porting and verification - require ments), to better 
understand how the project is reducing the climate vulnerability of the people of Barbados 
and develop an appropriate  logical framework and results chain Gender -related activities  
i. Gender baseline and gap assessment study  
ii. Workshop with GoB  and other stakeholders on gender issues and integration 
benefits  
iii. Development of public education campaigns/workshops which encourage the 
participation of girls and young women to aspire to leadership and technical roles 
in the renewable energy sector. Dev elop communication strategy with targeted 
messages for women and girls to go for technical jobs/studies  
iv. Develop and implement a detailed community -based Grievance/ Complaints 
Mechanism Plan with a survivor -centered  approach, which provides 
confidentiality for GBVH reporting and addressing GBVH claims; gender and 
GBVH awareness training for all and specialized training for those responding to 
GBVH claims.  
v. Develop stakeholder -specific handbooks/tool kits which are user friendly and 
increase the awareness and understanding of key stakeholders (male - and 
female -headed households, business owners and other vulnerable populations) 
on the benefits and impacts of hydrogen energy production and conduct 
education awareness sessions on such benefits and impacts.  
vi. Provide training in rainwater harvesting techniques targeting small farmers, 
community members, business owners and operators, with a focus on women 
and other underserved population s 
b) Establish a project information meeting; conduct gender -sensitiv ity training with the RSB 
project management team.  
 
Implementation arrangement  
RSB is the Executing Entity of the solar PV generation and hydrogen and battery storage plant in Barbados. 
Financial close is preliminary planned towards the end of  2023 and the planning application and the 
Independent Power Producer (IPP) license application have already been submitted for approval. The 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was submitted around March/April 2022  and the 
planning applicati on has been approved . Regarding the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) the government 
of Barbados has shared a draft solar PPA, and currently it is being discussed with the local utilit y. Signing of 
the PPA is estimated to take place by the end of 2023.  A fuller description of the implementation arrangement 
is presented in section B.4 below.


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 20 
 
  
Key financial and operational risks  
• Technology and performance risks (fuel cell in particular) of this new solution . 
Mitigant : Although the proposed solution is innovative , it integrates technologies that have already 
been proven for years (fuel cells and electrolyzers), albeit there being still room for scaling mass 
manufacturing and reducing production costs. The electrolyzer and fuel  cells will be procured from a 
tier-1 electrolyzer manufacturer  and HDF Industry  under a Ballard’s exclusivity co -development , 
respectively, renowned brands in the nascent green hydrogen industry. The fuel -cell technology 
used is Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) technology. The electrolyz er technology can either be 
pressurized alkaline or pressurized PEM, procured through a competitive process. Both electrolyzer 
technologies compete today. IFC has conducted an initial due diligence and management approval 
to engage in this project at the d evelopment stage (pre -investment). From this initial due diligence, 
IFC has not found an impediment to support the proposed technology or technology provider in 
Barbados. Although the expectation is that such  a proven technology will operate as designed, a s a 
worst -case scenario the risk of the technology failing is mainly concentrated on the hydrogen part. 
IFC’s understanding is that failure to deliver the agreed electricity to the grid will result in the 
sponsors carrying the burden of lower revenues and penalties, but not in the tariff to the end 
consumer being increased  as the tariff will be set at PPA signing . IFC will conduct additional due 
diligence prior to financial closing as part of the approval process for debt financing.  
 
• Cost competitiveness wi th other sources of power generation.  
Mitigant : Despite not having access to the exact dispatch profiles of BLPC required to develop an 
accurate economic assessment and electricity generation price comparison, the team estimates that 
the project, with the expected concessionality of GCF, competes with a combination of baseload 
assets and gas turbines (rather than with intermittent solar or wind generation), but entirely carbon -
free, domestically -produced, resilient, innovative, and with local return on inve stment. Another 
alternative to the RSB solution could be a system using solar generation and battery -only storage 
(instead of a combination of green hydrogen an d batteries). Although no such solution is being 
considered in Barbados, HDF prepared an in -hous e comparative analysis between these two 
options and IFC commissioned  an independent study (by consultant  DNV ) to verify these results . 
The levelized cost of energy (LCOE) for the BESS -only solution is similar to  the solution using GH2 
(with the GH2 solution varying from 21 percent  more expensive  to 7 percent  cheaper , across the 
different scenarios evaluated) . Additionally , it is important to consider that  the option with GH2 has 
several advantages such as : 
 
a) Diversification : not relying on one technology  makes the system more flexible . There is 
also a lower marginal cost of additional MWh when the GH2 component is included . 
b) Higher autonomy : the hybrid GH2 & BESS system ha s the ability to store energy for up 
to two days of dispatch in case of emergency. Th is capacity can be increased 
economically by adding storage tank capacity, which is important for the 
adaptation/resiliency benefi t and that is prohibitively costly for a BESS -only system   to 
replicate .   
c) Replicability : being a first mover in the nascent green hydrogen space  open s the way  for 
Barbados  to replicat e the solution in tandem with  a cost reduction of the GH2 technology 
that is expected to be steeper than for the more mature battery technology.  It will also 
provide the opportunity  for other potential applications such as industrial decarbonization  
where GH2  is a promising solution .


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 It is significant that the RSB  project  is supported by the govern ment of Barbados and t here is no 
BESS -only solution that is ready to be implemented , meaning that an opportunity cost  should also 
be considered . HDF has spent development costs on this project over  the last five years to  get to  
the investment stage.  The purpose of the DNV report, therefore, was not necessarily to be the 
decision factor in choosing between to possible solutions, but to be considered as one of the various 
criteria to determine the viability of the proposed RSB solution, which to IFC co ntinues to have 
sufficient merits to be supported.  
 
• Grid interconnection  
Mitigant : BLPC confirmed RSB can dispatch power generated to the nearest substation , the 
Hampton substation, which has upgrade plans to be ready before 2024 independently of RSB's 
project. Since the project is expected to start commercial operations in 2025, the team will monitor 
the upgrade's development and explore alternative arrangements to mitigate this risk further.  As 
additional mitigant s to the interconnection risk , a Connection Impact Assessment (require d as part o f 
the licensing process) will document all technical obligations for interconnection to be met by both 
parties, including the utility (BLPC).  The Interconnection Agreement currently under negotiation will 
document these obligations and any penalties to be imposed due to delay. The PPA will impose 
deemed capacity payment s in case of delay in COD for a reason attributable to BLPC.  
 
• Sponsor, Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) and interface risks  
RSB will assume the construction cost and schedule risk. If there are delays in implementing the 
Project, RSB might be liable to pay Liquidated Damages (LDs) to BLPC  such as in the case the 
plant does  not deliver the agreed capacity or does not meet its daily availability commitments . 
Mitigants : RSB expects to implement a full wrap fixed price EPC with an experienced, creditworthy 
contractor. EPC includes a customary liability cap, security package, LDs, and warranties. 
Additionally, HDF provides fuel cel l technology and solar PVs are to be provided by a supplier with a 
proven track record. Moreover, HDF is currently recruiting professional expertise in Barbados to 
facilitate and coordinate between international EPCs and local subcontractors to mitigate EP C risks.  
 
• Supply chain constraints leading to increased costs and schedule slippage  
Mitigant : Solar PV and Battery Energy Storage Systems supply chain s are currently very 
constrained , as well as the GH2 -related equipment and EPC contractors,  but are expected to return 
to more normal levels in the medium term.  HDF is developing similar projects in LAC area, 
especially in Mexico, and other places in the world, hence a common procurement strategy has 
been put in place to secure the interest of the suppl iers and of the EPCs and find synergies with the 
different supply chain stakeholders.  HDF has already developed relationships with key suppliers on 
their other similar projects.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
 
Proposed Financing Structure  
The figure  below illustrates the RSB p roject's indicative structure and the entities involved.  
 
 
Figure 3: Stakeholders Structure


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 22 
 
  
 
 
 
Sponsors  
Hydrogène de France (HDF)  – Registration Number 789 595 956  
HDF is a French company listed on the EuroNext Stock Exchange specializing in developing and operating 
high-capacity large -scale hydrogen -to-power infrastructure projects that provide on -demand electricity from 
renewable sources energy sources (wind or solar), MW -scale fuel cells, and storage systems. The 
company was founded in December 2012 and is headquartered in Lormont, France. HDF recently 
completed its IPO on June 24, 2021. The company raised EUR 132.25 million under  the ticker symbol of 
HDF.  
 
The solutions designed by HDF combine solar and wind power, short -term battery storage, and long -term 
energy storage using hydrogen to provide clean baseload power and compete with existing polluting diesel 
generators. The prop osed project uses the power -to-power Renewstable solution that consists of multi -MW 
power plants, producing electricity 24h/day (intermittent renewable source and H2 storage).  HDF has 
initiated the proposed project and is a shareholder in RSB. HDF leads a ll development activities through a 
development and project management agreement signed with RSB  and will be the supplier of the fuel cells. 
HDF will take over the O&M activities after the two years interim O&M done by the EPC contractor.  
 
HDF Energy is currently developing projects in French Guiana, the Caribbean, Central America, Southeast 
Asia, European Islands, and Australia . HDF has reported notable progress on the first project deploying this 
technology in CEOG – French Guiana: a multi -MW electrical  power plant using hydrogen to store 
renewable energy delivering firm power of 10 MW days and evening and 3MW night. The project closed 
financing and started construction in September 2021 and is expected to be commissioned by 2023. It 
counts on equity banking from Meridiam and SARA (Rubis Group) and financing interest from international 
commercial banks (BNP Paribas, SMBC). Given the strong credit rating of French Gu iana (France) and 
EDF as the offtaker, the financing in this case was achieved in commercia l terms without concessional 
financing. The recent partnership with Rubis strengthens HDF's local expertise and networks and adds the 
means to develop additional projects and fund the construction of their fuel -cell plant in France.


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 Rubis Caribbean  Holdin g Ltd. – Registration Number 35330  
Rubis Inc. is a France -based international company specializing in storing, distributing, and selling 
petroleum, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), food, and chemical products. Rubis is the market leader in 
France, Switzerland, Bermuda, Jamaica, Madagascar, Morocco, French Antilles -Guiana, Senegal, the 
Channel Islands, and Kenya. Rubis Group (already a 19  percent  shareholder in HDF) acquired a 51  percent  
stake in RSB. Rubis Inc. is the wholly owner of Rubis Caribbean  Holding, a majority  (51 percent ) 
shareholder in RSB . 
 
Renewstable Barbados (RSB)  – Registration Number 43324  
RSB will be the Executing Entity  implementing the project. The company is registered in Barbados and 
currently owned at 51  percent  by Rubis Caribbean  Holding and 49  percent by HDF. The board of directors  
comprises two board members from Rubis and one from HDF. All the equity needs are already committed 
by the existing shareholders. HDF is in discussion with local credit unions to acquire up to 30  percent  of the 
project equity at or after financial close (in any case be fore COD).  
 
RSB is the entity in charge of the development, financing, design, procurement, construction, 
commissioning, installation, testing, operation, maintenance, insurance, and decommissioning of the plant.  
 
 
Construction Arrangements : 
RSB is currently in the process of selecting an EPC contractor  for the solar plant and storage facilities: 
green hydrogen plant and BESS . The o ngoing tender was launched in April 2023 and has already 
shortlisted four reputable international EPCs.  The EPC contract  is expected to be awarded towards the 
end of 2023.  A separate work package is also being procured for site preparation, potentially from a local or 
regional firm.  Both contracts are intended to be signed in Decemb er 2023 following the financial close of the 
project  and construction is expected to be completed in 24 months . RSB, with the support of HDF,  will be 
responsible for procurement of equipment.  For the time being, only HDF Responsible Procurement 
guidelines ( annex 10 ) have been imposed  but there is a general requirement to follow IFC standards when 
applicable.  HDF will be the supplier of the fuel cells  given the limited availability of suppl iers of high -
power  (1.5 MW) fuel cells and the strategic partnership between HDF and renowned fuel-cell company 
Ballard  based on which HDF is building a fuel -cell manufacturing facility in Bordeaux .  
RSB is negotiating an Interconnection Agreement  with t he utility (BLPC) . BLPC  has proposed certain 
infrastructural upgrades be performed at HDF’s cost to facilitate interconnection. Regarding the risk of delay 
in the interconnection to the grid, the Connection Impact Assessment  (a requirement of the licensing  
process) will document all technical obligations for interconnection to be met by both parties, including 
BLPC.  
 
Operation al Arrangements:  
The EPC  contractor will be also be responsible  for operating  and maintaining  (O&M) the full plant for an 
interim period of  up to  two years  and will subcontract through Long -Term Service Agreement  the 
maintenance of the equipment with their supplier . After that initial period and through a handover process, 
an O&M Operator (potentially HDF) that will have the human resources, skills and know -how to ensure a 
reliable operation will take over the O&M activities  for the remaining years of the Project . HDF will enter into 
a Project Management Contract  with RSB  through which, among other things, HDF will carry out all 
procurement activities (as mentioned above) and supply and provide support regarding the fuel cells , O&M 
of the plant after the EPC contractor, and in general all development activities .


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 RSB will also enter into a Power Purchase Agreement  (PPA) with BLPC, through which RSB will provide 
BLPC with additional capacity with the previously agreed dispatch profile, and BLPC will pay a capacity 
(availability) payment.   
To be able to operate as a power generator  in Barbados , RSB will enter into an  Independent Power 
Producer (IPP) License  with the GoB.  
An agreement to procure the water,  Water Purchase Agreement  (WPA) , will be entered between  RSB and 
the Barbados Water Authority (BWA).  
 
Financing and Subsidiary Arrangements:  
In accordance with the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) dated 22 November 2017, IFC and GCF  will 
enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA)  in terms that are being prepared. The FAA will comprise 
two components: one concessional loan to be blended with the commercial loans financing the construction 
and implementation of the RSB plant, and a technical assistance grant component. The concessio nal loan 
will mirror the terms of the commercial financing except for the concessional pricing that will be fully 
transferred to the end -user tariff.  
RSB is a special purpose vehicle to which the shareholders, HDF and Rubis, have already committed the 
equity contribution needed for the project  budgeted at US$43 million . The expectation is that the equity 
component (either as direct equity or as a fully-subordinated shareholders’ loan  or a combination of both ) 
will be injected first or pari -passu with the de bt financing.  
Loan Agreements  will be signed between RSB and various lenders . The loan agreements are expected to 
include a  standard security package that could include pledge of shares, accounts and assets as well as 
economic rights under the key Project contracts and insurance policies.  
 
Technical Assistance:  
The Technical Assistance  grant component of the FAA  will support the following scope of work that is 
detailed more in annex 25: 
1. Government assistance for Sustainable Energy policy development for large infrastructural 
projects  
2. Ministerial training in strengthening Government institutions capacity to unlock non -recourse 
project financing  
3. Capacity building & Skills Development for the clean energy sector to elevate the local ski lls 
market in hydrogen & hydrogen power specialties (incl. scholarships)  
4. Knowledge sharing  
5. Assessment and monitoring  
6. Gender -related  activities . 
 
Funds will be transferred from GCF to IFC in accordance with the FAA  that will be entered between the two 
institutions.  Capable  consultants will be engaged for these activities. Some of the TA activities are expected 
to be commissioned by the IFC advisory unit  following World Bank Group procurement procedures and 
guideline s for the  selection and contracting of the consultants  (competitive selection is preferred in all cases 
and mandatory for contracts USD 50K and above).  There may be some activities that the RSB may hire 
directly in coordination with IFC.  For capacity building activities, participants will be selected in consultation 
with the GoB and the EE to ensure that  the skills  are developed for the people that will benefit the most and 
apply them more eff ectively  in their respective positions . Candidates for the Knowledge Sharing activities


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 (including  for the launch of the Caribbean Green Hydrogen Network)  will be selected from the most 
appropriate  public and private sector stakeholders in the region, to target potential champions that can 
spearhead a green hydrogen economy across these small island developing states ( SIDS). 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
NOTE: GIVEN THE TIMING OF THE EXPECTED FINANCIAL CLOSE BY THE END OF 2023, IT WOULD 
BE IMPERATIVE THAT THIS PROJECT IS PRESENTED AT GCF’s OCTOBER 2023 BOARD MEETING 
SO THAT THE CONCESSIONALITY COMPONENT CAN BE INCLUDED IN THE TARIFF  
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE FAIR  TRADE COMMISSION.  
The project would enable the development of the first large -scale hydrogen storage solution in 
Barbados  and in the Caribbean and inform future IPPs and PPAs for other private sector initiatives that can 
be scalable and mitigate more innovative vulnerabilities of high dependence on fossil fuel energy 
generation. Concessional funding is critical for early pro jects such as this one to be viable, but it is expected 
that similar projects can be financed on commercial basis as the cost of renewable energy, electrolyzers, 
fuel cells, and batteries continue to drop  going forward . GCF support is being sought not so m uch for the 
liquidity as for the concessionality of the financing  it provides . Barbados being non -eligible to traditional 
blended finance sources, GCF is uniquely positioned to bring a cheaper financing than the combined 
commercial loans of  IFC, other mult ilateral and local lenders , and thus will  directly impact  the PPA tariff  as 
explained above  (i.e. maximizing the concessionality in an otherwise set financing plan will directly benefit 
the tariff) . 
GCF funding would be supporting an innovative solution for decarbonization of the grid . Although 
the electrolysis and fuel -cell technologies are not new, only now the cost of renewable energy and the 
production cost of electrolyzers and fuel cells are approaching a commercial level that could compete with 
fossil fuel alternatives. Expected continued trends of cost reduction for both hydrogen equipment and 
renewable energy generation are likely to result in solutions like this one not needing concessional funding 
in the medium -term. But to get there, pr ojects like this one are needed to keep the momentum and promote 
“power to hydrogen to power ” project . 
A successful experience with this project could be replicated in other island countries or isolated 
grids . It is critical that early, well-conceived  projects such as the proposed solution are supported to deliver 
a positive result that can then be replicated, not only in Barbados, but in other Caribbean islands and 
beyond. The possibility of harnessing intermittent renewable energy and, through short - and long-term 
storage, being able to provide firm dispatchable energy without the need of fossil fuels is sure to have 
abundant application opportunities.  The Technical Assistance component of this proposal includes a study 
and workshop on lessons learned once  the plant has been built to leverage this experience and serve as a 
catalytic factor  for future initiatives using these technologies. Training programs will be required to develop 
the local workforce to support hydrogen industries. Specialty skills in pla nt operation, renewable project 
financing, legislation and contracting will be required, skills that would then be immediately transferrable 
regionally and worldwide. In this regard, RSB, with the support of GCF TA,  is looking at opportunities to 
partner with local universities and set up a Training Center for H2 services that will be used to form local 
student and train the potential workforce of the power plant and other H2 project in the region.  Already i n 
2021, H DF executed a letter of intent with the University of the West Indies in which the UWI recognized 
HDF as an important vehicle for regional research and knowledge transfer and expressed its willingness to 
work with HDF to explore potential synergies for par tnership and collaboration on the Project and regionally.  
Through the proposed project, GCF would be able to support the diversification of energy 
generation sources for Barbados . With a grid that relies heavily on fossil fuels, the proposed solution is 
not only a way to decarbonize the generation matrix, but also to diversify the energy resources and 
geographic location of the power generation facilities. Diversification of generation sources and


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 decentralization of power plants (that no longer need to be close to ports that import fossil fuels) provides 
additional resilience to the energy sector in the country.  
sing solar energy for base load power dispatch  will support Barbados to increase its energy 
security . By shifting the paradigm that fossil fuel is needed for base load generation and grid stability to a 
solution that is fully renewable and, at the same time, dispatchable at any time and without grid stability 
issues, GCF would be helping Barbados in reducing imported, expensive and polluting fossil f uels for 
electricity generation. This will help mitigate a risk price volatility and access to supply that is always 
present, but that was stressed by the recent conflict between Russia and Ukraine.   The Project would 
provide a natural hedge against a poss ible rise in international fuel prices, reduce fuel imports and 
international reserve depletion and improve the  country ’s trade balance. Ninety percent of the oil and gas 
required to operate the plants is imported due to the  lack of refining infrastructure . It impacts the 
competitiveness of the economy and cost s on average  7 percent  of GDP every year . 
GCF support will be critical in de -risking part of the project's development in the Barbadian 
environment, thus maximizing chances of reaching financial closure . The concessionality of the GCF 
contribution will be fully channeled to reduce the tariff to the end user. The recipients would benefit from 
GCF support to be able to provide a tariff that is competitive with the current electricity gener ation 
alternatives  in Barbados which are  based on fossil fuels  which enjoy embedded subsidies . The current cost 
of energy storage makes this clean and locally -sourced solution expensive to the end customer. As the cost 
of electrolyzers, fuel cells, renewab le energy, etc. continue to decrease, future projects of this type are 
expected to eventually become competitive without the need for concessional funding.  The HDF solution 
makes sense in island contexts such as Barbados where existing electricity prices a re high and driven by 
diesel/HFO  generation assets.  
Competitiveness in small islands, such as in the Caribbean or the Pacific, and in similar isolated grids (ie. 
off-grid villages in Sub -Saharan Africa) is likely to be reached faster, given that diesel ge nsets and other 
alternatives are also expensive. In fact, HDF was able to reach financial close for a project in French 
Guiana (CEOG – https://en.ceog.fr/home ) that uses the same technology and is very similar to the 
proposed project in Barbados, except for the country risk (although located in the same geographic region, 
French Guiana is effectively part of France). The proje ct closed financing and started construction in 
September 2021 and is expected to be commissioned by 202 5. It includes  equity funding  from Meridiam 
and SARA (Rubis Group) and financing interest from international commercial banks (BNP Paribas, 
SMBC).  The project cost is similar to the project in French Guiana, however financing cost is higher for 
Barbados given that French Guiana is part of France (lower country risk) and the off -taker is EDF (state -
owned off -taker from France ). A successful project  in Bar bados could potentially open the way for a multi -
country platform engagement to reproduce these projects in the Caribbean, LAC, and beyond (IFC is 
engaged in early discussions about similar systems in countries like Chile, PNG, and Pacific Islands).  
 
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The project is expected to be sustainable in the long run.  The principal investment of the GCF 
concessional loan is expected to be recovered from project revenues. Operating costs and revenues are 
stable and predictable providing higher certainty that the project will be sustainable over its lifecycle. Private 
investors plan to own , operate  and maintain  the project in the long  run to recover the ir investment through 
dividend distributions in the exp ectation of making  a reasonable risk -adjusted return. At the end of the 
Project life, the plant can be refurbished for continued operation or decommissioned. Lenders will be 
providing long -term financing alongside GCF concessional loan that is expected to be serviced fully from 
the Project ’s cash flow s. Looking beyond this project, similar solutions are expected to be implemented in


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.10.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 other locations that may also need concessional funding initially (Barbados is among the most -developed 
small islands in the C aribbean), and eventually  graduate  to become a competitive solution financed on 
commercial  terms . 
Paradigm shift  
Green hydrogen is a technology that  is already mature and is on a trajectory to  becoming cheaper . 
Early projects need some concessionality while the price of electrolyzers and the cost of renewable 
energy continues to drop to levels that would make the technology fully commercial . The level of 
concessionality needed is expected to be relatively low for this project and intended to address relatively 
higher country and technology risk perception resulting in a higher cost of financing at this early stage. Over 
time, similar projects are expected to be financed on a purely commercial basis, and GCF funding  can (i) 
help accelerate implementation and (ii) provide a successful demonstration project to be replicated in 
Barbados and other places.  The project will help develop knowledge and expertise  about green hydrogen in 
Barbados that will facilitate its  use in other applications such as industrial, etc. , making Barbados a leader in 
this sector in the sub -region.  Equity contributions for the project in Barbados will be provided by private 
sponsors and the debt is expected to be financed by development banks on a commercial basis, further 
leveraging the concessional funds from GCF . This project with a solar PV and lithium -ion BESS has the 
novelty of a n H2 long -term storage allowing it to be a clean b aseload asset for the country. The HDF 
solution makes sense in island contexts such as Barbados where existing electricity prices are high and 
driven by diesel/HFO generation assets. It places this project apart from  the various other green hydrogen 
initiatives being pursued throughout LAC and Europe.  
The project will provide catalytic  gap financing to support a solution in LAC that show s significant 
scale -up potential and can demonstrate an economically viable green alternative to imported diesel . 
The production of cost -competitive green hydrogen is a function of three critical factors: (i) delivered cost of 
green hydrogen (incl uding  cost of electricity, CAPEX, scale, electrolyzers), (ii) policy/legislative environment 
(including  carbon taxes and caps ), and (iii) the cost of alternative solutions for a given application. This 
proposal offers GCF an opportunity to support a paradigm change from fossil fuels to green hydrogen, 
promote the development of a new green hydrogen ecosystem and help Barbados ac hieve their net -zero 
emission targets.  
The project is expected to have a significant demonstration effect, to show that on small island 
states with high power costs , a technical solution combining solar generation , BESS and green  
hydrogen  storage  can provide baseload power , thus  facilitat ing a paradigm shift towards further 
decarbonization of grids on these islands . With the expansion of the industry to include hydrogen and 
hydrogen technologies, training programs will be required to develop the l ocal workforce to support 
hydrogen industries. Specialty skills in plant operation, renewable project financing, legislation and 
contracting will be required, skills that would then be immediately transferrable regionally and worldwide. 
Moreover, using gre en hydrogen for power storage will be an anchor for the exploration of  other 
applications of green hydrogen beyond this project’s scope in decarbonizing hard -to-abate sectors such as 
shipping  and other transport modes . In this regard, HDF is looking at opp ortunities to partner with local 
universities and set up a Training Center for H2 services that will be used to serve local student s and train 
the potential workforce of the power plant and other H2 project in the region. In 2021, HDF executed a letter 
of intent with the University of the West Indies in which the UWI recognized HDF as an important vehicle for 
regional research and know ledge transfer and expressed its willingness to work with HDF to explore 
potential synergies for partnership and collaboration on the Project and regionally.


---
*Page 32*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 28 
   
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv 
+ v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
41 million USD ($)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  40 18 years  2 years  2.25 % 
(ii) Grants  1     
(b) Co -
financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
128 million USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
RSB Equity  43 million USD 
($)  25 years  
0 years  NA% junior  
IFC Senior 
Loans  8.5 million USD 
($)  18 years  
2 years  SOFR+4 % senior  
Other MDB  Senior 
Loans  8.5 million USD 
($)  18 years  
2 years  SOFR+4 % senior  
Local Banks  Senior 
Loans  68 Local 
currency   18 years  
2 years  3.75% senior  
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
169 million USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max . 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page )  
 
 
The sources above are sufficient to cover th e budgeted project costs. No 
sovereign guarantee is expected for this financing.  Commitment from this 
financing source is expected to occur concurrently with DFIs by the end of  2023.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.2. Financing by component


---
*Page 33*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 29 
   
  
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million USD 
($) Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institution
s 
Component 1: 
Solar PV Base 
Load 
Generation 
Plant  Output 1:  
Installed 
renewable 
energy 
capacity of 
Barbados is 
increased  52.7 12.5 Senior 
Loan s 
 13.6 
 
26.6 Equity  
 
Senior 
Loan s RSB 
 
IFC/Other 
MDB /Local 
Banks  
Output 2  & 
3: 
Short -term 
electricity 
storage 
capacity is 
installed & 
Long -term 
electricity 
storage 
capacity is 
installed  115.3 27.5 Senior 
Loans  29.4 
 
 
58.4 EquitySenio
r Loans  RSB 
 
IFC/Other 
MDB /Local 
Banks  
Component 2: 
Capacity 
building and 
knowledge 
sharing  Output 4:  
Financing 
is 
closed/PPA 
is signed; 
strengthen 
regulatory 
framework  1 1 Grants  Enter 
amount  Choose an 
item.  Click here 
to enter 
text. 
Indicative total cost  (USD)  169 41 128 
 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 
page)


---
*Page 34*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 30 
   
 C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding financ e technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
The Technical Assistance/capacity building component of the Project will supplement the Project 
by building the capacity of the government of Barbados and relevant actors, to support and drive 
green hydrogen and battery storage projects both in Barbados an d in the LAC region. The Project 
is a pilot that can demonstrate scalability of low -emission energy for the Barbados national grid and 
other fossil fuel -based power grids in the region.  Beyond decarbonization of the power grid  
addressed with this initiativ e, the proposed project would be Barbados first venture into the green 
hydrogen  field that can be helpful to decarbonize hard-to-abate sectors such as shipping  and other 
transport and industrial applications . 
 
The Technical Assistance grant of approximately US D 1 million is planned to be allocated for i) 
institutional capacity building of the National Designated Authority of Barbados and Ministry of 
Energy and Business in novel technology such as green hydrogen powered fuel cell energy 
storage and batter y energy s torage system (“BESS”) via multistakeholder forum and training 
dedicated for efforts to improve the enabling environment for future green hydrogen and BESS 
projects in the country; and  ii) knowledge generation and sharing with neighboring SIDS countries 
to develop and tailor similar business cases in those countries .


---
*Page 35*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 31 
   
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Mitigation Impact : 
• Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) to be reduced or avoided (PMF -M Core 
1): The Project will reduce or avoid 27,719 tCO2e per year, for a total of 693,000 tCO2e over the 
lifetime  of the asset . This conservative emission avoidance estimation is based on displacing 
typical fossil fuel power generation in the national grid. Although there is no formal conditionality 
implicit in the Project for the decommissioning of the gas turbine "GT02" running  on diesel, it is 
expected that with the RSB project coming in line, GT02 can be decommissioned. Note that GT02 
was scheduled to be decommissioned by 2019 and is still operating because there is no 
alternative generation that has been developed with a simi lar dispatch profile. Based on the 
characteristic of the GT02 facility, the emission avoidance would be up to 56,700  tCO2/year, 
once  the Project replaces GT02.  
• Degree to which activity avoids lock -in of long -lived, high emission infrastructure : The Projec t does 
not rely on fossil fuel but removes barriers for higher penetration of renewable energy in the power 
grid, and it is therefore considered to have no carbon lock -in risks.  
• Degree to which the program/project supports the scaling up of low -emission en ergy in the affected 
region by addressing key barriers : The Technical Assistance/capacity building component of the 
Project will supplement the Project by building the capacity of the government of Barbados and 
relevant actors, to support and drive green h ydrogen and battery storage projects both in Barbados 
and in the LAC region. The Project is a pilot that can demonstrate scalability of low -emission energy 
for the Barbados national grid and for other fossil fuel-based  power grids in the region.  
• Expected number of MW of low -emission energy capacity installed, generated and/or rehabilitated : 
50 MWp solar power plant, as a primary source of electricity, with the following supporting equipment 
to achieve required dispatcha bility profile: 90 MWh H2 storage system that converts electricity into 
hydrogen using a 1 5 MW electrolysis system during the day, 3 MW hydrogen fuel cell that transforms 
the stored hydrogen into firm electricity at night, 1 5MW/30MWh Li -Ion battery storage  system that 
provides the end of the day (7 pm to 9 pm) peak power and, in combination with the hydrogen storage, 
ensures the stability of the plant power service.  
 
Adaptation Impact:  
• Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries:  The Project will directly benefit 
approximately 21,000 people. This is calculated as the incremental energy generated by the plant 
(56GWh/year) by the average electricity consumption per capita ( approximately  7.3 KWh/person 
per day). The pro ject will indirectly benefit the entire population of Barbados  (287,000 people ) 
since all of the population of Barbados is connected to the energy grid and the project will 
increase the resilience of this grid, particularly during extreme precipitation events , tropical 
storms  or hurricanes.  
• Degree to which the activity avoids lock -in of long -lived, climate -vulnerable infrastructure : This 
project was designed based on the recommendations from a climate risk assessment using the 
latest clima te models and scenarios. For example, the plant’s structural design will withstand 
higher extreme weather and wind loads and include drainage design to higher flood return periods, 
increased resilience against low water availability, electrical infrastructure designed for higher future 
temperatures and design suitable for increased dust levels . More information on the climate risk 
assessment can be found in the annexes.  
• Expected reduction in vulnerability by enhancing adaptive capacity and resil ience for populations 
affected by the proposed activity, focusing particularly on the most vulnerable population groups 
and applying a gender -sensitive approach:  The Project is expected to reduce the vulnerability of 
the population of Barbados by enabling  faster restoration of electricity to the local region and the 
country, which will shorten recovered time post disaster and help to avoid economic catastrophe .


---
*Page 36*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 32 
   
 D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
Potential for scaling up and replication  
The proposed project has a very high potential for  engendering  a paradigm shift given its prospects for 
scaling up and replicability in Barbados and in other small island economies or in off -grid, remote areas. 
Solar PV generatio n has become one of the lowest cost solutions for renewable energy production. One of 
the main drawbacks of solar energy relates to its intermittency, being operational only during the day and 
with significant variations when passing clouds interfere with sun irradiation. The instability that intermittent 
sources of power generation like wind or solar produce on the grid can severely limit the penetration of 
renewable energy capacity in the generation mix. The Project’s proposed solution combines a solar pl ant 
with green hydrogen and battery storage to provide a clean, stable, base -load dispatch, thus preventing 
disturbances to the grid.  
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning  
Being one of the first projects in the LAC region - and the world - using green hydrogen as an energy 
vector to store energy for base -load dispatch, the Project will offer significant opportunity for knowledge 
sharing and be a critical learning experience for (i) private sector including the Project sponsors who, 
pending the success of this Project with the support of the GCF, are aiming to build a pipeline around the 
world, (ii) for IFC as a potential lender and knowledge source for future green hydrogen p rojects, and (iii) 
for GCF to demonstrate the viability of the technology and replicability paving the way to support similar 
projects following a programmatic approach.  
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
The Technical Assistance/capa city building component of the Project will supplement the Project by 
building the capacity of the government of Barbados and relevant actors to support and drive green 
hydrogen and battery storage projects both in Barbados and beyond. Through capacity bui lding activities, 
the Project will focus on filling ‘gaps’ to strengthen the enabling environment for private sector investments 
in green hydrogen and battery solutions, focusing especially on the needs of small island states. 
Specifically, the Project wil l ensure that there is awareness of the up -to-date legislation and that necessary 
mechanisms are in place bolstering private sector engagement in the energy sector.  
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
The Project will provide the opportun ity to adjust the regulatory framework ( i.e. tariff, PPA, etc.) and safety 
standards to enable the creation and development of a green hydrogen ecosystem. After a new PPA 
legislation was put in place in 2015, the Project will be among first IPPs in Barbado s, thus contributing to 
establish a more diversified structure in the electricity sector. The Project will serve as a proof of concept 
for a technical solution and business model that can be scaled to contribute to decarbonization of the 
power generation s ector in Barbados and various countries. Beyond this specific application, the proposed 
solution will be complementary to other uses of hydrogen as a decarbonization enabler and energy vector 
for hard -to-abate industries such as transport, fertilizers, che micals, steel, and synthetic fuels.  
Overall contribution to climate -resilient development pathways  
The Project is fully aligned with the ambitious objectives of Barbados to increase the share of electricity 
produced from renewable sources. The Project is fully aligned with the GoB's ambitious objectives to 
increase the share of electricity produced from  renewable sources and the proposed Project is also aligned 
with key programs being pursued by the government of Barbados, such as the Roofs to Reefs Program


---
*Page 37*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 33 
   
 (R2RP), supported by GCF readiness funds, that provides the overarching framework for an integrate d 
approach to addressing the negative impacts of climate change. Additionally, through a NAMA 
prioritization analysis, the Barbados’ Second National Communication Under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change identifies solar generation a nd energy storage as new 
technology options for contributing to climate change mitigation and to reduce Barbados’ dependence on 
fossil fuels. Thus t he Project has a strong paradigm shift potential and will impact the country's trade 
balance and limit the e xposure to a possible rise in international oil prices and international reserves 
depletion. Also, the Project  will enable the country to produce more energy locally and reduce supply risk 
and political dependence.  
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Financing Structure.  IFC’s additionality results from providing a financing solution that is not available in the 
local market.  Non -recourse project finance is practically nonexistent in Barbados and the tenors available  
in the market are well below the 15 -years that IFC expects to offer to the client. In the past three  years only 
one USD -denominated syndicated loan was issued by a company in Barbados (extractives sector) with a 
face value of 100 million USD and a one -year maturity. In that same period there were no USD corporate 
bond issuances at a corresponding rating of B+/ -. This context of limited availability of financing is a challenge 
for the private sector in Barbados. Private investment for example, was 15  percent of GDP in 2022 which is 
a mild improvement from the 13.9  percent  average of the previous 5 years but remains below the 17.7 and 
17.8 percent  registered in LAC and EMDEs11.  
 
Non-commercial Risk mitigation.  IFC’s participation gives comfort to the clie nt by mitigating non -commercial 
project risk derived from the untested nature of solar and green hydrogen generation plus hydrogen and 
battery storage in Barbados. IFC will contribute  to facilitating interactions with the Government to enable the 
project i mplementation. The project has been subject to a lengthy permitting process and unforeseen 
landowner disputes, resulting in a one -year delay on the development schedule. The current development 
timeline relies heavily on the engagement with the Ministry of  Energy, Small Businesses, and 
Entrepreneurship for the IPP License and the PPA negotiation.  
Knowledge, innovation, and capacity building.  IFC has established a strategic partnership with the client 
through an Upstream advisory engagement to develop the p roject. The engagement has been fundamental 
to move the project from  prefeasibility to near implementation stage. IFC’s Upstream engagement is currently 
active in several areas including assessing solar resources, geotechnical and hydrological characterist ics, 
tax and customs.  
Standard Setting. IFC is also working with the client to develop a comprehensive ESAP that improves the 
project’s Environmental and Social Risk Management policies and procedures, making sure that it is aligned 
with IFC Performance S tandards. In addition, IFC has a rigorous approach to managing blended finance to 
ensure there is a strong rationale for blended finance in every project and each project applies  the DFI 
Enhanced Blended Finance Principles including minimum concessionality and IFC’s enhanced disclosure 
which also include s an estimation of the subsidy at the transaction -level. This includes review of every 
investment project by a Blended Finance Co mmittee independent from IFC Operations or the Blended 
Finance Director and supervision by a blended finance team responsible for the application of concessional 
blended finance and adherence to the DFI Blended Finance Principles spearheaded by IFC and ado pted by 
all major DFIs . In 2019, IFC announced it would hold itself to the highest standards of transparency when 
deploying concessional resources: IFC now discloses in its   Summary of In vestment Information , the subsidy 
levels for each proposed project along with justification for why it is necessary. IFC is the only DFI or blended 
finance implementer taking this step to date.  
 
11 Emerging markets and developing economies


---
*Page 38*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 34 
   
 Affordability/Environmental . The project is expected to generate 56GWh/year of electricity and directly 
benefit approximately 21 ,000 people. The plant will enable the replacement of a 13MW gas turbine thus 
contributing to a reduction of the country’s reliance in fossil fuels (over 9 5 percent currently) and the resulting 
high exposure to fuel price volatility. Levelized cost of electricity has gone up from 163 USD/Mwh in 2020 to 
261 USD/Mwh in 2022 due to increase in oil prices.  This volatility is directly reflected in the end consum ers’ 
bills since it is passed down to the end consumer via the Fuel Clause Adjustments mechanism.   
The plant’s two-hours dispatchable block at 13MW effectively replaces a 13MW gas turbine on the grid 
(GT02) which was scheduled to be decommissioned in 2019  and is still operating . The associated emissions 
savings per year are preliminarily estimated in 56.7 thousand tons of CO2.  
Sustainability . The project’s demonstration effect can be a central component of the country’s 
decarbonizati on strategy for the  power sector. The Project directly supports Barbados's National Energy 
Policy (NEP), which targets  full renewable energy and carbon -neutral island -state transformation by 2030. 
The Renewstable concept combining solar PV and H2 generatio n with H2 and Li storage represents a 
significant innovation to provide stable baseload and dispatchable energy to the grid. This configuration 
enables increased utilization of solar generation in the country’s power generation matrix, thus mitigating 
climate change effects of the sector. Barbados’ generation matrix relies heavily on fossil fuel generated 
power . In 2016 , the country had 249 MW of utility scale installed capacity of which 239 MW was powered 
by oil and diesel plants. The role of solar power i n the provision of electricity has remained marginal 
because of its limited ability to dispatch based on changes in demand. The project’s configuration 
combining generation with daily storage contributes to addressing this limitation, thus effectively 
diversifying sources of generation, and ultimately reducing the system’s reliance on thermal sources.  
Looking beyond the scope of this project, the experience of producing green hydrogen from local 
renewable resources can help Barbados in using green hydrogen to decarbonize sectors other than 
power , such as transport.   
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
The Barbados electricity grid is centralized and vulnerable to hurricanes. Since 2010, hurricanes Tomas 
(2010), Ernesto (2012), Harvey (2017), and Elsa (2021) and the tropical storms Matthew, Maria, Kirk and 
Gonzalo (2020) have impacted the island, causing  power outages and enormous damage to the people in 
Barbados, particularly in areas that are distant from the current generation centers. The ability to locate the 
Project away from the ports through which fossil fuels are imported provides the local commu nities around 
the Project with more reliable electricity supply in case of climate events that may impact the transmission 
infrastructure.  
Barbados is already among the countries with highest electricity tariffs in the region. On the other hand, 
Barbados h as very ambitious targets for decarbonization and low potential for base -load renewable 
sources such as geothermal, hydro or biomass. To avoid stability issues with its grid, Barbados will have to 
rely on technologies that are in a downward cost trend, but  still at a relatively expensive price level such as 
battery storage or green hydrogen. The higher cost and inherent  higher risk of these technologies 
compounded by the small size of the Barbados economy makes commercial financing of power solutions 
of thi s nature very unlikely to materialize at this stage. The support of GCF alongside development 
financial institutions like IFC comes to fill a need to help materialize a project that will be a reference for 
future similar projects that eventually are exp ected to be financed by commercial banks without the need of 
concessional funds once the decreasing pricing trends reach the appropriate  level.


---
*Page 39*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 35 
   
 The Project will also provide a natural hedge against rises in international fuel prices, reduce fuel imports 
and international reserve depletion, and improve the country trade balance. Ninety percent  of the oil and 
gas required to operate the plants is imported due to the lack of refining infrastructure.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
 
Country ownership  
As mentioned above, this private sector project is fully aligned with the GoB's ambitious objectives to 
increase the share of electricity produced from renewable sources. The proposed project is also aligned with 
key programs being pursued by the governmen t of Barbados, such as the Roofs to Reefs  Program  (R2RP), 
supported by GCF readiness funds, that provides the overarching framework for an integrated approach to 
addressing the negative impacts of climate change. Additionally, through a  Nationally Appropri ate Mitigation 
Action  (NAMA ) prioritization analysis, the Barbados’ Second National Communication Under the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  identifies solar generation and energy storage as 
new technology options for contributing to c limate change mitigation and to reduce Barbados’ dependence 
on fossil fuels.  Additionally, the project would strongly impact the country's trade balance and limit the 
exposure to a possible rise in international oil prices and international reserve depleti on. Also, it would enable 
the country to produce more energy locally and reduce supply risk and political dependence. The 
government of Barbados is fully supportive of th e proposed project and issued the No -Objection 
Letter (NOL) early in the process.  
Dema nd for energy remains strong and the Integrated Resource and Resiliency Plan for Barbados (IRRP) 
projects electricity demand to increase to 1,277 GWh by 2030 under a base scenario, implying a 35  percent  
increase from its 2019 levels. At the same time, the IRRP recommends that Spring Garden steam generation 
plans fueled by HFO (totaling 40MW) be retired in 2023 and that gas turbines (totaling around 100MW) are 
not suitable for continued use operation and are expected to be used only as backup and emergency 
generation. The IRRP mentions green hydrogen as an option for decarbonization through long -term storage 
of electricity. Although this technology was excluded from the analysis for being deemed not mature enough 
and too expensive, the green hydrogen landscap e has evolved significantly in the two years since  the IRRP 
was published. GCF support would help address the high cost of the technology at this early stage. The 
authors of the IRRP recommend that the report is updated regularly to provide the opportunity to consider 
alternate technologies as circumstanc es evolve.


---
*Page 40*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 36 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☐ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
       
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  The current installed 
capacity of solar PV is 
10 MWp of utility -
scale solar PV 
generation capacity 
plus 25 MWp of solar 
PV distributed 
generation12 in 
Barbados. The 
country has no BESS 
system  nor hydrogen 
storage and fuel cell 
system . The  Ministry 
of Energy is launching  
a national energy 
storage polic y to Low (i) 50 MWp of addition al solar PV 
generation capacity  
(ii) 90 MWh hydrogen storage 
system  
(iii) 3 MW hydrogen fuel cell  
(iv) 1 5MW/30MWh Li -ion battery  
storage system  
 The RSB project will contribute to  a 
paradigm shift in renewable energy and 
storage in Barbados by scaling up 50 
MWp of solar PV generation capacity 
as a primary source of electricity when 
the sun is shining, by developing a 90 
MWh hydrogen storage system that 
converts electricity into hydro gen using 
a 15 MW electrolysis system during the 
day, installing a 3 MW hydrogen fuel 
cell that transforms the stored hydrogen 
into firm electricity at night, and 
installing a 1 5MW/30MWh Li -ion battery 
storage system that provides the end of 
the day (7 pm to 9 pm) peak power 
and, in combination with the hydrogen 
storage, ensures the stability of the 
plant power service .  
 
12 BLPC (https://www.blpc.com.bb/index.php/company/how -we-serve -you/how -we-generate -electricity)


---
*Page 41*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 37 
  
  
 incentivize renewable 
energy developers to 
build a storage 
system.   
Green hydrogen and battery storage in 
this project will enable firm dispatchable 
electricity, promoting a paradigm shift 
toward integr ating more variable 
renewable power to the grid while 
reducing reliance on fossil fuels for grid 
stability.  
Replicability  No hydrogen storage , 
BESS , and fuel cell 
have yet been 
demonstrated in 
Barbados, so 
replication is not yet 
possible.  Low If the installment of solar PV and 
hydrogen storage systems can b e 
demonstrated, the Project can be 
replicated across neighboring small 
island economies and in other off -
grid, remote areas .  The project’s intervention has never 
been tested before, so lessons learned 
through this work will directly inform any 
efforts to replicate the work in other 
areas of Barbados  and neighboring  
small island countries.  Via technical 
assistance of knowledge sharing, 
Caribbean Green Hydrogen Network 
will be established to share best 
practices and lessons learned from this 
project.   
Sustainability  Current capacity of 
the government of 
Barbados and other 
small island states 
with regards to 
creating green 
hydrogen solutions to 
generate and store 
energy is limited . Low 
 The capacity of the government of 
Barbados is increased and 
sustained beyond the project’s 
implementation period.  Via technical assistance, the c apacity of 
the Barbados government will be 
increased via focused trainings and 
other capacity building activities  such 
as legislation development, rate setting, 
technical support to regional 
organizations such as CARICOM in 
strengthening the regional polic y, 
legislative and tariffs frameworks for 
energy sector development  to create 
enabling environment and minimize


---
*Page 42*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 38 
  
  
 regulatory barriers for future green 
hydrogen projects.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
 
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Core 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Annual e x-ante and 
ex-post analyses , 
electricity generation 
data from the project  
Power  generated from 
solar resource (GWh) 
and multiplied by the 
Firm Energy 
Combined Margin Grid 
Emission Factor  IFI 
grid emission factor13  
(Conducted  by an 
independent  
verification company  
at the mid and final 
term evaluation , and 
end of the project ) 0 0 Target value at 
the end of 
implementatio n 
period: 0  
 
Target value at 
end of total 
lifespan: 
693,000 tCO2e  Total lifespan target for 
GHG reduction is 
expected over 25 -year 
asset lifetime of the 
Project, which is 692,981  
tCO2e . During the project  
period of 18 years, it is 
expected to be 498,946  
tCO2e . The annual 
emission reduction is 
expected to be 27,719  
tCO2e.   
 
Externalities: The PPA is  
based on capacity 
payments and BLPC is 
free to dispatch as they 
wish up to the maximum 
agreed. BLPC may 
decide not to dispatch 
the plant , which doesn’t 
have an impact in 
revenues, but may have 
 
13 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Harmonized_IFI_Default_Grid_Factors_2021_v3.2_0.xlsx


---
*Page 43*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 39 
  
  
 an impact on emissions 
mitigation.  
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable 
energy capacity  Annual e x-post 
analysis by IFC team  
(commissioning 
report)  
Lenders’ engineer  
verification that 
commissioning is 
completed and the 
plant has reached 
COD  0 0 50MW  Successful construction 
of solar PV  plant  
Assumes interconnection 
to the grid is permitted 
and connecting 
infrastructure is ready  
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated  Annual ex -post 
analysis by IFC team  
Power generated from 
solar resource (GWh) 
to be measured  at the 
end of the month  
through calibrated 
meter at battery limit 
of the project 
concurrently by RSB 
and BLPC  0 0 66,000 
MWh /year  Clean  power dispatched  
during the day  over one 
year


---
*Page 44*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 40 
  
  
 MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Supplementary  1.2: 
Installed energy 
stoarage capacity  Annual e x-post 
analysis by IFC team  
Verification of 
hydrogen storage 
capacity at 
commissioning  0 0 90 MWh  Green Hydrogen long -
term storage capacity of 
3MW throughout the 
night  
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Supplementary  1.2: 
Installed energy 
stoarage capacity  Annual e x-post 
analysis by IFC team  
Verification of battery 
storage capacity at 
commissioning  0 0 30 MWh  Battery Storage System 
with capacity of 1 5MW 
throughout the peak  
hours  
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access  
 Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions  Project financial 
report; asset value 
information  report 
from asset  owners  0 0 USD 120 
million  Based on CAPEX  
(excluding Development 
Costs, Additional 
Investment Costs, 
Contingencies, Financing 
Costs, Interest During 
Construction and 
Working Capital)  
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
 
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage


---
*Page 45*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 41 
  
  
 Core Indicator 5: 
Degree to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission 
climate -resilient 
development pathways 
in a country -driven 
manner  The country has no 
BESS system nor 
hydrogen storage and 
fuel cell system . The 
Ministry of Energy is 
launching a national 
energy storage policy 
to inc entivize 
renewable energy 
developers to build a 
storage system.  low Strengthened 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
allow for an increase of 
renewable energy in 
the generation matrix 
and help the country  
decarbonization 
targets.  Through  the TA 
activity, t he project 
will strengthen 
government al 
capacity to develop 
Sustainable Energy 
Policy for large 
infrastructure 
projects.  National level (one country)  
Core indicator 8: 
Degree to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards   
There is a lack  of 
knowledge of storage 
technology , good 
practices  and 
standards . low In-depth knowledge of 
battery and green 
hydrogen storage 
technology is 
developed , extracting 
lessons are learned 
and good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards are adapted 
to the local context.  The project ’s practice  
of storage technology, 
good practice, 
standards, and lessons 
learned will be shared 
with target audiences 
including other 
government officials, 
energy companies in 
the country and in the 
region.  Multi -countries  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)   
Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1  
Reduced GHG 
emissions from solar 
energy generation  
 Estimated GHG 
emissions avoided  
(tCO2e)  GWh generated from 
solar resource  and 
calculation of emissions 
of a gas turbine operating 0 0 693,000 tCO2e   The final target is defined 
as the ex -ante GHG 
reduction of 
690+KtonCO2e expected


---
*Page 46*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 42 
  
  
 on diesel  with the sam e 
dispatch profile  over 25 -year lifetime of the 
Project.  
Output 1   
Installed renewable 
energy capacity of 
Barbados is increased  
 Generation Capacity 
installed (MW)  
  
Commissioning  certificate 
issued by grid operator.  
 0 
 0 
 
  
50 MW  
 Tested capacity in line with 
nameplate capacity  
Annual availability  
(%) 
 Grid operator 
confirmation  
 0 0  
 
 Plant to be dispatched by 
the grid operator  based on 
demand and operating 
needs  
Maximum annual 
production of the 
Plant(GWh/year)  Monthly joint energy or 
meter reports issued by 
the grid operator  0 0  
[56] GWh/year  
 Assumes no curtailing  
       
Output 4  
Project financing is 
closed and a sound 
PPA is signed  
  
Financing closing  
 
 Signing of loan 
agreements between 
lenders and RSB  
 
 
 
 0 
 
 0 
 
 [1] 
 
 Assuming the PPA is 
signed  
PPA is signed.   
Legal effectiveness of 
PPA document issued by 
grid operator (BLPC) or 
government of Barbados  
 0 0 [1] Assuming commercial and 
legal terms are agreed 
among the parties  
Project/programme co -benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1 : 
Adaptation: “Island 
Mode” operation in 
case of disaster  Direct/indirect 
beneficiaries  (#) Vulnerability assessment  0 0 21,000   Number of customers 
affected during an event 
that continue to have 
access to pow er from RSB


---
*Page 47*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 43 
  
  
  
14 https://www.epa.gov/air -emissions -factors -and-quantification/ap -42-fifth-edition -volume -i-chapter -3-stationary -0 Co-benefit 2: 
Environmental: Air 
pollution is reduced  
 Estimated NOx, S Ox 
and PM-10 emissions 
avoided ( Ton) GWh generated from 
solar resource and 
calculation of emissions 
based on emission 
factors14 of a diesel 
generator with the sam e 
dispatch profile   0 0  
NOx: 31,099  
 
SOx: 2,057  
 
PM-10: 2,207  The final target is defined 
as the ex -ante GHG 
reduction of NOx: 31,099 ; 
SOx: 2,057 ; and PM-10: 
2,207  expected over 25 -
year lifetime of the Project.  
Co-benefit 3: 
Economic: More 
reliable and affordable 
energy  with less 
reliance on and cost of 
fuel Electricity  tariff 
reduction (%)  Negotiated tariff with FTC  0 0 [6]% Final tariff negotiated as 
compared to tariff yielding 
the same equity IRR 
without concessional 
financing.  
Co-benefit 4: 
Jobs created during 
construction and 
operation (women/men)  Number of jobs 
created (#)  RSB payroll  0 100 of which 
15% female 
(Construction)  10 of which 
30% female  
(Operation)  The TA activities are 
expected to develop the 
skills  to hire local workers  
and promote female 
workforce participation . 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables   
 
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1 50 MWp Solar Power 
Plant  Installation of solar panels/inverters 
and intercon nection to the grid  Sub-activity 1.1  Solar panels/modules  
Sub-activity 1.2  Inverters  
Sub-activity 1.3  Interconnection  to the grid  50 MWp Solar PV plant installed and 
commissioned  
 
 
Activity 2 Battery Storage 
System (BESS) and Green 
Hydrogen Storage System   
Battery Storage System (BESS)  
 
 
 
 
  
Sub-activity 2.1  Pre-assembled enclosures 
(plug -and-play) 15 MW/30MWh   
 
 
 
 Storage systems installed and 
commissioned


---
*Page 48*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 44 
  
  
 Green Hydrogen Storage System  
 
 Sub-activity 2.2  Electrolyzer (15 MW)  
Sub-activity 2.3   Hydrogen storage tanks 
(90 MWh)  
Sub-activity 2. 4 Fuel cells (3 MW)  
Activity 3 Technical Assistance  Capacity building to government; 
local skill building on clean energy; 
knowledge sharing;  
assessment and monitoring; and,  
Gender -related activities . 
 Sub-activity 3.1   Government assistance for 
Sustainable Energy  
Sub-activity 3.2   Ministerial training on  non-
recourse project financing  
Sub-activity 3. 3 Capacity building & skills 
development  
Sub-activity 3. 4 Knowledge sharing  
 
 
Sub-activity 3. 5 Assessment and monitorin g 
 
 Government offic ials who have 
complete d capacity building  
Ministerial officials who have  complete d 
capacity building  
Skilled labor trained  
 
Study on GH2 applications in SIDS   
Launch of Caribbean GH2 network  
Workshop on lessons learned from RSB 
delivered  
Vulnerability assessment  conducted  
Gender action plan implemented  
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
 
IFC is responsible for the supervision of the project, including obtaining and reporting results to GCF. Relevant indicators in Annex 11 will be 
tracked and reported by IFC.  For mitigation result measurement, the operational reporting will include  the renewable energy (GWh/year) generated 
by the plant  and dispatched to the grid . This data  is a key variable not only for mitigation measurement purposes, but also for other operating 
metrics . Energy generation will be measured using calibrated  meters l ocated at the battery limit of the power plant and verified by BLPC as 
counterpart in the power transact ion. The evaluation of the annual GHG emissions reduction  will be estimated by multiplying  the renewable energy 
generation times the latest IFI Grid Emission Factor for Barbados.  IFC methodology for measurement of development impact will be followed. IFC 
will provide GCF with relevant, non -confidential project information. The services of a qualified external third party may be retained to undertake an 
evaluation of the project’s activities.   
 
The interim and final  independent evaluations  will be conducted in accordance with the GCF’s evaluation criteria a s per the GCF Evalu ation Policy.  
Accordingly, these independent evaluations  will embed a n assessment of the Project’s contributions to a paradigm shift and enabling environment 
using a three -point scale rating.  IFC will notify GCF  should the project appear unlikely to achieve expected results and/or fail at its objectives due to 
extraordinary circumstances (natural disaster, political unrest, etc.).  A mid -term evaluation is planned on 3Q2026  and a final -term evaluation  in 
2030  that will allow  for lessons learned from the project implementation to be applied at an earlier stage, rather than at the end of the project


---
*Page 49*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 45 
  
  
 lifespan in 2050.  Complementing the specific GCF monitoring requirements  and independent evaluations mentioned above , IFC’s loan agreement 
to be signed with the EE  contains provisions for regular reporting and IFC will monitor  and review these reports including: quarterly financial 
statements, quarterly construction/operations  report, annual audited statements, compliance with financial covenants, E&S annual monitoring 
report, notice of accidents, material adverse effect, litigation, default, insurance, etc.  Operations reports will include energy dispatched from this 
clean sour ce, which would then be used to calculate the emissions reduction .


---
*Page 50*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
 
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Select  
Description  
 
Technology and performance risks (fuel cell in particular) of this new solution  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
The proposed solution is new and innovative . It integrates technologies that have already been proven for 
years (BESS, fuel cells and electrolyzers), albeit there is still room for scaling mass manufacturing and 
reducing production costs. This project's BESS will be lithium ion and is intended to be p rocured from a top 
tier manufacturer. The electrolyzers and fuel cells will be procured from a tier -1 supplier and HDF Industry 
under an exclusive co -development license with Ballard, two renowned brands in the nascent green 
hydrogen industry, and performa nce guarantees will be negotiated. The electrolyzer technology can either 
be pressurized alkaline or pressurized proton exchange membrane (PEM). Both technologies compete 
today in similar projects (on CEOG, alkaline was used for commercial reasons). The fu el cell technology 
used is PEM technology. Finally, although these technologies are providing a novel solution, HDF has 
been operating a 1 MW fuel cell in Martinique since 2019 and reputable international banks and 
commercial lenders have already invested in a project similar to RSB. Meridiam and SARA provided 
equity, and BNP Paribas provided debt for HDF's French Guiana CEOG project after conducting technical 
and contractual due diligence, which uses the same Renewstable solution as RSB.  
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Credit  Low Medium  
Description  
Cost competitiveness with other sources of power generation  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
Despite lacking access to detailed dispatch profiles of BLPC, the Team estimates that the Project 
competes with a combination of baseload assets, HFO, diesel, and gas turbines, but is entirely carbon 
free, domestically produced, dispatchable, resilient, an d with local return on investment.  
It is also relevant that the proposed project is supported by the GoB and there is no BESS -only solution 
that is ready to be implemented, meaning that an opportunity cost should also be considered.  HDF has 
spent developm ent costs on this Project over the last five years to get to investment stage.  
Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact


---
*Page 51*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 47 
   
 Credit  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Sponsor, Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) and interface risks. RSB will assume the 
construction cost and schedule risk. If there are delays in implementing the Project, RSB might be liable to 
pay LDs to BLPC.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
RSB expects to implement a full wrap fixed price EPC with an experienced, creditworthy contractor. EPC 
includes a customary liability cap, security package, liquidated damages, and warranties. Additionally, HDF 
provides fuel cell technology and solar PVs to b e provided by the supplier with a proven track record. 
Moreover, RSB plans to achieve financial closure before the 2023 reelection, which would require a 
competitive EPC contract tender in 2023. RSB has recruited talent in Barbados to facilitate and coordinate 
between international EPCs and local subcontractors to mitigate EPC risks.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Ability of the plant to meet performance requirements over its 25-year life . 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
During their operational life, the performance of the components will degrade. Degradation warranties will 
be sought for all components (Solar PV, BESS, Electrolyzers, and fuel cells). As the lifetime of some parts 
is less than 25 years, the cost of timely replacement will be included in the operational costs. During the 
negotiation of the PPA, the performance targets and penalties should be reasonab ly aligned with the 
plant's capabilities.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited practices  Medium  Medium  
Description  
E&S Capacity and Management System: IFC will need to ensure that sufficient client capacity and 
commitment exists to manage E&S risks and impacts consistently with good international practice while 
maintaining early, continuous, open, and transparent engagement with stakeholders, avoiding potential 
conflict or opposition.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
IFC will work with HDF to screen out and de -risk the Project of sensitive E&S issues during project design 
and planning phases of development, ensuring the Project works towards consistency with the IFC 
Performance Standards in the latter stages of the projec t cycle. IFC will work with the client to develop an 
ESMS and work on its implementation accordingly. In addition, through the E&S capacity -building 
advisory , IFC will work with HDF to identify the gaps in the ESMS using IFC ESMS Toolkit and provide a 
detailed Improvement Plan outlining precise actions, timeline, and staff resources needed to overcome


---
*Page 52*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 these gaps. An ESIA was developed by an external consultant to outline risks and was reviewed by IFC for 
its thoroughness and rigor.


---
*Page 53*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max . 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
 
This project is provisionally a Category B project: IFC E&S team conducted a preliminary assessment of 
key E&S risks and potential impact.  
 
Preliminary key E&S risks include: i) Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) in line with 
IFC’s PSs prior to construction; ii) Client and contractor ESMS and organizational capacity for construction 
and operation; iii) management of labor and wo rking conditions including contractor/third party 
management, migrant workers, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), and Gender Based Violence 
(GBV); iv) supply chain risk management related to solar panels; v) pollution prevention; resource 
efficiency and  management; waste and hazardous waste management; and storage safety of green 
hydrogen; vi) stakeholder engagement and grievance mechanisms; and vii) community health, safety and 
security.  
 
RepRisk data showed no incidents in relation to the Sponsors of the project in relation to reputational risks 
on E&S.  
 
IBAT assessment showed that the project is located in a modified habitat but less than one kilometer from 
an Important Bird and Biodiversity Area (IBA). A Biodiversity Specialist will join the project  to understand if 
there are any material risks to the IBA (due to water abstraction) or to avifauna (due to the powerline).  
 
The project is part of upstream portfolio (46174) with several E&S studies under revision and E&S trainings 
undertaken. Training i n relation to IFC’s E&S Performance Standards was given to all project team 
members as well as senior management in January 2023 by IFC. An additional training on how to develop 
an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) appropriately will be con ducted in July 2023 by 
IFC. Additional  studies that have been completed by the client for IFC include:  
 
- The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  
 
o The ESIA was reviewed by IFC, and updates were requested including potential alternative 
options to water to be incorporated as a separate study . The current water procurement 
through the Barbados Water Authority is viable and provides sufficient water wit h the 
specifications and terms required by the project.  Any option  identified by the  study on 
alternative water  sources  can be taken int o consideration to improve the  water procurement 
arrangement , if approp riate.  
 
o In consideration of the GCF definition of "Indigenous People," available at paragraphs 13 -16 
of the GCF Indigenous Peoples  Policy, there are no indigenous people  in the areas targeted 
by the project.  
 
o HDF held a public consultation meeting in December 2022 on the ESIA with the  
stakeholders and community members of the project to explain the project components and 
all potential impacts. IFC was present at the stakeholder public consultation meeting. The 
meeting was recorded and made available online on YouTube for full public di sclosure. 
Stakeholder consultation was done in accordance with IFC’s Sustainability Framework.  
 
- Life Cycle Assessment study  
o The LCA assesses the impacts of major components such as solar panels, batteries, etc. 
throughout the entire supply chain. This is d one to ensure supply chain risks are also taken


---
*Page 54*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 into consideration during procurement of equipment such as solar panels to mitigate E&S 
risks of forced and child labor.  
 
- Drainage Study  
o The study looks at the scope of drainage topographically based on 50 -year storms which 
are becoming more frequent. The study explores potential route directions for stormwater, 
including mitigation options such as suck wells in various locations to avoid i mpact with 
project site, as well as neighboring communities. This study also explores options for 
rainwater harvesting techniques to re-incorporate  rainwater into the project.  
 
- Climate Change Risk Assessment  
o This study looks at a detailed climate change risk assessment including impacts from 
hurricanes, storms and their frequency. It also examines water allocation and distribution 
across the country and its impact from climate change over the years. As the project site is 
inland and not coastal, it depend s on water from the national grid which may potentially be 
impacted from climate change as the island of Barbados is already water scarce.  
 
o The sponsors contemplate a specific training in SEAH that has also been included in the 
updated Draft Final Gender Action Plan and will also be included as part of the risk 
assessment in the updated ESMP. The aim is that all the RSB project staff including EPC 
contractors will benefit from specific training in these areas (SEAH and SGBV) as well as 
within the project's  updated Standard Operating Procedures that will now include a gender 
focus/lens.  
 
The client has shown willingness to improve and implement IFC’s E&S Performance Standards as well as 
updating and revising the ESIA and necessary E&S studies for the project . These studies will be provided 
in Annex 6.  
 
 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
 
The Project plans to play a key role not only in the development of the surrounding communit ies and 
vulnerable population , but specifically in the empowerment of women. As detailed in the Gender Action 
Plan, the Project plans to focus on implementing programs to help improve gender equality and to ensure 
that female and male  headed households have access to a more resilient  energy supply . In addition to 
residential customers, the gender action plan also targets small farmers, business owners/operators , 
temporary field workers  and other vulnerable population s. 
 
The Gender Action Plan (annex 8a) developed by the Project , informe d by the Gender Assessment  (annex 
8), details specific objectives, outcomes , and activities that will be followed to improve gender equality in 
the Project and in the area around the RSB site. In implementing successful community engagement, an 
important goal of the Project will be to empower local women through increased awareness and 
understanding of the RSB project and its contribution to enhanc e energy resilience.  
 
As detailed in annex 8, the Project aims to respond to gender issues by implementing at least  five gender 
responsive interventions  (outputs) throughout the life of the RSB project  (Outputs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7) .  
 
These  outputs will aim at addressing gender issues as follows:  
 
• Ouput 1: Gender -specific gaps and requirements are identified and incorporated into the 
Renewstable Barbados Project


---
*Page 55*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 o Output 1.1 - Ensure findings of the Gender Assessment are incorporated into the Project’s 
Results Management Framework  
o Output 1.2  - Ensure that the project’s Environmental & Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
promotes gender -sensitive actions through the project’s life cycle.  
o Output 1.3  - Ensure updates to the project’s Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and 
(For example; EPC Contracts, Labour Management Plans, etc) address the requirements of 
gender as well as sexual exploitation, abuse and sexual harassment (SEAH), sexual and 
gender -base d violence (SGBV).  
o Output 1.4  - Conduct training with the RSB Project staff on the updated  SOPs that include 
gender considerations.  
o Output 1.6 - Organize experience sharing workshops with key government agencies and 
partners. By engaging government and non -government stakeholders and sharing the 
importance of integrating gender considerations i nto renewable energy projects 
opportunities may be created to influence policy development and decision -making 
processes.  
 
• Ouput 2 : Enhance capacity of the RSB project staff ( including all project -related contractors and 
employees) to integrate gender considerations/ requirements in renewable energy projects 
Activities Indicators and Targets Timelines  
o Output 2.1  - Establish a MOU between HDF Caribbean and tertiary educational institutions 
to support the training, skill  development and capacity bu ilding of all RSB Project staff in 
gender sensitivity, SEAH and SGBV training  
o Output 2.2  - Develop a project -specific SEAH and SGBV Training Program to reflect Gender 
Sensitivity in Workspaces for all RSB Project employees ( including contractors, construction 
workers and other related employees)  
o Output 2.3  - Develop online self -paced mandatory SEAH and SGBV training to reflect 
Gender Sensiti vity in Workspaces for all RSB Project employees ( including contractors and 
employees)  
 
• Ouput 3: Increase participation of women performing technical roles in the renewable energy sector  
o Output 3.1 - Develop in collaboration with relevant training institutions N/CVQ in hydrogen 
energy production, storage and use  
o Output 3.2 - Design  in collaboration with relevant training institutions the RSB -Young 
Professional Energy Sector Internship Program  with specific emphasis on encouraging 
female participation in the sector via technical roles.  
o Output 3.3 - Implement in collaboration with relevant training institutions the above 
internship program  (USD 16,200 stipend co -financing)  
o Output 3.4 - Collaborate with the Ministries of Education and Energy to host public 
education campaigns/workshops which encourage the participation of girls and young 
women to aspire to leadership and technical roles in the renewable energy sector.  
 
• Output 4: Conduct gender sensitive stakeholder consultations and awareness -raising program s to 
ensure public knowledge and buy -in on the use of the RSB hydrogen energy solution and potential 
impacts.  
o Output 4.1 - Conduct gender sensitive stakeholder consultations  
o Output 4.2 - Update the RSB Project webpage to host communication outputs including a 
Grievance Complaints Section  related to the RSB Project  
o Output 4.3  - Develop a Community and Social Engagement Benefits Sharing Plan which 
takes on board gender considerations in the development of a community -based program to 
benefit residents within St. Philip  
 
• Output 5: Increase capacity of the RSB Project Management Team to respond to complaints from 
community members and other stakeholders


---
*Page 56*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 o Output  5.1 - Develop and implement a detailed community -based Grievance  Redress  
Mechanism (GRM) Plan that is (a) easily accessible by all stakeholder groups  including 
women , (b) legitimate, (c) transparent, (d) culturally appropriate, and (e) confidential . 
 
• Output 6:  Female  and male  heads of households, small business owners and other vulnerable 
populations have an increase d awareness and understanding of the use and application of the 
RSB project in enhancing energy resilience  
o Output 6.1 - Develop stakeholder specific handbooks/tool kits on the benefits and impacts 
of hydrogen energy production.  
o Output 6.2 - Conduct educatio n awareness sessions with key stakeholders ( including 
women)  on the benefits and impacts of hydrogen energy production using the handbooks 
and toolkits  developed.  
 
• Output 7: Female  and male  heads of households, small farmers, business owners and other 
vulnerable populations have an increase d understanding of how the demineralize water produced 
by the hydrogen energy plant or rainwater  harvesting can be used for irrigation and other ancillary  
usage  
o Output 7.1 - Undertake sensitization and awareness -raising sessions targeting community 
members, small farmers and business owners and operators and other vulnerable 
populations  
o Output 7.2 - Provide training in the rainwater harvesting techniques targeting small farmers, 
community members, business owners and operators and other vulnerable populations  
 
• Output 8: Small farmers and community members have an increase d understanding of how 
hydrogen energy production can support sustainable agriculture including sustainable farming 
techniques  
o Output 8.1 - Undertake education and awareness -raising programs with small farmers and 
industry stakeholders in the agricultural sector on the synergies between renewable energy 
and the sustainable agricultural sector  
 
• Output 9: Enabling a gender -responsive project management and governance environment for the 
duration of t he Project  
o Output 9.1 - Establish an Inclusive and Participatory Steering Committee (PSC) that includes 
the Institute for Gender and Development Studies (IDGS) at the UWI Cave Hill Campus or 
Bureau of Gender Affairs (BGA)  
o Output 9.2 - Conduct gender -sensitiv ity training with the RSB Project Management Team to 
ensure gender dimensions are effectively considered throughout the duration of the project. 
Topics to be included in the training include gender -responsive behavior and interactions, 
avoiding sex ual harassment, and conflict -resolution skills.  
o Output 9.3 - Present annually to the PSC to report on the status and implementation of the 
Gender Action Plan (GAP)  
 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
As a lender to the Project, IFC will  conduct a due diligence  assessment  prior to submitting the proposal for 
approval to IFC’s management and Board of Directors.  This due diligence will cover financial and credit 
aspects, but also other non -financial matters such as technical, environmental, social, etc. IFC will also 
follow its standard procedures to ensure that conditions of disbursement ha ve been met prior to disbursing 
the funds.  IFC also expects to be the mandated lead arranger (MLA) in addition to the AE  for the GCF 
concessional funds, and as such will coordinate  with all lenders for a pari -passu disbursement as well as  
for supervision and monitoring  after disbursement.  The loan agreements will contain requirements for 
regular reporting from the client . This reporting may contain among others quarterly financial statements, 
project progress report s (during construction), annual audits/annual reports, insurance policies,


---
*Page 57*
---

G 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 environmental and social annual monitoring reports  (including  environmental and social action plan  status 
report),  gender  action plan implementation status,  management letter, compliance certificate, etc.  Site 
visits may also be part of the supervision activities of the Project both during construction and operations.  
As is customary with all IFC loans, the agreement will include provisions requiring the borrower not to incur 
in Sanctionable Practices (ie. any Corrupt Practice, Fraudulent Practice, Coercive Practice, Collusive 
Practice, or Obstructive Practi ce, in accordance with the Anti-Corruption Guidelines for IFC Transactions ). 
and to cooperate in good faith with IFC if there is a concern that a violation has occurred . 
Procurement of major components of the Project are detailed in annex 10. The sponsors  will manage the 
procurement process and plan to follow a competitive tender in most cases.  One of the sponsors, HDF , is 
building a fuel -cell manufacturing facility in Bordeaux  under license of renowned fuel -cell manufacturer 
Ballard.  Fuel cells are therefore supplied by HDF Energy . An EPC contractor  will be engaged  to lead the 
implementation of the project including  procurement of long-term service agreements for main equipment 
such as electrolyzer and batteries.  Even though procurement of most of the main components of the 
Project will follow a competitive tender, IFC usually does not require  that procurement follows World Bank 
Group procedures or even that a competitive tender  takes place , when dealing with private sector players 
(unlike when working with state -owned enterprises or local governments)  as long as the transaction is at 
arms -length.  Part of the due diligence will involve making sure that the procurement of the fuel cells is at 
arms -length and that  pricing is reasonable compared to  similar fuel cells in the market . 
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☐ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☒ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to t he Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the c orresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential infor mation.


---
*Page 58*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☐ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☐ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☐ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☐ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/program milestones (template provided)  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corr esponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☒ Environmental and Social  Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/program -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☐ Annex 
10 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☐ Annex 
11 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 
12 AE fee request (template provided)  
☐ Annex 
13 Co-financing commitment lett er, if applicable (template provided)   
☐ Annex 
14 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment 
schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☐ Annex 
15 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 
16 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 
17 Multi -country project/program information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 
18 Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating 
a pilot project  
☐ Annex 
19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking 
projects financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 
20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment


---
*Page 59*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 10.0 | PAGE 55 
   
  ☐ Annex 
21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 
22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation 
and cross cutting -projects)  
☐ Annex 
23 Drainage Study  
☒ Annex 
24 Climate Change Risk Assessment  
☒ Annex 
25 Technical Assistance scope


---
*Page 60*
---

The Hon. Ryan Straughn, M.P.  
MINISTER IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE  & ECONOMIC AFFAIRS  
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment  
Government Headquarters,  
Bay Street, St. Michael, BB11156, Barbados, W.I . 
   Our Ref.:   7045/79/1 Vol. 5   Tel.: (246)535 -5300  
Fax: (246)535 -5629  
      Date: March 1 , 2023  
Mr. Yannick Glemarec  
Executive Director  
The Green Climate Fund  
Songdo Business District Incheon 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA  
Dear Mr. Glemarec,   
Funding Proposal for the G reen Climate Fund by 
International Finance Corporation, regarding Renewstable 
Barbados Project  
We refer to the project titled Renewstable Barbados as included in 
the funding proposal submitted by the International Finance 
Corporation to us on February 20, 2023.  
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative,  
Hon. Ryan Straughn,  National Designated Authority of Barbados.  
Pursuant to the Green Climate Fund (G CF) decision B.08/10, the 
content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no -objection to the project as included in the funding 
proposal.  
By com municating our no -objection, it is implied that:  
(a) the Government of Barbados has no -objection to the project
as included in the funding proposal;
GOVERNMENT OF BARBADOS
Page 56


---
*Page 61*
---

-2 -
(b) the project as included in the funding proposal is in
conformity with the national priorities, strate gies and plans
of Barbados;  and
(c) in accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social
safeguards, the project as included in the funding proposal
is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no -
objection to the project as included in the funding proposal has been 
duly followed.  
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on 
the GCF website.  
Yours sincerely , 
HON. RYAN STRAUGHN, M.P.  
Minister   
Page 57


---
*Page 62*
---

Page 58 
 
Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Renewstable Barbados Project  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Private  
Accredited entity  International Finance Corporation  (IFC)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Harrow, Saint Phillip Parish region  in Barbados  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Monday, September 18, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language   English is the official language of Barbados.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.renewstable -
barbados.com/_files/ugd/22dce1_ef2c386467dc4fd78fdcc
15c17177f01.pdf  
Other link(s)  IFC website:  
https://www.ifc.org/en/what -we-do/sector -
expertise/blended -finance/climate/green -climate -fund   
 
Project Planning and Documents: 
https://www.renewstable -barbados.com/planning  
 
ESIA Annexes including ESMP (Annex I): 
https://www.renewstable -
barbados.com/_files/ugd/22dce1_73a3a52d72104edba97
894ccaf275623.pdf   
Remarks  An ESIA  consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the ESIA . 
 
 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Monday, September 18, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English  
Explanation on language   English is the official language of Barbados.  
Link to disclosure  https://www.renewstable -
barbados.com/_files/ugd/22dce1_ef2c386467dc4fd78fdcc
15c17177f01.pdf  
Other link(s)  IFC website:  
https://www.ifc.org/en/what -we-do/sector -
expertise/blended -finance/climate/green -climate -fund


---
*Page 63*
---

Page 59 
 
ESIA Annexes including ESMP (Annex I): 
https://www.renewstable -
barbados.com/_files/ugd/22dce1_73a3a52d72104edba97
894ccaf275623.pdf  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in Annex I to the ESIA  
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS ) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website   N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks   N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website   N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure   N/A  
Explanation on language   N/A  
Link to disclosure   N/A  
Other link(s)   N/A  
Remarks   N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Tuesday, November 8, 2022  
Place  ESIA /ESMP were made available  to community for public 
viewing  digitally at RSB website  at https://renewstable -
barbados.com  and physically at (a) Six Roads Public Library, 
Highway 5, Six Roads , St Philip,  Barbados ; (b) Bridgetown 
Public Library, Fairchild St., Bridgetown , Barbados ; (c) 
Planning and Development Department , Warrens Office 
Complex, Warrens , St Michael, Barbados . Public 
Consultation  advertised in local media and online  
(https://www.renewstable -barbados.com/copie -de-home ) 
on Wednesday, November 9, 2022. Public Consultation 
conducted at Princess Margatet Secondary School, Six 
Roads, St. Philip  and virtually via live stream  on December 
7, 2022.  
 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  Wednesday, November 15, 2023  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 23, 2023  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
 
 
________


---
*Page 64*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 15 
Page 60 
 
 
   
 Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP224  
Proposal name:  Renewstable Barbados Project  
Accredited entity:  International Finance Corporation  
Project/programme size:  Medium  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical  Advisory Panel  
1.1 Overview  
1. Renewstable Barbados is an innovative stable energy provision project based on a 50 
Megawatt peak (MW p) solar  photo voltaic ( PV) system combined with a battery energy storage 
system (BESS) and green hydrogen storage . This combination will  allow continuous and stable 
electricity provision 24/7 with 13 MW during the day and the evening peak between 7 p.m. and 
9 p.m.,  and 3 MW at other times . The core feature of the project is that the solar PV system will 
allow for a guaranteed and stable provision of electricity similar to a base -load system. This is 
achieved through both storage in the BESS to cater for short -term fluctuations during the day 
and to provide electricity during the eveni ng peak , and through the production and storage of 
green hydrogen which acts as long -term storage for provision of electricity during the night , or 
also as reserve power. Such systems are central to achieving high rates of renewables based on 
intermittent energy sources , in particular  for small island states with limited grid interchange 
options. The project has opted for a hybrid storage system using lithium -ion (Li-ion) batteries 
combined with hydrogen ( H2) storage for longer periods which is a promising technical 
solution. The project is of h igh relevance for countries, especially small island developing States 
(SIDS ), to achieve high or even 100  per cent  renewable electricity production and is one of the 
first large -scale systems of this kind worldwide.  
2. The USD 169  million  project has a finance source of: (i) USD 41 million from GCF 
composed of a concessional loan of USD 40 million and a grant of USD 1 million ; (ii) USD 43 
million of equity from the private project sponsor ; (iii) USD 8.5 million loan from the 
International Finance Corporation ( IFC); (iv) USD 8.5 million  loan from the Inter -American 
Development Bank ( IDB) and (v) USD 68 million loan from a local commercial bank. The project 
is private sector -driven and GCF funding leverages an inflow of private capital , including private 
equity , as well as significant involv ement  by a local commercial bank into an important climate 
change mitigation project. The private executing entity , Renewstable Barbados , is composed of 
Rubis Caribbean Holding (51 per cent) and  Hydrog ène de France (HDF)  (49 per cent) . All the 
equity needs are already committed by the existing shareholders. HDF is in discussion with local 
credit unions to acquire up to 30  per cent  of the project equity at  or after financial close . GCF 
loan proceeds are used to reduce the tariff for energy customers and will not alter the financial 
internal rate on equity for the project sponsor. GCF grant proceeds are used for capacity -
building and knowledge -sharing.   
1.2 Impa ct potential       Scale:  High  
3. The program me has basically a mitigation impact but , as a side effect, it  also increases 
the resilience of energy provision on the island. The mitigation impact is estimated at around


---
*Page 65*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 15 
Page 61 
 
 
   
 693 ,000 tons o f carbon dioxide equivalent ( t CO 2eq) reduced over the 25-year lifespan of the 
project. 
4. The mitigation outcome is achieved by providing  stable carbon -free base -load power to 
the grid . The project has a c apacity factor or energy target compliance of 85  per cent  equivalent 
to a conventional thermal power plant . The 50 MWp solar plant delivers  from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
and again from 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. 13MW and in the remaining hours provides 3 MW of base -load 
power equivalent to maximum 182 megawatt -hours (MWh) of elect ricity delivered per day , or 
on average (using the average availability rate) 57 gigawatt -hours  per annum. During the day , 
the PV plant provides direct electricity, feeds the 15 MW/30  MWh Li -ion battery storage system 
and produces green H 2 for a 90 MWh hyd rogen storage system . The BESS provides the end -of-
the-day peak power and, in combination with the hydrogen storage, ensures the stability of the 
electricity service. In contrast to standard PV systems the proposed project allows for a base  
load and not an  intermittent energy provision. Currently over 90 per cent of electricity 
provision in Barbados is based on fossil generation and the country has set the high target of 
achieving 100  per cent  renewable electricity (RE) generation by 2030. This project cons titutes a 
critical piece of the puzzle to achieve such a target, not so much for its RE production level but 
rather for its storage and grid stabilization approach. Storage facilities and base -load systems 
are a critical component to achieve high levels  of RE production.  
5. The greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation impact was  calculated using the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change  registered clean development mechanism 
methodologies AMS -I.D. (“grid -connected renewable electricity generation ”). The source used 
for the carbon grid factor for Barbados is based on the harmonized International Financial 
Institutions ( IFI) Default Grid Factors 2021 v3.2.  for “firm energy provision ”1 which is 484 
grams of carbon dioxide equivalent  per kilowatt -hour (g CO 2eq/kWh ). The projected GHG 
emission reductions are deemed to have been calculated in a conservative manner.  
6. The project is designed to be resilient to extreme weather events and a co-benefit is that 
the energy provision can be made more resilient to climate change as the system can operate in 
an “island mode” if disconnected from the rest of the generation plants , allowing for continued 
access to electricity  for residents  or critical local services , benefiting more than 21,000 people . 
The ability to store hydrogen for longer potential outage periods , for example,  caused by 
hurricanes , also increases resilience of the  power sector to extreme climate events . The 
hydrogen storage capacity  could be increase d in the future in a cost -effective manner by adding 
more hydrogen storage tanks which would enable maint enance of base electricity provision 
through a longer period , if required.  
7.  The stand -alone direct impact of the project is limited. The main impact is indirect  in 
nature , by serving  as a lighthouse for SIDS as well as many other countries that want to achieve 
high or very high levels of renewables in the future. Storage, base -load provision, stable supply 
and grid stability are core factors to achieve such a target. Barbados , similar to many other SIDS,  
has abundant solar resources with high irr adiation and capacity factor s; however, adding 
increasing numbers of  solar plants results in problems of grid stability  and base -load power 
provision. The technology approach chosen by the project is one of various possibilities . Results 
of the project are  critical to design optimal solutions for other countries .2 Only very few large -
scale base -load and storage projects with solar PV exist today and the medium - and long -term 
indirect impact of the project  is thus considered to be very high.  
8. Overall , the Independent Technical Advisory Panel  (TAP ) considers that the project has 
a high mitigation impact.   
 
1 Based on recommendations of the i ndependent Technical Advisory Panel  the GHG calculation methodology was 
updated to firm energy provision reducing the GHG impact from the initially estimated 930,000 tCO 2 to 693,000 
tCO 2. 
2 Solutions for other countries might or might not use the hybrid approach using batteries and H 2 storage.


---
*Page 66*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 15 
Page 62 
 
 
   
 1.3 Paradigm  shift potential      Scale:  High  
9. Barbados relies currently on over 90  per cent  fossil fuel-based  electricity generation . 
The country has the intention to shift to 100  per cent  renewables by 2030. No large -scale 
storage and base -load plant from renewables currently exists in Barbados.  
10. The major paradigm shift is not so much towards renewable  energy,  although this alone 
is al ready a major change compared to the current situation. The real paradigm shift is the 
change from solar PV being an intermittent source of energy that potentially creat es grid 
stability problems , to stable base -load energy provision. The proposed energy s torage solution  
adopts a hybrid , combination of a BESS  with H 2 storage . It is the first  of its kind in the Caribbean 
and one of the only plants worldwide  at this scale . A large investment will have to be made  in RE 
base -load provision and storage to achieve the RE targets of countries. The project plays a 
critical role in assessing and choosing optimal technology solutions to enable this paradigm 
shift.  
11. The approach  of combining H 2 and a BESS is one possible technological  solution. 
Another option , already implemented  in various countries , is to use only a BESS. This  system is 
more energy efficient as producing H2 and then generating electricity from the H2, results in 
larger energy losses than using batteries . At current c osts , a hybrid approach is also more 
expensive  compared to adopting only the BESS . However,  a hybrid system  has other advantages 
related to  flexibility and reduced impact of battery degradation over time. Trialling different 
technological approaches in energy storage is considered a positive contribution to identify ing 
and choos ing optimal storage and base -load systems relative to country requirements and 
situations  in the future . However, information, capacity -building and training should be 
technology -neutral for storage solutions and should not be exclusive or uniquely prefer  the 
proposed hybrid solution.   
12. The project benefits  critical experience in green hydrogen production and storage. 
Green hydrogen can play an important role to decarboni ze short - and medium -haul maritime 
transport , while  electro -fuels (e-fuels ) such as e-liquefied natural gas or e-methanol  can also 
decarbonize long -haul maritime and aviation services  that are  critical for islands.  However, the 
independent TAP  believes it is important that hydrogen is promoted only in areas where it has 
an environmental, technical,  and financial advantage compared to other solutions. In the case of 
Barbados , battery electric vehicles which have a factor of three to four times higher efficie ncy in 
energy usage compared to H 2 vehicles , are better suited for all road transport modes , whil e H2 
or e -fuels based on green H 2 are an option for maritime shipping and aviation. The independent 
TAP  wants to avoid GCF grant resources being used for an indiscriminate promotion of 
hydrogen technology .  
13. Knowledge -sharing is critical for a paradigm shift. The project includes measures for 
capacity -building and development  of skills . Information, know -how a nd capacity -building 
should however be technolog y neutral and should not be steered b y the invest or with vested 
interests in the H 2 economy.  
14. The project is private sector with a private company taking the investment risk. Private 
sector capital is utili zed for  renewable energy storage solutions. This is considered as highly 
positive  and with a high replicability potential by showcasing that renewable energy base -load 
and storage provision can be delivered in a cost -effective manner with private capi tal.  
15. Overall , the independent TAP  considers that the project has the potential to attract more 
private companies and capital to invest in storage and base -load RE provision. Renewable 
energy storage and base -load provision are critical,  and the proposed system create s a 
paradigm shift. The independent TAP  therefore considers that t he paradigm shift potential of 
the project is  high .


---
*Page 67*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 15 
Page 63 
 
 
   
 1.4 Sustainable development potential       Scale:  Low  to Medium  
16. The project is aligned with several Sustainable Development Goal s: SDG 3 (good health 
and well -being) ; SDG 7 (affordable  and clean energy) ; SDG 8 (decent work and economic 
growth ); and SDG 13 (climate action).  
17. The project has a positive impact on reducing local air pollution and noise  due to 
reducing fossil electricty generation. However, the impact is considered to be minor , as fossil 
generators are not l ocated in areas with high population density and , compared to the air 
pollution impacts caused by the transp ort sector , the health an d environmental impact of fossil 
generators is limited.   
18. The project  has a positive economic impact by using locally available resources and by 
reducing the need for import of fossil fuels.  This increases the sustainability of the economy of 
Barbados. No impact on job creation is expected as the project will potentially create a similar 
number of jobs to those lost in fossil -based  electricity generation. This is also true for the 
planned sheep -farming initiative which replaces jobs of former agricultural ac tivities on the 
land (sugarcane farming).  
19. The major potential negative impacts of the project  are associated with end -of-life 
hazaradous products (solar PV systems and batteries). These  will be taken care of through 
extended producer responsibilities ensuring the used products are shipped to the country of 
origin or to a closer recycling facility. Freshwater availability for H 2 production is secured and is 
at a very low level compared to current usage and water availability rates. The land used for 
establishment of the solar PV system is currently used for sugarcane farming which is a 
declining crop  industry in Barbados.  A sheep -farming initiative is being planned as a social 
enterprise , thus replacing a declining agribusiness activity with one that is more attractive 
financially . This avoid s potential negative land -use change impacts .3 
20. Overall , the sustainable development potential of the project is considered low to 
medium . It can make important contributions in the are a of reducing dependency on foss il fuel 
imports while the major focus and impact of the project is clearly on mitigating clim ate change . 
1.5 Needs of the recipient      Scale:  Medium  
21. The Barbados electricity grid is vulnerable to hurricanes. Since 2010, hurricanes Tomas 
(2010), Ernesto (2012), Harvey (2017) and Elsa (2021) and the tropical storms Matthew, Maria, 
Kirk,  and Gonzalo (2020) have impacted the island, causing power outages a nd enormous 
damage to the people of Barbados. The project allows for a more resilient energy system with a 
mor e stable and reliable energy supply and can thus reduce the impact of climate events.  
22. Comparable to other SIDS , the electricity tariffs  are alread y very high . Barbados wants to 
decarbonize energy generation but has a low potential for base -load renewable sources such as 
geothermal ,4 hydro or biomass. Whil e solar PV technology has a downward cost trend , energy 
storage is still very costly and would result in additional costs.  The higher cost and the risk of 
hybrid storage technologies make commercial financing very unlikely to materialize at this 
stage. The support of GCF alongside development financial institutions such as  IFC and IDB 
Invest h elp to establish  a project that will be a n important reference case for future storage 
investments in other countries and which will increasingly be financed by commercial banks . 
The us e of concessional GCF funds to reduce energy costs for the population w hile also 
venturing into a renewable energy provision combined with storage enables  uptake of the 
technology.  The independent TAP  therefore considers the needs of the recipient as medium .  
 
3 A similar arrangement is already in place at the largest solar facility in Barbados located in Trents, S aint Lucy.  
4 See e.g. Barbados_Central America and the Caribbean_RE_SP.pdf (irena. org).


---
*Page 68*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 15 
Page 64 
 
 
   
 1.6 Country  ownership       Scale:  high  
23. The energy sector is the largest GHG emission source in Barbados. The Barbados 
National Energy Policy target s achieving  a fossil fuel -free electricity sector by 2030. This private 
sector project is fully aligned with the government’s ambitious objective to inc rease the share of 
electricity produced from renewable sources. It is also in line with the target to reduce the 
country’s vulnerability to extreme climate events.  
24. The no-objection letter  of the Government of Barbados has been provided . 
25. The project has mad e a stakeholder assessment and has responded to the issues raised 
during the assessment  in a satisfactory manner . 
26. The country ownership is assessed by the independent TAP  as high . The project fully 
aligns with the countr y’s nationally determined contribution  and its strategic national plan s.  
1.7 Efficiency  and effectiveness              Scale:  Medium  
27. An alternative viable storage solution  for Barbados would be bas ed on BESS  alone . A 
battery -based solution with current prices is expected to have a lower overall cost due to the 
higher efficiency of batteries relative to usage of hydrogen. This is confirmed by an external Det 
Norske Veritas (DNV ) study (annex 28). However, the two syst ems are not entirely comparable 
due to battery degradation (resulting in a faster reduction of storage capabilities than with a 
hybrid system) and a lower potential level of medium -term  storage in case of extreme events.  
The proposed system therefore has its merits but care needs to be taken to have a technology -
neutral approach for replication and outreach without promoting indiscriminately a hybrid or 
H2-based solution.   
28. Green hydrogen production and storage opens the door for future usage in difficult -to-
abate transport sectors in the country, especially for medium - and long -haul maritime 
transport. Generating experience with a hybrid system is thus considered to be an economic 
asset in itself , warranting some additional costs compared to an alternative of only BESS .5 The 
power purchase agreement costs of the project of around USD 250 per MWh have been 
compared by IFC with other projects worldwide and are deemed as competitive. Private 
investment is also available for the hybrid system proposed and not fo r an alternative BESS  
alone .  
29. The concessionality  of the GCF loan is intended to reduce the energy tariff and not to 
increase the profit margins of the project sponsor. This will only be true if capital expenditure 
costs of the system are not overrated and are market conform. As project sponsor , HDF will 
supply the fuel cells. The AE needs to ensure that fuel cells provided are cost competitive to 
avoid siphoning off concessionality of GCF funds.  
30. The total investment amount is USD 169 million with USD 41 million from GCF with a 
co-financing ratio of 76  per cent  and a leverage factor exceed ing 3. 
31. The estimated GCF cost per t  CO 2 eq avoided  is around USD 59. Whil e this cost may seem 
high, the project technology is novel and storage costs are still high. Also, due to th e project 
providing baseload and storage , other RE projects can be established in Barbados. Stand -alone 
RE projects to a certain extent underestimate the cost per ton nes of CO 2 avoided as they do not 
factor in the costs of grid reinforcement and storage which is required to achieve high degrees 
of RE provision based on intermittent energy supply. The GCF funding also has important 
adaptation co-benefits in increasing the resilience of the energy system in Barbados . The 
 
5 The cost comparison between a BESS only and a hybrid system depends on various critical parameters and results 
vary from comparable costs to 15  per cent  lower costs for BESS only. As mentioned, the two systems do not have 
identical output parameters which  means that differential costs can also be attributed to differential outputs.


---
*Page 69*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 15 
Page 65 
 
 
   
 replicability potential of this project is considered to be very high, with future decreasing unit 
costs. Therefore,  the specific project cost is not considered to be excessive.  
32. IFC has experience and together with IDB also proven capabilities  to make such  an 
endeavour  successful and to achieve replicability.  HDF has proven experience with hydrogen 
systems. Core components , such as the BESS , the electrolyzers and fuel cells , will be procured 
from a tier -1 supplier  with  performance guarantees .  
33. The overall the independent TAP  assessment concerning efficiency and effectiveness is 
medium as the proposed technology has considerable potential to be a future game changer for 
countries targeting high levels of RE and is crowding in significant additional private fi nance.  On 
the other hand,  other technology solutions could be more cost -effective.  
II. Overall remarks  from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
34. Based on the assessment above, the independent TAP  endorses this funding proposal  
with conditions and a recommendation . 
35. The project is financed to a considerable extent by private sources and implements an 
innovative base -load energy plant using a solar PV system combined with a hybrid storage 
solution wi th a BESS and H 2 component which allow deliver y of stable electricity to the grid. 
This is particularly important for Barbados where the RE potential is primarily solar PV which 
can only deliver intermittent and  unstable energy thus requiring cost -effectiv e storage and grid -
stabling solutions.  
36. The independent TAP  recommends that the project reports data on energy usage and 
inputs/outputs for the solar energy system, the BESS and the H 2 system. This would enable  
future optimal design of systems. The claim of  the project sponsor that this information is 
intellectual property is not fully shared.  Disclosure of this information would be valuable and 
would increase the project impact. Non -disclosure of the information should entail a lower 
concessionality level o f GCF funds  as this reduces the project impact and paradigm shift 
potential . 
37. The independent TAP  recommends that TA funds are used as far as possible in a 
technology neutral manner including (i)  focusing scholarships on energy storage technologies in 
gener al and not only on potential usage of hydrogen; (ii) financing and promoting studies of 
energy storage options for SIDS in general without focusing exclusively on hybrid or H2 
solutions; (iii) not financing directly H2 platforms but technology open platfor ms.  
38. The independent TAP  recommends  that no GCF Proceeds under Component 2 of the 
Funded Activity are used for the training and/or capacity building of RSB's plant technicians.     
39. The AE needs to ensure that GCF concessionality is used to r educe energy tar iffs and not 
siphoned off to potentially overpriced components provided by the project sponsor. This has 
been acknowledged by the IFC without disclosing to the independent TAP  the required 
documentation describing how this will be achieved.  
40. Therefore the independent TAP  endorses this funding proposal subject to the condition:  
Prior to the effectiveness of the FAA,  delivery by the AE to the Fund, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of the proc edures setting out the  methodology  used to 
ensure cost competitiveness of the fuel cells to be supplied by HDF.


---
*Page 70*
---

 
 
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.15 
Page 66 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP224 ) 
Proposal name:  Renewstable Barbados Project  
Accredited entity:  International Finance Corporation (IFC)  
Country/(ies):  Barbados  
Project/Programme size:  Medium  
 
Impact potential  
We thank the panel for this assessment. We agree that the impact potential of the Project is 
high. The input from the Independent Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP ) regarding the GHG 
emissions calculations were very useful and relevant to revise the emission f actor based on the 
firm energy provision of the proposed plant.  
 
We concur that there will be significant indirect impacts as a result of the Project in terms of 
replicability and providing a demonstrative example to other Small Island Developing States 
(SIDS). The stand -alone, direct impact of the Project is also worth emphasizing: the plant has 
the potential to generate about 6% of the energy dispatched to the Barbadian network using 
local, renewable energy and without a negative impact on the grid stabil ity. 
Paradigm shift potential  
We thank the panel for this assessment. We fully agree with the independent TAP  that the 
paradigm shift goes beyond renewable energy by itself and relates more to using an 
intermittent source of energy to provide a firm, bas e-load dispatch that avoids grid stability 
problems. Regarding the comparative cost against a battery -only solution, while initial 
indications from an independent study commissioned by the AE pointed to a pricing gap 
favoring a Battery Energy Storage Syste ms (BESS) -only solution, further iterations aimed at 
providing the same flexibility that the hybrid H2 + BESS system yielded an overlapping range 
of levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) for both alternatives.  
 
We also agree that different technological approaches to energy storage are a positive 
development and the intent of using GCF concessional funds is not to support the hydrogen 
technology as a preferred solution, but rather to make the best use of the opportunity to learn 
from this Pr oject and add this innovative solution to the menu of potential approaches that will 
help support the paradigm shift desired. As indicated by the panel, private sector participation 
will be key in the future development of similar solutions and the support  provided by GCF to 
this project will help catalyze future opportunities that will gradually need less and eventually 
may not need any concessional support to yield an attractive tariff.  
Sustainable development potential  
We thank the panel for this assessment . IFC’s expectation is that the Project will have relevant 
positive impact in various fronts, while minimizing the negative impact at the end of its life. 
Moreover, the impact on climate and health by avoiding local air pollution and noise should  be 
considered in the context of an island such as Barbados where the relative impact is more


---
*Page 71*
---

 
 
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.15 
Page 67 
 
 
 significant than the absolute effect. As compared to the transport sector, the electricity and heat 
sector in Barbados emits 37% more, according to:  
https://ourworldindata.org/co2/country/barbados .  
Furthermore, the Project will increase the share of renewable energy in the Barbadian 
generation mix. The current share of  renewables in Barbados is limited by the variable nature 
of solar PV but the introduction of renewables into the baseload through short - and medium -
term storage enables increased renewable energy in the mix.  This could be replicated also in 
the future.  Therefore, this is aligned with SDG 7 - to provide affordable, reliable, sustainable,  
and modern energy for all - with a core target for increasing the share of renewable energy in 
the mix.  
Needs of the recipient  
We thank the panel for this assessment. The panel clearly identifies the resiliency aspects of 
the Project as a key component of the recipient’s needs. We would like to also highlight how 
this Project helps address curtailment and stability issues that the  country is already facing 
even with a relatively small installed capacity of solar PV generation. Given the Government of 
Barbados’ ambitious decarbonization targets,  replacing old fossil fuel generation facilities is 
becoming an issue given the reluctanc e to install other diesel generators that will be emitting 
greenhouse gases and other pollutants for a long time. At the same time, the country is facing 
challenges to increase penetration of intermittent renewable energy without negatively 
affecting the s tability of the grid.  
 
While energy storage is still costly, this is not exclusively related to the financing of electricity 
storage using green hydrogen. Given the island context of Barbados, in order to increase the 
penetration of renewables, storage is required.  And due to the high fuel costs in Barbados, 
renewables with storage is cost competitive with diesel plants, which is not the case in other 
locations.  
Country ownership  
Thank you for this assessment. We fully agree and have been able to hear firsthand the 
interest of various public officials in seeing this Project move ahead and close as soon as 
possible.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
We appreciate the independent TAP ’s assessment. While the roundtrip efficiency of a BESS -
only system is higher than a system that combines H2 with batteries, as the panel indicates, the 
latter provides more flexibility regarding medium -term storage and resilience in case of 
extreme weather events. In fact, the higher LCOE cost of the hybrid system is closer and even 
as competitive as the BESS -only system under scenarios where the batteries -only system is 
sized to replicate the hybrid system, as was evaluated by DNV in a revised version of the 
comparative study.  
It is also important to highlight the location -specific nature of this solution which can work in 
Barbados due to high fuel costs, but probably not in economies where the electricity tariff is 
more competitive.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:


---
*Page 72*
---

 
 
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add.15 
Page 68 
 
 
 Thank you for your endorsement to proceed to the GCF Board and we acknowledge your 
recommendations and condition.  
 
We take note that the panel does not fully share the view that information on input/output of 
each component of the system (solar PV, Li -ion batteries,  and green hydrogen system) is 
intellectual property and subject to confidentiality. IFC’s view is that for the most part, the 
project impact is achieved regardless of the disclosure of this information and the potential for 
replicability and paradigm shift ar e likely subject to other developers with knowledge of the 
technology or of other technologies (following your comments on maintaining a technology 
neutral approach) to be able to develop other projects without the need of the level of detail 
suggested by the panel. Given that the concessionality is fully allocated to reduce the tariff, the 
rationale of linking the level of concessionality to the provision of information specific to the 
Project is unclear.  
 
We also take note of the recommendation to keep th e TA activities open to a technology -neutral 
approach. While we are supportive of keeping the TA work on a technology -agnostic basis, we 
will need to consider the amount of resources available as compared to a broader scope of 
work, as well as the immediac y of the hydrogen technology from the Project to be leveraged by 
the TA work.  
 
We acknowledge the recommendation to not use GCF proceeds for the TA work to train or 
provide capacity building to RSB employees. If there is a restriction on using GCF proceeds  for 
this purpose, we will work with the EE in adjusting the scope of work accordingly.  
 
We understand GCF’s interest in ensuring that the concessionality of the funding is fully 
allocated to reducing the energy tariff. As explained by the AE, the tariff f or the life of the Project 
is determined up -front and takes into consideration the impact of the concessionality in 
reducing the Project costs, rather than being channeled to benefit the project sponsors. The 
relevant information has been made available to  the independent TAP  and GCF subsequent to 
the submission of the Funding Proposal to the independent TAP . 
 
Thank you for your endorsement. Based on our understanding of the requirement for the 
condition precedent proposed by the independent TAP , we have al ready provided the TORs 
to address this request. We look forward to the consideration of the Renewstable Barbados 
Project at the GCF Board in October 23 -25, 2023.


---
*Page 73*
---

  
The Green Climate Fund
Gender Assessment
Page 69


---
*Page 74*
---

 
 Rev  Issue Date   Originated by  Reviewed by   Approved by   Revision   
1 28 July 2023  M. Clarke  J. Beckles; L. Theron  H. Frossard  Third  Issue --Final 
            
            
            
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
DISCLAIMER   
THIS DOCUMENT IS THE EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY OF HDF -ENERGY.   
The information contained in this document has been prepared by HDF -Energy, exclusively to be use on HDF -Energy projects.    
This document is subject to review and users are cautioned to obtain his latest edition.   
This document only provides information which have to be reviewed by the third parties.   
HDF -Energy provide no warranties to third parties as to the quality, accuracy or completeness of information contained in this do cument and 
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,  THE WARRANTY OF THE WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE.   
No part of this document may be copied or otherwise shown or disclosed to third parties without the prior consent of HDF -Energy.   
Unauthorized use of this document by any third Party, in cluding project contractors and subcontractors, shall be at such Party’s own risk, and HDF -
Energy assumes no liability in connection with information contained herein.    
HDF -Energy disclaims any liability for any damage suffered by any company or person a s a result of or in connection with the use, application or 
implementation of the information contained herein or any part thereof.   
This document should not be confused with federal, state, provincial, or municipal specifications or regulations, insuranc e requirements or national 
safety codes.   
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.  
Page 70


---
*Page 75*
---

  
GENDER ASSESSMENT        R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         i 
Contents  
1 Acknowledgements  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  1 
2 Acronyms  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  2 
3 Key Gender Terms and Concepts  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  3 
4 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  5 
5 Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  6 
6 Limitations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  6 
7 Purpose/ Rationale  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  7 
8 Barbados Country -Specific Gender Context  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  8 
9 The Gender Policy Fra mework in Barbados  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  9 
10 The Renewable Energy & Climate Change Policy Sector Landscape in Barbado s ................................ ............  10 
10.1  Gender integration in Barbados National Energy Policy 2019 -2030  ................................ ........................  17 
10.2  Gender integration in The International Framework and Barbados National Climate Change Policy ..... 18 
10.3  Gender integration in Barbados’ updated NDC  ................................ ................................ ........................  18 
11 Gender Gaps in the Energy & Renewable Energy Sector in Barbados  ................................ .............................  19 
11.1  Women’s workforce participation in the energy sector  ................................ ................................ ..........  19 
11.2  Women’s participation in the energy sector educational programs  ................................ .......................  20 
11.3  Women’s participation in decision making positions and roles in the energy sector  .............................  21 
12 Stakeholder Mapping & Analysis  of the Renewstable Barbados Project  ................................ .........................  22 
13 Social & Gender Baseline Assessment of the Renewstable Barbados Project  ................................ .................  26 
13.1  The Social  & Gender Impact Assessment of RSB - Project Construction Phase  ................................ ........  26 
13.2  The Social & Gender Impact Assessment of RSB – Project Operational Phase  ................................ ........  31 
14 Challenges / Constraints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 33 
15 Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  34 
16 Conclu sion ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  37 
17 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  38 
18 Annex  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  39 
 
 
Page 71


---
*Page 76*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         1 / 43  
1 Acknowledgements  
The Gender Assessment was prepared by Ms. Meshia Clarke, the Environmental Social, Governance and 
Communications Lead for HDF Caribbean with support from Ms. Janina Jasmin Blessing a Gender Consultant . 
Special thanks and appreci ation  to Dr. Janice Cumberbatch, Social Consultant and lead in the development of the 
Social Impact Baseline Assessment and Study that was completed as part of the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) developed by Stantec on behalf of the Renewstable Barbados project. Most of the social and 
gender inclusive data collected and refe rence d in the Gender Assessment was compiled from the Baseline Study.  
We are very grateful for Ms. Jacqueline Beckles , Project Manager for Development and Mr. Leo Theron , Project 
Manager , Hydrogen Projects, both of  HDF Energ y, France  for their technical in puts and review of the draft Gender 
Assessment for the Renewstable Barbados Project.  The Gender Assessment was developed with the aim to identify 
the social and gender considerations specific to the project and devise ways of streamlining gender into the p roject 
proposal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 72


---
*Page 77*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         2 / 43  
2 Acronyms  
BGA  Bureau of Gender Affairs  
CEDAW  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women  
ESIA   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment  
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment  
ESMP  Environmental and Social Management Plan  
ESF Environmental and Social Framework   
GAP  Gender Action Plan  
GBV  Gender -based violence  
GGGI  Global Gender Gap Index  
GRM  Grievance/Complaints Mechanism  
HyPCe  Hydrogen Power Centre  
IGDS  Institute for Gender and Development Studies  
ILO International Labour Organization  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contribution  
SEP Stakeholder Engagement Plan  
SOP Standard Operating Procedures  
RSB Renewstable Barbados Project  
RoW  Rights -of-way 
SEAH  Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment  
SGBV   Sexual and Gender -based Violence  
UWI  University of West Indies  
  
Page 73


---
*Page 78*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         3 / 43  
3 Key Gender Terms and Concepts  
Gender analysis  or assessment : Identifies, analyses and informs action to address inequalities that arise from the 
different roles of women and men, or the unequal power relations between them, and the consequences of these 
inequalities on their lives, their health and well -being. The way power is distributed in most societies means that 
women have less access to and control over resources, and are less likely to take part in decision -making.  
Gender and energy nexus : Women and girls disproportionately bear the burden of energy poverty because of 
gender norms and traditions, which hinder equal access to modern energy services. Women  and men  have 
different energy needs and capacities to access energy services and appliances. This is a consequence of societal 
gender norms, and differences in responsibilities and opportunities. In this context, gender -blind approaches 
further institutionalise and perpetuate existing inequalities. This is why we need to create a gender -responsive 
energy sector that enables women and men to equally benefit fro m energy services and supports their socio -
economic potential.  1 
Gender -inclusive:  This term refers to initiatives, activities or programmes that are open to both women and men 
but are designed to overcome any barriers to the full participation that one o f the two sexes may experience. In 
most cases, it targets the increased participation of women and girls. Implementing gender -inclusive programmes 
is a powerful way to promote gender equality and eradicate gender bias.2 
Gender -neutral:  Something that is n ot specific to women or men. This can be policies, investments, projects or 
business models, whereby it can be assumed that there is no different effect on women or men. Often, something 
is mistaken to be gender -neutral when it is “gender blind”. This mean s that the policy, programme or business 
model did not take into account the ways in which it would affect women and men differently. In the end, gender -
neutral most commonly means that the needs of men are assumed to be the needs of everyone, which leads to 
women’s needs being left out3 
Gender -based violence (GBV):  An umbrella term for any harmful act that is perpetrated against a person’s will 
and that is based on socially ascribed (gender) differences between females and males. The nature and extent of 
specific types of GBV vary across cultures, countries and regions. Examples include sexual violence, including 
sexual exploitation/abuse and forced prostitution, domestic violence, trafficking, forced/early marriage, harmful 
traditional practices such as f emale genital mutilation, honour killings and widow inheritance.  
 Gender mainstreaming:  Mainstreaming a gender perspective means assessing the implications for women and 
men of any planned action as a way to make women’s as well as men’s concerns and expe riences an integral 
 
1 International Network on Gender and Sustainable Energy, 2023. Available at: https://www.energia.org/what -we-do/why -
gender -and-energy/  
2  ILO, Gender -inclusive service provision: A quick guide for financial and business development services providers . 2022  
2022,  
3 Ibid 
Page 74


---
*Page 79*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         4 / 43  
dimension of all policies and programs in all political, economic, and societal spheres. In this way, women and men 
may benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated.4  
Gender -responsive programming and policies : Intentionally empl oying gender considerations to affect the 
design, implementation and results of programmes and policies. Gender -responsive programmes and policies 
reflect girls’ and women’s realities and needs, in components such as site selection, project staff, content,  
monitoring, etc. Gender -responsiveness means paying attention to the unique needs of females and males, 
valuing their perspectives, respecting their experiences, understanding developmental differences between girls 
and boys, women and men and ultimately empowering girls and women . 
 
4 UN WOMEN, 2022. Available at: https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital -library/publications/2022/02/handbook -on-
gender -mainstreamin g-for-gender -equality -results  
Page 75


---
*Page 80*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         5 / 43  
4 Introduction   
This gender assessment provides a summary overview of the gender equality situation in Barbados specifically 
within the context of the renewable energy sector. The report summari zes the principal findings regardin g the 
gender and social impact assessment of the Renewstable Barbados project within the fourteen (14)5 neighbouring 
and surrounding communities located nearest to the project site at Harrow Plantation, in the Parish of Saint Philip, 
Barbados  (Please refer to Annex Table  5). The aim of the gender assessment is to identify the social and gender 
considerations specific to the project and devise ways of streamlining gender into the pro ject proposal.  
The Renewstable® Barbados Project (referred to herein as “the Project” or “RSB”) is an innovative and unique 
large -scale green energy project which combines the use of solar, hydrogen and lithium -ion battery  technologies 
to construct and operate a hybrid solar photovoltaic (PV) energy facility with hydrogen storage. RSB will deliver 
non-intermittent, carbon -free, and renewable electrical power to the national grid and will also accommodate a 
Blackbelly sheep farming facility within the solar power plant and surrounding green areas.  
The Project will be located at Harrow Plantation, in the Parish of Saint Philip, Barbados, which is situated on the 
southeastern end of the island. Harrow Plantation consists of app roximately 123.0 hectares (ha) of privately -
owned land, of which approximately 73.2 ha will be leased by RSB for the purpose of carrying out the Project. The 
RSB leasehold area (referred to herein as “the Project Property”) will encompass the following pro posed project 
components and activities:  
▪ Approximately 59.1 ha will be used for the solar PV power plant, including associated rights -of-way (RoWs) 
and various restrictions, such as drainage reserves. Most of this land (approximately 57.4 ha) will also 
support solar grazing (i.e., the practice of grazing livestock, in this case Blackbelly sheep, between and 
beneath the solar panels of the power plant).  
▪ Approximately 1.6 ha will be used to implement energy storage and management systems in support of 
the sol ar PV power plant. These systems will be contained within an area referred to as the “Hydrogen 
Power Centre” (HyPCe).  
▪ Approximately 2.3 ha will be used for buildings and facilities associated with the on -site Blackbelly sheep 
farm as well as general office  and storage facilities.  
▪ Approximately 10.3 ha will be left as green space (i.e., undeveloped land that is covered with grass) to be 
used as a fodder pasture for grass harvesting and baling.  
The approximate geographic coordinates of the centre of the Proje ct Property are as follows: 13.127548, -
59.472712. The land within the Project Property is existing agricultural land that is currently used for sugarcane 
farming augmented by rotational crops (e.g., cotton). Cultivation of existing sugarcane fields and ro tational crops  
within the Project Property will continue until the start of Project construction. On June 16th, 2023 t he project 
received its planning approval and in maintaining the agricultural integrity of the land has incorporated as a dual 
usage facil ity a Blackbelly Sheep Farm as key component of the project development. This facility will include on -
 
5 Padmore Village, Circular Road, Marchfield Village Road, Harrow Land, Neil Kirk Gardens, Farm Road, Harrow Road, 
Crescent Drive, Farm Gardens, Farm Road Terrace, Harrow Park, Green Way/ Farm Gardens, Bushy Park Road, and Nie l Kirk 
Road.  
Page 76


---
*Page 81*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         6 / 43  
site agricultural facilities such as: sheep pens, a barn for hay storage, a feed silo, water storage tanks, a designated 
waste skip area on a concrete pa d, and a farm building/staff facility.  
In-addition to maintaining the project’s agricultural integrity, the project initiated prior to its planning approval, 
community engagement with the St. Philip communities through the conduct of its Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA), which was carried out by Stantec and included a gender responsive Social Impact 
Assessment, as part of the study which was undertaken by Dr. Janice Cumberbatch. The results of which are 
captured in the successive sections of this report. Additional community eng agement was facilitated through the 
hiring of a local community based private sector firm, Haigh Communications Inc (HCI), and as an output of this, 
the project is developing a Community and Social Engagement  Benefits - Sharing  Plan derived partially from t he 
data and inputs collected from their social engagement work. It is important to note that the Project will not 
generate physical resettlement of local communities in any of its components or stages or will it result in the 
displacement of any minority g roups or indigenous populations. However, reference is made to vulnerable 
populations and or specific gender -based groups (i.e., women, youth and the elderly) in which the Assessment 
provides an analysis and proposed recommendations for addressing such gen der constraints.  
5 Methodology  
In conducting the Gender Assessment, a mixed methodology approach was utilised which combined the use of 
qualitative and quantitative research analysis to help identify the gender and social constraints of the RSB project; 
to b est devise ways in which gender could be effectively integrated into the project’s proposal and inform the 
Gender Action Plan. The main qualitative research method used included that of a desk review of all the relevant 
policy and legislative frameworks sp ecific to the energy sector in Barbados. A further deep dive of the Social Impact 
Assessment, as part of the ESIA, was also undertaken to provide additional analysis and insights into the project’s 
gender related impacts.   
The quantitative data collected from the Social Impact Assessment and the community stakeholder consultations 
via the community surveys and interviews coordinated was also used as means of gathering sex -disaggregated 
data on the project. From the data collected a qualitative gender analy sis of these results was computed and from 
this, there were some notable constraints as well as opportunities observed from which several recommendations 
were proposed as part of the Gender Assessment.  
6 Limitations  
One of the core limitations in undertaking  this Gender Assessment was the timelines. Given that the timelines for 
the completion of the Assessment had to be fast tracked  to meet the financing requirements. The core 
methodology used to gather and assessed data was that of a desk review. Stakeholder  feedback and input was 
gathered from the data collected under the Social Impact Baseline Study as part of the project’s broader ESIA. 
Additional stakeholder consultations and feedback would have been useful, but were not feasible within the 
Page 77


---
*Page 82*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         7 / 43  
timeline given  for completion. In mitigating this shortfall further stakeholder consultations and feedback are 
planned during the project’s initial inception and throughout the project’s implementation.  
7 Purpose / Rationale  
As indicated above, the Gender Assessment was u ndertaken to identify the social and gender considerations 
specific to the RSB project in order to devise ways of streamlining gender into the project’s proposal. The purpose 
of the Gender Assessment is therefore, to identify the social and gender specific  constraints which impact the 
project’s specific stakeholder groups and propose recommendations and actions which can be used to inform the 
activities captured within the project’s Gender Action Plan (GAP).   
Page 78


---
*Page 83*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         8 / 43  
8 Barbados Country -Specific Gender Context  
Barbad os is globally recognized as a leading voice for small island developing states (SIDS) specifically in the 
championing of climate, climate finance and environmental issues. The country has also been consistently ranked 
amongst the top countries in governance and social development indicators, and amongst the countries with 
lowest corruption indexes6.   In 2021, the country formally became a Republic becoming the fifth Caribbean 
Community (CARICOM) country7 to do so.  The country’s current populati on is estimated to be 281,976 people. 
According to the World Population Prospects the country’s annual population growth is around 0.18%. In 2021, 
there were 3,040 births and the population of males totalled  139,000 while females stood at 148,0008. The fe male 
population at that time was 51.57% compared to 48.43% male s9. Barbados’ female population exceeded that of 
men by approximately 9,000 females and at the time (i.e., circa 2021) Barbados ranked 30th out of 201 
countries/territories in terms of female to male ratio10. 
Since the start of the 20th century Barbados has transitioned from a largely agrarian sugar producing nation -state 
to a diversified service sector -based economy - where tourism, international business and finance - are among the 
country’s m ain economic drivers. However, with this transition the traditional gender stereotypes that cast 
women and femininity as essentially different from and inferior to men and masculinity still remain intact. 
According to the Barbados Country Gender Assessment , which was carried out by the Caribbean Development 
Bank in 2016, these gender binaries continue to affect the economic options and behaviours of women and men 
across the public/ private and professional/ domestic spheres.  In recent years, Barbados has h owever made 
considerable progress in these areas, specifically in (i) its efforts to enhance women’s economic participation and 
opportunities within society, (ii) educational achievement, (iii) reproduction, health  and survival and (iv) political 
empowerme nt. 
In the most recent Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI), Barbados scored 0.769, ranking it 31st out of 146 countries.11 
The GGGI showed that the country ranked highest, at 4th globally, in economic participation and opportunity 
demonstrating the enhanced  gender parity achieved in this area.12 In the educational attainment sphere, Barbados 
also performed reasonably, ranking 65th globally but 3 scores up from its 2022, 67th ranking in this area.13 A major 
contributor being the country’s high literacy and secondary school enrolment rates, which both ranked 1sts.  Even 
 
6 Caribbean Development Bank. Barbados Country Gender Assessment (CGA) . January 2016.  
7 Caribbean Community (CARICOM). Barbados Becomes A Republic. November 30th, 2021.  https://caricom.org/barbados -
becomes -fourth -caribbean -republic/  
8 UN World Population Prospects (2019). Demographics of Barbados. October 31st, 2021.  
https://statisticstimes.com/demographics/country/barbados -demographics.php  
9 UN World Population Prospects (2019). Demographics of Barbados. October 31st, 2021.  
https://statisticstimes.com/demographics/country/barbados -demographics.php  
10 UN World Population Prospects (2019). Demographics of Barbados. October 31st, 2021.  
https://statisticstimes.com/demographics/country/barbados -demographics.php  
11 World Economic Forum. Global Gender Gap Report 2023 . Geneva: Switzerland. June 2023.  
12 World Economic Forum. Global Gender Gap Report 2023 . Geneva: Switzerland. June 2023.  
13World Economic Forum. Global Gender Gap Report 2023 . Geneva: Switzerland. June 2023.  
Page 79


---
*Page 84*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         9 / 43  
though the  country has benefitted from stellar female political leadership in the last five (5) years that has been 
internationally r ecognized, in terms of political empowerment Barbados only ranked 58th. Altogether , when 
conceptualizing Barbados global gender performance against the larger grouping of Latin America and Caribbean 
states, Barbados’ ranks 5th overall with the only other E nglish speaking Caribbean state ranking higher being 
Jamaica at 3rd. This demonstrates the strides the country has made in advancing gender equality and women’s 
empowerment.  
The Bureau of Gender Affairs (BGA), a department within the Ministr y of People Empowerment and Elderly Affairs, 
is the entity responsible for integrating gender into all development plans and policies and to achieve gender 
equity and equality. However, budgets to support gender mainstreaming efforts are limited and are no t available 
in any ministry except the host ministry. Notwithstanding th is, Barbados  has put in place numerous environmental 
and energy -related policies including (among others) the 2012 Barbados National Climate Change Policy  and the 
Barbados National Ene rgy Policy 2019 -2030 . The BGA has not been systematically involved in environmental 
bodies such as the National Climate Change Committee. This means there has been a dearth of gender 
mainstreaming and the consideration of gender specific dimensions within many of the country’s national 
development policies and plans.  
9 The Gender Policy Framework in Barbados  
Barbados has ratified several key international and regional human rights instruments related to gender equality, 
namely the Convention on the Eliminatio n of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and the Inter -
American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women14. It has also 
ratified the eight core International Labour Organisation (ILO) Conventions.15  
There is no National Gender Policy currently in place. The BGA, the national agency responsible for gender 
mainstreaming, areas of work have been shaped by the Beijing Platform for Action  and Commonwealth Plan of 
Action for Gender Equality 2005 –2015  and in clude poverty alleviation but not broader engagement in economic 
development. Achievements include the development of legislation and support mechanisms relating to gender -
based violence and delivery of gender training.16 Links to some NGOs and the Institu te for Gender and 
Development Studies at the UWI Cave Hill Campus are strong. However, there are few links with the business 
community and agencies concerned with economic development.  
 
14 Caribbean Development Bank. Barbados Country Gender Assessment (CGA) . January 2016.  
15 Caribbean Development Bank. Barbados Country Gender Assessment (CGA) . January 2016.  
16 Caribbean Development Bank. Barbados Country Gender Assessment (CGA) . January 2016.  
Page 80


---
*Page 85*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         10 / 43  
10 The Renewable  Energy & Climate Change Policy Sector Landscape 
in Barbad os 
The renewable energy and climate change landscape in Barbados is shaped by several policy and legislative 
frameworks which guide the development of these sectors. In terms of the execution of the Renewstable Barbados 
project, the ESIA makes reference to  twenty -one (21) related policy documents and legislative frameworks 
associated specifically with the project’s development. Captured below in the tabular matrix is an overview of the 
relevant policies and legislations.  
Table 1.   Barbados’ Relevant Legislative Frameworks and Policy Documents related to the execution of the 
Renewstable Barbados project  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
Legislation Associated with Renewable Energy in Barbados  
Electric Light and Power Act, 
2013 and associated 
amendments and Fees 
Regulations  “An Act to revise the law relating to the supply and use of electricity, 
to promote the generation of electricity from sources of renewable 
energy, to enhance the security an d reliability of the supply of 
electricity and to provide for related matters.”  
·       Allows for the generation and supply of electricity by 
independent power producers.  
·       Establishes the requirement for licences to supply, distribute, 
store, trans mit, and dispatch electricity.  
·    Sets out licence application fees.  
·       Allows for the public utility to make interconnections for 
electricity supply.  
·       Allows for the Minister to set targets for the supply of 
electricity from sources of renewable energy.  
·       Sets out licensees' powers, obligation, and restrictions in 
respect of electricity supply (e.g., in relation to the carrying out of 
works, the placement of electrical lines, etc.).  
Page 81


---
*Page 86*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         11 / 43  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
Fair Trading Commission Act, 
Cap. 326B  “An Act to provide for the establishment of a Fair-Trading  Commission to 
safeguard the interests of consumers, to regulate utility services supplied 
by service providers, to monitor and investigate the conduct of service 
providers and business enterprises,  to promote and maintain effective 
competition in the economy, and for related matters.”  
·    Establishes a Fair-Trading  Commission to enforce 
the Utilities Regulation Act.  
·    Allows for the Commission to set maximum rates and 
determine standards of serv ice for providers of utility services, 
including the supply and distribution of electricity.  
·    Empowers the Commission to investigate suspected 
breaches of the Utilities Regulation Act and take appropriate 
enforcement action.  
Utilities Regulation Act, Cap. 282  “An Act to provide for the regulation of utility services.”  
·    Sets out requirements and principles for setting utility rates.  
·    Establishes a duty to provide adequate utility service.  
·    Allows for joint use of equipment by more than one service 
provider.  
Electricity Act, Cap. 277  “An Act to provide for the inspection and control of electrical works and 
for other purposes in connection therewith.”  
·       Establishes requirements for inspection of electrical 
installations prior to the supply of electricity, and for inspection of 
alterations and extensions to installations.  
·       Establishes requirements for reporting of accidents 
involving electrical works and circuits.  
Legislation Governing Phys ical Development in Barbados  
Town and Country Planning Act, 
Cap. 240  “An Act to make provision for  
(a)  the orderly and progressive development of land;  
(b)  the grant of permission to develop land;  
(c)  powers to regulate land use and development; and  
Page 82


---
*Page 87*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         12 / 43  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
(d)  related matters"  
·       Regulates physical development, defined as “the carrying 
out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, 
over or under any land, the making of any material change in 
use of any buildings or other land or the subdivision of land”.  
·    Establishes requirements for environmental impact 
assessments.  
·    Superseded by the Planning and Development Act, 2019 . 
Planning and Development Act, 
2019 and associated 
amendments and regulation s “An Act to make provision for  
(a)  the orderly and progressive development of land;  
(b)  the grant of permission to develop land;  
(c)  powers to regulate land use and development; and  
(d)  related matters"  
·       Regulates physical development, defined as “the carrying 
out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, 
over or under any land; the making of any material change in 
use of any building or land; or the subdivision of land”.  
·    Establishes requirements for environmental impact 
assessments.  
·       Establishes a new Planning and Development Board and a 
new Planning and Development Department.  
Safety and Health and Work Act, 
2005  
Cap. 356  “An Act to make provision  
(a)   for securing the health, safety and welfare of persons at work;  
(b)   for protecting other persons against risks to health and 
safety in connection with the activities of persons at work;  
(c)   for controlling certain emissions into the environment;  
(d)   to consolidate the law relating to health, safety and  
(e)  for related matters.”  
·       Sets out general duties of occupiers and employers as 
well as duties and requirements in relation to safety, health, 
employee welfare, medical examinations.  
Page 83


---
*Page 88*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         13 / 43  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
·       Includes specific provisi ons for building operations and 
works of engineering construction; storage, handling and use of 
hazardous substances and articles in the workplace; processes 
involving special risks to safety and health of employees; use and 
management of pressure vessels.  
Health Services Act, 1969, 
Cap. 44 and associated 
amendments and regulations  “An Act relating to the promotion and preservation of the health of the 
inhabitants of Barbados.”  
·       Includes provisions for the abatement of nuisances and the 
removal or correction of conditions injurious to public health.  
·       Authorises the Minister to compel works in the interest of 
public health.  
·       The associated Health Services (Nuisance) Regulations allow 
for the control of nuisance, including any “matter, thing, deposit, 
or accumulation of liquid or solid matter” deemed unsanitary, 
injurious, or dangerous to health, or likely to become so; 
unpermitted discharge of industrial waste or other noxious matter; 
conditions that promote the p roliferation of public health disease 
vectors.  
·       The associated Health Services (Building) Regulations regulate 
the construction, extension, or alteration of buildings, with 
specific reference to drainage, sanitation, and ventilation.  
Emergency Mana gement Act, 2006  “An Act to provide for the effective organization and management of 
disasters and other emergencies in Barbados.”  
·       Authorises disaster hazard inspections in the event that the 
“condition of any premises is reasonably suspected of posing a 
danger of serious injury to persons outside of the premises in 
the event of an emergency or an impact of a hazard.”  
Trees (Preservation) Act, 1981, 
Cap. 397  “An Act to provide for the preservation of trees.”  
·    Restricts the remova l of trees over a certain size.  
·       Authorises the Chief Town Planner to require planting, re -
planting, maintenance, and protection of trees to preserve and 
enhance the amenity of “any land abutting upon, adjoining or near 
a public road”.  
Marine Pollution Control Act, 
1998, Cap. 392A  “An Act to prevent, reduce and control pollution of the marine 
environment of Barbados from whatever source. “  
Page 84


---
*Page 89*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         14 / 43  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
·       Prohibits release of any pollutant into the environment if 
such releases violate standards, condit ions or requirements 
specified under the Act or associated regulations.  
·       Scope includes land -based sources of marine pollution.  
Policies Associated with Renewable Energy in Barbados  
National Strategic Plan of 
Barbados 2006 –2025  The National Strategic Plan of Barbados 2006 –2025 was developed to 
enhance Barbadian society to become prosperous and globally 
competitive by 2025. One objective within the Plan was to ensure an 
efficient and reliable energy sector. The objective included prog rams to 
expand the supply of renewable energy. Specific targets included 
meeting 30% of energy requirements from renewable energy by 2025 
and substantially increasing the number of renewable energy businesses 
by 2025 (Government of Barbados 2007).  
National Sustainable 
Development Policy  The National Sustainable Development Policy attempted to encourage 
an integrated and holistic approach to sustainable development. In 
addition, the Policy emphasized that measures to support and promote 
the adoption of renewable energy, energy efficiency, and energy 
conservation would help Barbados to meet its obligations as a party to 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(Government of Barbados 2004).  
Sustainable Energy 
Framework for Barbados  The Sustainable Energy Framework is an ongoing technical assistance 
program with the Inter -American Development Bank, the objective of 
which is to promote renewable energy and energy efficiency to reduce 
fossil fuel dependency while enhancing ener gy security and 
environmental sustainability. The most recent instalment of the 
program includes a focus on further development and modernization of 
the electricity framework in Barbados to support adoption of 
renewable energy technologies (Government of B arbados 2019b).  
Page 85


---
*Page 90*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         15 / 43  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
Draft National Sustainable 
Energy Policy  Developed as a complementary policy to the Sustainable Energy 
Framework, the Draft National Sustainable Energy Policy addressed the 
high importation of fossil fuels. It sought to increase efficiency  and 
sustainability in the energy supply and demand. In addition, the Policy 
aimed to encourage economically viable utility -scale renewable energy, 
promote energy cost reduction technologies, reduce fossil fuel 
dependency, and decrease the impacts of globa l warming (Government 
of Barbados 2019c).  
Barbados National Energy 
Policy 2017 –2037  The Barbados National Energy Policy 2017 –2037 aimed to provide a 
direction for Barbados to transition from a fossil fuel -based economy to 
mainly renewable energy. The Policy sought to ensure affordable energy 
security, a sustainable energy sector, and increased renewable energy 
and energy efficiency (Government of Barbados 2019d).  
Barbados National Energy 
Policy 2019 –2030 (BNEP)  The BNEP outlines the transition to a 100% renewable energy and 
carbon -neutral island by 2030. The policy attempts to ensure the 
provision of reliable, sustainable climate -friendly energy with zero 
domestic fossil fuel consumption and expansion of research and 
development in re newable energy (Government of Barbados 
2019a).  
Renewable Energy Rider 
(RER) Program  The former RER Program allowed domestic customers to sell energy 
back to the electrical grid at 1.6 times the level of the Fuel Clause 
Adjustment. In 2016, the RER credit rate began to be calculated using a 
resource cost approach, rather than being tied to the Fuel Clause 
Adjustment (Howard 2019). In 2019, the RER was replaced by a feed -in 
tariff, and RER agreements were grandfathered for a period of 20 years 
(FTC 2019).  
Policies Associated with Physical Development in Barbados  
Page 86


---
*Page 91*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         16 / 43  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
National Groundwater 
Protection Zoning Policy, 1963 
(revised in 1973  
and 
2010) 
and 
Green Paper on the 2020 Water 
Protection and Land Use Zoning 
Policy   
The National Groundwater Protection Zoning Policy delineates the island 
into five zones. Public water supply wells are located in the most 
restricted Zone 1 areas (Stantec 2022).  
The Green Paper (i.e., a tentative government consultation document 
of policy pro posals for debate and discussion, which was produced by 
the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, the Government of 
Barbados, and the Barbados Water Authority [BWA]) proposes that the 
groundwater protection zones introduced in the National Groundwater 
Protection Zoning Policy be re -configured for the following purposes 
(Stantec 2022):  
·       To boost groundwater water quality protection due to the 
presence of more recalcitrant persistent pollutants.  
To release more lands in the current Zone 1 protection areas for 
development.  
More specifically, the Green Paper states the following (Stantec 2022):  
·       The existing National Groundwater Protection Zoning Policy is 
over 50 years old and does not protect against persistent 
chemical pollutants.  
·       The existing Zones 1 to 5 are proposed to be replaced with 
Zones A to E, with Zone A termed a strict exclusion zone smaller 
than the existing Zone 1.  
·       Only agriculture Class Two will be permitted within Zone A; 
this type of agriculture includes “horticu lture, fruit growing, seed 
growing, use of lands for farmers markets, bursary grounds, 
woodland or forestry”.  
·       Solar PV farms and wind farms – deemed to have low 
environmental impact – may also be allowed in Zone A areas 
under specific permitting conditions.  
·       As described in Appendix B, the Project is currently located 
within a Zone 3 groundwater protection zone as per the existing 
Policy. If the Policy is revised as proposed in the Green Paper, the 
Project will be located within a Zone D groundwater protection 
zone.  
Physical Development Plan (PDP) 
and associated 2003 amendment 
and draft 2017 amendment  The purpose of the PDP is to promote sustainable growth and 
development within Barbados by setting out policies and regulations 
to guide proponents of proposed developments, including 
Page 87


---
*Page 92*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         17 / 43  
Legislation or Policy  Description  
requirements related to the conduct of an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) or ESIA.  
Note:  
1 The information regarding policies associated with renewable energy in Barbados was adapted from 
Evelyn (2020). Other sources are cited throughout the table where applicable.  
 Source : The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the Renewstable Barbados Hybrid Solar Power 
Plant with Hydrogen Storage.  
 
Equally important to the identification of the relevant legislative and policy frameworks within the scope of the 
project’s development, is an understanding of how gender intersects or has been integrated into several of these 
core policies and legislative  frameworks.  This type of  analysis is critical to contextualising whether gender and 
women ’s rights have been effectively considered and prioritised within the scope of the renewable energy and 
climate change policy frameworks. Such an understanding is cr itical in appreciating the underlying gender 
inequalities, discrimination and exclusion that may impact women and other vulnerable groups in their access to 
energy resources and services.  
10.1 Gender integration in Barbados National Energy Policy 2019 -2030  
The Barbados National Energy Policy was approved in November 2019 and aims to achieve 100% renewable 
energy and carbon neutral transformational goals by 2030, positioning Barbados as the first island -state in the 
world to do so. Specific goals include the pro vision of reliable, safe, affordable, sustainable, modern and climate 
friendly energy services to all, zero domestic consumption of fossil fuels economy wide and to export all 
hydrocarbons produced both on land and offshore.  
Even though the policy includes  a specific goal to maximise local participation in distributed renewable energy (RE) 
generation and storage (democratization of energy), no reference is made to the interlinkages of women/gender 
and energy and the potential to use energy access to unleash  women's economic empowerment, for example by 
creating opportunities for women in energy value chains.  
Furthermore, the policy includes 10 visionary goals for Barbados that reflect the general direction that 
stakeholders wish ed the sector to go and what t hey wanted to see the sector achieve.  Even though not specifically 
mentioning women, Goal 10 calls for the creation of opportunities for all Barbadians including the most vulnerable 
to the impact of climate change to participate in and benefit from the tr ansformation to 100% Renewable Energy.  
Page 88


---
*Page 93*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         18 / 43  
10.2 Gender integration in T he International Framework and Barbados  National Climate Change Policy   
From a global perspective, the links between gender equality and climate change mitigation efforts are clearly 
articulate d. The Sustainable Development Goals framework (SDGs) and the connections among goal 5 on gender 
equality, goal 7 on clean affordable energy, and goal 12 on climate action speak directly to this. However, gender 
considerations are often not clearly reflect ed in national policy frameworks. An analysis of 192 national energy 
frameworks from 137 countries showed that only a third of the frameworks include gender considerations to some 
extent17 This is also the case for the Barbados National Climate Change Poli cy of 2012. Even though the policy aims 
at establishing a national process for adaptation to climate change, reduce the country's greenhouse gases 
emissions and design appropriate mechanisms to respond to climate change , no considerations for gender 
integr ation in such processes has been made.  
10.3 Gender integration in Barbados ’ updated NDC  
Barbados' updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) was communicated to the UNFCCC on 30 July 2021. 
The latter is a non -binding national plan highlighting climate ac tions, including climate -related targets, policies and 
measures, that governments aim to implement in response to climate change and as a contribution to achieve the 
global targets set out in the Paris Agreement.  
Barbados ’ updated NDC recognizes that clim ate change disproportionately impacts women, youth and lower 
income communities. Furthermore, the NDC highlights that three quarters of vulnerable families are female 
headed households, which is why the Government of Barbados, in addition to social assista nce, places strong 
emphasis on facilitating and supporting women's entrepreneurship and business development as one way of 
responding to rising levels of unemployment, retrenchment and to assist with the economy´s recovery. Incentives 
for micro and small b usinesses such as grants, loans and technical assistance for women are explicitly mentioned 
in the updated NDC.  
With regards to the interlinkages of gender and energy, the updated NDC highlights the importance of addressing 
structural inequities faced by w omen, young people and those socially and economically disadvantaged in the 
renewable energy sector.  The NDC also makes reference to the Roofs to R eefs Programme (R2RP),  that aims to 
improve the standard of living and quality of life of the most vulnerabl e segments of the population of Barbados. 
Under R2RP, protocols and standards for rooftop solar PV installation will be developed and include recommended 
options for energy storage technology. The NDC further highlights that the government will assess the social and 
gender impacts, and changes in vulnerability related to the project.  
 
17 Prebbles and Rojas, 2017 . 
Page 89


---
*Page 94*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         19 / 43  
11  Gender Gaps in the  Energy &  Renewable Energy Sector in 
Barbados  
11.1 Women’s  workforce  participation in the  energy  sector  
The renewable energy sector much like the energy sector is a male dominated field. The International  Renewable 
Energy Agency  (IRENA)  corroborated this point in its 2019 report titled, Renewable Energy: A Gender Perspective,   
by stating that, “the energy sec tor both in terms of its conventional fossil fuel and renewable energy sectors 
remain predominately male dominated field s with women been significantly underrepresented. ”18 A look into 
Barbados’ energy sector workforce participation profile , for the data s ets collected  by the Caribbean Centre for 
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency , clearly highlight s that similar to the international context, the Barbados 
energy sector is male dominated.  Kindly see table below:  
 
Table 2.   Barbados’ Workforce Profile of the Energy Sector  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source : CCREEE. Barbados Energy Report Card 2019.  
With statistics showing a total of 104 males in comparison to a total of 56 females being employed within the 
energy sector , excluding  those persons employed with the Barbados Light and Power Company (BL&PC) based on 
the data collected . Men’s participation in the energy sector dominates that of women in every category with the 
exception of the administrative levels.  The impact of which i s the lower participation of women in  the sector 
generally and in  technical areas  more specifically. For example, in the  engineering and other STEM related fields . 
The data captured  highlights women’s marginalization in the energy sector  to specific job ro les which  in turn  limits 
 
18 International Renewable Energy Agency.  Renewable Energy: A Gender Perspective. 2019.  https://www.irena.org/ -
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Gender_perspective_2019.pdf  
 
Page 90


---
*Page 95*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         20 / 43  
their participation and access to senior level and managerial positions  within the sector . The knock -on effect is 
that women are paid less as a result of being in lower paying positions. In addressing this constraint educational 
and internship programs which place a focus on women and provide access into the sector via non -traditional job 
roles are critical in helping to make an effect ive change.  The RSB project may consider as one of its 
recommendations and seek to incorporate unde r its Gender Action Plan , an internshi p and/or apprenticeship 
program which provides opportunities for women specifically , and men also , to gain entry into the sector via 
technical job roles.  
11.2 Women’s participation in the energy sector educational programs  
Moreover, women ’s lack of participation in energy related training and educational programmes also served to 
exacerbate the gender gaps seen in the  Barbados’  energy sector.  In reviewing the profile of educational  offerings 
available via the country’s techn ical and vocational institutions, which often acts as the first point of entry for 
access into the energy sector in Barbados. The data collect ed highlights men continued and higher levels of 
representation across all tertiary and vocational level education al programmes. A look into the profile of courses 
offered and the participation of women  vs men illustrates once more that men significantly dominate women in 
the area of energy sector training and  educational  development. Kindly see table below:  
 
Table 3.    Tertiary Level Educational Training Programmes on Offer in Barbados in Sustainable Energy  
 
Source : CCREEE. Barbados Energy Report Card 2019.  
This data helps to highlight why women’s participation in the sector is significantly lower than that of men. A dded 
to this, the underlying assumptions and perceptions around women’s participation in certain career fields , further  
help to  drive these misconceptions and gender biases.  The International Renewable Energy Agency  (IRENA) , notes 
Page 91


---
*Page 96*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         21 / 43  
that these assumptions are often driven by gender biases and mis -perceptions , around “occupations in 
engineering and technology being seen by women as less socially useful and acceptable when compared to other 
disciplines such as the medical and biological sciences. ”19 These  assumptions help to  inform the selection of certain 
subjects and programmes by women which ultimately determine their final career path . Greater levels of 
education and sensitization is therefore required is helping to address these misconceptions . Partnership s with 
the Mini stry of Education and the educational institutions offering such programmes working  alongside the 
Ministry of Energy  is critical in bringing about such change. RSB can leverage the execution of the Renewstable 
Barbados project to stimulate discussions and conversations around these issues  and where possible establish 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with these entities to effect change . 
11.3 Women’s participation in decision making positions and roles in the energy sector  
Consequently, women’s participation or lack thereof within the decision -making levels of the energy sector serve 
to further erode a focus on women and women’s issues within the context of the energy industry and the 
renewable energy sector more specifically. Even though women, currently over re present men in a ratio of 2:1, 
in-terms of the current positions held by the top three (3) critical stakeholders within the renewable energy sector. 
This includes namely: the Minister with responsibility for Energy, the Chief Executive Officer of the Fair -Trading 
Commission and the Managing Director of the Barbados Light and Power Company. A further analysis into the 
composition of the Boards governing these entities, as well as the privately owned and managed renewable energy 
firms and businesses in operat ion currently within Barbados, highlights a predominance of male ownership, 
management and financing.   
Women’s limited participation in positions of power translates into an absence and/or very limited focus on 
women specific issues and challenges within the energy and renewable energy sector. Where women’s issues are 
not identified and cannot be appropriately articulated they are unable to be addressed as reflected in the current 
Barbados National Energy Policy 2019 -2030. Within the policy context this ha s significant negative implications, 
as women ultimately become marginalize and this marginalization reinforces the proliferation of gender barriers 
and inequalities seen across the energy sector.  In addressing these concerns,  the RSB project has undertake n this 
gender assessment to better devise ways into how gender can be appropriately integrated within the scope of this 
project, which will hopefully serve as a platform for the  upscaling of long -term gender mainstreaming actions in 
the energy sector  and t he renewable energy sector more specifically  by Government.  
 
19 International Renewable Energy Agency.  Renewable Energy: A Gender Perspective. 2019.  https://www.irena.org/ -
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/P ublication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Gender_perspective_2019.pdf  
 
 
Page 92


---
*Page 97*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         22 / 43  
12 Stakeholder Mapping & Analysis  of the Renewstable Barbados 
Project  
In undertaking the stakeholder mapping of the RSB project, a Social Impact Assessment Baseline Study was 
completed as part of the  project’s ESIA. The baseline assessment was one of the tools used to identify the project 
stakeholders; and specifically,  the stakeholders immediately impacted by the project in terms of their proximity 
to the project site.  The Baseline Assessment utilised a 1  km radius in the development of a sample size as a 
baseline, to support the collection of data from the neighbourin g community residents as one of the main 
stakeholder groups.  
Captured below is a photo of the project site and a 1km radius surrounding  the Harrow Plantation. This radius was 
used as a sample size  in the stakeholder mapping and analysis of the neighbourin g community residents as part of 
the stakeholder analysis.  
 
 
Figure 1.   Study area  
 
In-addition to the residents in nearby communities, other key stakeholder groups were also identified. Using the 
following support tools develope d under the ESIA which included namely:  
▪ Social Impact Assessment Base line Study  
▪ Environmental and Social Management Plan and  
▪ Stakeholder Engagement Plan  
Page 93


---
*Page 98*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         23 / 43  
These outputs were all used to inform the stakeholder mapping and analysis  captured within this secti on of the 
report. Outlined within the project’s Environmental and Social Management Plan, is a Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan (SEP) which identifies and defines the project’s stakeholders.  
The RSB project defines stakeholders as; persons, groups, or institutions with an interest in the Project or the 
ability to influence the project outcomes, either positively or negatively. Stakeholders are diverse and may be 
affected by the Project either dire ctly or indirectly.  Captured below is the preliminary stakeholder list which  
shows each stakeholder’s relevance to the project and the extent to which gender is a concerning issue.  
 
Table 4.  Preliminary Stakeholder List  
Stakeholders  Relationship to the Project  Gender Analysis  
RSB Overall Project Management  Both females and males in this 
group benefit from the Project. 
The current information does not 
suggest a gender bias.  
Engineering Consultants  Quality control for the 
construction  Both females and males in this 
group benefit from this Project. 
The current information does not 
suggest a gender bias.  
Contractors and construction 
companies  Responsible for the Project’s 
construction  The predominance of male 
workers in the construction 
industry means that more males 
than females are likely to benefit 
from employment opportunities in 
this Project.  
Residents in nearby communities  Could potentially be adversely 
impacted by the nose, dust and 
vibration from the construction  Both females and males will be 
affected by the construction. Of 
specific concern are the retired 
residents who may be at home 
during the construction activities.  
Town and Country Development 
Planning Office and Prime 
Minister’s Office Planning Unit  Regulator y agencies responsible 
for ensuring the development is 
consistent with the Physical 
Development Plan and other 
national Plans and Laws.  Not applicable  
Page 94


---
*Page 99*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         24 / 43  
Stakeholders  Relationship to the Project  Gender Analysis  
Division of Energy  Regulatory agencies responsible 
for monitoring and regulating the 
energy sector, rene wable energy 
and energy conservation.  Not applicable  
Environmental Protection 
Department  Regulatory agencies responsible 
for ensuring compliance with 
national or international standards 
for air quality, noise, etc.  Not applicable  
Labour Department  Regulatory agency responsible for 
ensuring decent work standards 
on the island.  Not applicable  
Unions  Regulatory for protecting workers ’ 
rights on the island.  Not applicable  
Media  A likely option for residents who 
are affected to share their 
complaints will publicly report the 
resident’s complaints. Can provide 
a channel for sharing information 
about the Project with the public.  Not applicable  
 
 
Source : Environmental and  Social Impact Assessment for the Renewstable Barbados Hybrid Solar Power Plan 
with Hydrogen Storage  
In-addition to the residents in neighbouring communities, the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) identified nine 
(9) other stakeholder  groups and in total t en (10) which related directly to the RSB project; and mapped the 
relationship of each stakeholder group specific to their role in the project. In providing a cursory analysis, four (4) 
of the stakeholder groups were noted as having gender -related impacts.  That is, gender was identified as having 
a potential positive or negative impact on the project.  
Firstly, the RSB project team was identified as one of the project’s stakeholder groups. While the cursory gender 
analysis provided highlights that there is n o suggested gender bias and both women  and men  are likely to benefit 
as well as be positively impacted by the project, the result of which may be due to the current and positive gender 
balance in the team composition of the Renewstable Barbados project.  Given, that both the Project Manager for 
Development and the Environmental, Social and Governance & Communications Lead are both females. It is 
important to note, that the absence of women in large -scale energy infrastructure related projects, specifically i n 
Page 95


---
*Page 100*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         25 / 43  
senior level positions during the project’s planning and design phases can contribute to the development of energy 
projects that do not consider the specific needs and circumstances of women, girls and other diverse groups20. 
Research shows that this in turn can lead to negative impacts and missed opportunities for individuals and 
communities whose lives the infrastructure seeks to improve.21 
Furthermore, engineering consultants were also identified as another critical stakeholder group. While the initial  
gender analysis, captured within the Stakeholder Engagement Plan notes that there is no  suggested gender bias 
and women and men are likely to both benefit positively, the systemic gendered differences in the educational 
trajectory of women, highlights th e persistent gender gaps in women’s education, specific to their participation in 
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) related subjects.22 Although STEM fields are widely 
regarded as critical to national economies only 35% of all student s in STEM related fields of study are women. 23 
This in turn  impacts the ability of women to access jobs in STEM related fields as they lack the necessary training 
and skills required to perform these job roles. Consideration of these gender barriers and b iases should be 
considered in the implementation of the RSB project and opportunities should be created to increase women’s  
participation in the engineering and engineering -related fields. This can be achieved either  through the creation 
of training opport unities for women in STEM subjects, or via the development of internship  or apprenticeship 
programmes which specifically allocate a  percentage of the participation to women.  
Contractors and construction companies were also recognized as a key stakeholder group. The analysis  provided 
demonstrates that the predominance of male workers in construction will result in greater employment 
opportunities for more men than women. Addressing this issue, will require a balance of innovation and 
practicality in providi ng the project with the relevant and available skills sets on island to support the successful 
completion of the project’s outcomes while addressing the gender constraints. Inclusion of companies with 
progressive recruiting, training and human resource pol icies24  which supports women’s inclusion may be a useful 
tool here.  RSB, in  the project’s execution, should  seek to adopt such gender responsive policies within the 
contracting and procurement frameworks utilized in the recruitment and selection of the co ntractors responsible 
for undertaking the project's construction and civil works.  However, it should be noted that limitations in the  size 
of local market  as well as  availability of suitable and qualified female workers may impact the effective recruitment  
and mobilisation  of gender inclusive companies . 
The research also shows that an additional factor that may discourage women’s employment in the energy sector 
is a g ender -insensitive work environment.25 Construction sites are often cited as high -risk environment s for 
gender -based violence affecting workers and service use rs and discourage women’s involvement, as these sites 
are often spaces for sexual abuse and exploi tation as well as sexual and gender -based violence. These specific 
gender constraints hamper women’s participation and employment in the construction sector. In addressing these 
constraints,  the opportunity exists within the scope of the implementation of the RSB project to integrate training 
 
20 UN Women. Guidance Note Gender Analysis in Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure . New York: December 2022, 6.  
21 UN Women. Guidance Note Gender Analysis in Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure . New York: December 2022, 6.  
22 UNESCO. Institute of Statistics, Science Report, 2023  
23 Ibid  
24 UN Women. Guidance Note Gender Analysis in Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure . New York: December 2022, 7.  
25 UN Women.  Guidance Note Gender Analysis in Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure . New York: December 2022, 7.  
Page 96


---
*Page 101*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         26 / 43  
in the Gender Action Plan, in the areas of Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) and Sexual and 
Gender -based Violence (SGBV) as core a mandatory training which must be undertaken by all contractors and 
constr uction workers on the project.  
As indicated previously, the neighbouring community residents were also noted among the project’s core 
stakeholder groups. From the sample of the 155 households that participated in the Social Impact Baseline Study 
and the co rresponding surveys, the results show that, 70.3% were female headed households, while 10.3% and 
19.4% were male and jointly managed households respectively  (Please refer to Annex Table 6 ).26 The 
predominance of female head -households within the baseline assessment is reflective of the national trend in 
Barbados where female -headed households are predominant. This further demonstrates that women are most 
likely to be negatively impacted by the proj ect outcomes; and given their added economic as well  as care 
responsibilities, as heads of households these impacts are likely to have a multiplier effect. Research has shown 
that large -scale energy infrastructure projects are mostly likely to negatively i mpact women. Community and/or 
benefit sharing programmes, if designed to consider gender, can help to offset some of the likely negative project 
impacts and advance gender equality in the community.27 The RSB project team will therefore design a Community 
and Social Engagement  Benefits Sharing  Plan, which will outline the specific community activities as well as the 
proposed benefit -sharing among the neighbouring residents and the other stakeholder groups identified. Inclusive 
with in such a plan will be opportunities for knowledge building, training and skills development, infrastructure 
development via road repairs and the creation of new employment opportunities.  
13 Social & Gender Baseline Assessment of the Renewstable 
Barbados Projec t 
The main objective of the Renewstable Barbados project is to enhance sustainable energy generation in Barbados, 
by providing a clean, renewable baseload solution that addresses the intermittency issues of solar and wind to 
enhance energy resilience in th e country. The energy generated by the project represents  substitution  in the 
demand of approximately  18,680  residential customers, providing them all with clean, resilient and stable 
electricity. In doing so, the project is anticipated to have specific so cial as well as gender related impacts. Outlined 
below are the specific social and gender related impacts across the varying project phases.  
13.1 The Social  & Gender Impact Assessment of RSB - Project Construction Phase  
i) Social and gender impacts related to employment  
The proposed project can facilitate employment as well as economic opportunities and benefits for local 
businesses. It is estimated that there co uld be a maximum of 150 construction jobs over two years. There could 
 
26 Stantec . Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the Renewstable Barbados Hybrid Solar Power Plant with 
Hydrogen Storage . May 2022.  
27 UN Women. Guidance Note Gender Analysis in Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure . New York: December 2022.  
Page 97


---
*Page 102*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         27 / 43  
also be opportunities for capacity -building and skills development for local workers, particularly youth, since 
training will be offered. In addition, collaboration and working relations hips with foreign companies involved in 
the Project’s construction could increase the technological capacity of local businesses. These are all benefits that 
should accrue during the construction phase and require no mitigation measures.  
However, the influ x of many temporary workers during the construction phase could affect social networks and 
dynamics in nearby communities and could result in negative  interactions with residents. Moreover, care must be 
taken to establish fair employment and decent work co nditions to prevent perceptions of unequal employment 
benefits and conditions between local workers and equivalent foreign personnel.  These potential adverse effects 
can be readily mitigated and made compliant with local labour laws and regulations. To enh ance the employment 
benefits of the Project, the hiring process will be transparent and allow eligible locals to apply for and have a fair 
chance of acquiring work at the Project. In addition, consideration will be given to employment opportunities 
being a vailable to some of the unemployed residents of neighbouring areas. Further mitigation, including gender 
sensitization training for workers, is detailed later.  
The Project could support local businesses that provide supplies for the construction and renew able energy 
sectors. The construction phase is typically a boost to local entrepreneurs operating small retail businesses near 
the Project, especially food and beverage, because the construction workers will provide additional customers. 
This can have a po sitive impact on the local food and beverage businesses, many of which are led by women.  In 
addition, accommodation and rental car companies could also gain business from foreign personnel working on 
the Project. The construction phase could therefore boo st the economy and have a positive effect on local 
livelihoods.  
The provision of employment is a particularly positive impact given that  the Baseline Assessment noted that  30.1% 
of the  other persons living with in the sampled househol ds were reported as unemployed  (Please refer to Annex 
Figure 2 ). Moreover, the economic opportunities would be a considerable benefit in the current  economic context, 
where the prolonged Covid -19 pandemic has resulted in a decline in tourism arrivals, the closure of many 
businesses and the loss of several jobs. The benefits require no mitigation measures. To enhance the employment 
benefits of the Proj ect, the hiring process will be transparent and designed so that eligible locals can apply for and 
have a fair chance of acquiring work at the Project. In addition, consideration will be given to employment 
opportunities being available to some of the unem ployed residents of neighbouring areas including women.  
The project document indicates that approximately twenty (20) full -time -equivalent local jobs , direct and indirect, 
may be created to support project operation, maintenance, and security requirements and that the hiring process 
will allow eligible locals to apply for and have a fair chance of acquiring work at the project including some of the 
unemployed residents of neighbouring areas.  However, it is not specified whether women  and men will  benefit 
from these opportunities. Recent research suggests that some individuals may gain new jobs in green sectors, but 
others may not be well -positioned to avail themselves of these opportunities. In the renewable energy sector, for 
example, women may not automati cally be part of new high -tech value chains unless deliberate policy incentives 
and capacity support measures targeting women are provided.28 It is therefore suggested to conduct a mapping 
 
28 UNDP Just Transition Brief, 2022  
Page 98


---
*Page 103*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         28 / 43  
of entry points for potential employment to foster the inclusion of  local women in the project's operations  and 
where possible support the development of internship or apprenticeship programs as avenues for entry into the 
sector.  
 
ii) Social and gender impacts related to noise, dust and vibration  
The noise, dust, and vibratio n during the construction of the Project may have adverse effects on the physical and 
psychological well -being of people in surrounding communities, especially individuals with a sensitivity to dust and 
noise. In this regard, 2 7.7% of the residents in the sample households were retired and would likely be at home 
during the construction activities. In addition, the peaceful and quiet nature of the communities is the primary 
feature valued by 64.5% of the respondents , most of which are women  (Please refer to  Annex Table 7) for more 
details) . The potential impacts from the construction vehicles and equipment are an added  concern. There is 
potential for further damage to the roads, already rated as “poor” by 51% of the respondents. In addition, the 
absence of adequate sidewalks or bicycle paths place these users , many of which are women at increased risk. 
Especially  if, construction drivers do not drive with due care and within the required speed limit. Road restoration 
and the implementation of traffic management measures  and road restoration projects will be essential in helping 
to address the se potential  adverse effects and protect health and safety.    
 
iii) Gender related impacts  
During the construction of the project, there can be various environmental and social impacts that may affect 
women and men differently. It is important to recognize that gender roles, norms, and pow er dynamics can 
influence how individuals experience and respond to these impacts. Construction projects can bring significant 
changes to the social fabric of communities. Within the baseline study conducted , 70.3% of the  155 households 
are headed by women . Women play essential roles in the community, like caretaking and maintaining social 
cohesion. Noise, dust, and vibration can disrupt these activities and affect the overall well -being of women and 
children. Additionally, gender norms might restrict women 's mobility or participation in decision -making processes 
related to the construction, limiting their ability to voice concerns and preferences as well as the possible 
restrictions on mobility in terms  of travel/transport to and from their homes.  
In addit ion, the psychosocial effects of construction noise, dust, and vibration can differ between genders. Women 
may experience stress and anxiety due to concerns about their family's well -being, health, and safety. For men, 
the pressure to provide for their fam ilies and endure harsh working conditions may result in mental health 
challenges.  
With regards to health and safety women and men may have different levels of exposure to noise, dust, and 
vibration depending on their roles and activities during constructio n. For example, if men are more likely to be 
involved in activities near the construction site, they may experience higher exposure levels. This could lead to 
different health outcomes, with men potentially facing greater risks to their health due to prolo nged exposure.  
Page 99


---
*Page 104*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         29 / 43  
 
 
 
 
Table 5.  Potential benefits and adverse effects that could occur during the construction phase.  
Potential Impacts  Phase  Nature  Gendered 
Impact  Geographic 
Extent   
Duration  Significant  Likelihood  
Construction -related jobs  Construction  Positive  Yes Site specific  Short -
term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Capacity -building and 
skills development for 
local workers  Construction  Positive  Yes Site specific  Long -
term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Increased technological 
capacity of local businesses  Construction  Positive  No Site specific  Long -
term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Support for local suppliers in 
the construction and 
renewable energy sectors  Construction  Positive  Yes Local  Short -
term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Increased retail business, 
primarily food -related from 
construction workers  Construction  Positive  Yes Local  Short -
term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Business for 
accommodation 
and car rental 
companies  Construction  Positive  No Island wide  Short -
term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Noise and vibrations from 
construction vehicles and 
equipment  Construction  Negative  Yes Local  Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Likely  
Page 100


---
*Page 105*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         30 / 43  
Potential Impacts  Phase  Nature  Gendered 
Impact  Geographic 
Extent   
Duration  Significant  Likelihood  
Impaired air quality from 
dust and other emissions 
from construction vehicles 
and equipment  Construction  Negative  Yes Local  Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Likely  
Reduced visual amenity due 
to construction activity  Construction  Negative  Yes Local  Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Likely  
Damage to roads from 
construction vehicles 
and equipment  Construction  Negative  Yes Local  Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Likely  
Health and safety risks to 
on-site workers  Construction  Negative  Yes Site Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Unlikely  
Health and safety risks to 
adjacent communities 
and general public  Construction  Negative  Yes Local  Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Unlikely  
Influx of temporary workers 
affect social dynamics  Construction  Negative  Yes Local  Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Unlikely  
Perceptions of inequitable 
labour conditions  Construction  Negative  Yes Site Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Unlikely  
Delays to construction if any 
archaeological and cultural 
heritage features are found 
within the PDA  Construction  Negative  No Site Short -
term  Can be 
mitigated  Uncertain  
Accidental spill or leak  Constructi
on and 
operation
al phase  Negative  Yes Local  Long -term 
or 
irreversible  Can be 
mitigated 
but could 
be 
significant if 
it occurs  Unlikely  
Source : Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the Renewstable Barbados Hybrid Solar Power Plan 
with Hydrogen Storage  
Page 101


---
*Page 106*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         31 / 43  
 
 
 
13.2 The Social & Gender Impact Assessment of RSB  – Project  Operational Phase  
i) Social and gender impacts related to employment  
The energy facility will provide an estimated twenty (20) permane nt jobs when fully operational, and the sheep 
facility is expected to employ ten  (10) people. Employment opportunities  in these areas are expected to be created 
for persons within  the community. These benefits require no mitigation. However, the hiring pro cess will be 
transparent and allow eligible persons  to apply for and have a fair chance of acquiring work at the Project. In 
addition, consideration will be given to employment opportunities being available to some of the unemployed 
residents of neighbouring areas and in particular women who are often left  behind in the execution of large energy 
sector  projects  and in agriculture  sector .  
As indicated previously , the  sheep facility is expected to employ  up to  ten ( 10) persons  directly , thereby potentially 
providing employment opportunities to the community.  The sheep facility can create employment opportunities 
in various ways for women  as well as men,  by promoting gender equality and empowerment within the workforce. 
The planned sheep facility can offer a range of positions that cater to different skill set s for women. Jobs could 
include sheepherders, farm managers, veterinary assistants, administrative roles, marketing, and sales positions.  
In addition, training and skill development programs to empower women with the necessary knowledge and 
expertise to e xcel in various roles within the sheep facility could be provided. This can include training in animal 
husbandry, farm management, veterinary care, sustainable agriculture practices, and business management. In 
addition, mentorship programs or leadership i nitiatives aimed at supporting and encouraging women to pursue 
leadership roles within the sheep facility could be facilitated.  
Table 6.   Potential benefits and adverse effects that could occur during the operational phase.  
Potential Impacts   
Phase  Nature  Gendered 
Impact  Geographic 
Extent  Duration  Significant  Likelihood  
The generation 
of clean, 
renewable 
energy  Operation  
Positive  No Island -wide  Long -term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Employment at the 
energy facility  Operation  Positive  Yes Local/parish  Long -term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Page 102


---
*Page 107*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         32 / 43  
Potential Impacts   
Phase  Nature  Gendered 
Impact  Geographic 
Extent  Duration  Significant  Likelihood  
Employment at the 
sheep farm  Operation  
Positive  Yes Local/parish  Long -term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Improvement in 
national 
agricultural 
productive 
capacity  Operation  
Positive  No Island -wide  Long -term  No mitigation 
required  Likely  
Reduced visual 
amenity due to 
the presence of 
Project 
components and 
perceived 
negative aesthetic 
impacts  Operation  
Negative  No Local  Long -term  Can be mitigated  Uncertain  
Potential 
health and 
safety impacts 
on workers  Operation  Negative  Yes Site Long -term  Can be mitigated  Unlikely  
Potential health 
and safety 
impacts on 
adjacent 
communities  Operation  
Negative  Yes Local  Long -term  Can be mitigated  Unlikely  
Decreased 
water 
pressure due 
to Project -
related water 
usage  Operation  
Negative  Yes Local  Intermitte
nt Can be mitigated  Uncertain  
Odours from the 
sheep farm  Operation  Negative  Yes Local  Intermitte
nt Can be mitigated  Likely  
Page 103


---
*Page 108*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         33 / 43  
Potential Impacts   
Phase  Nature  Gendered 
Impact  Geographic 
Extent  Duration  Significant  Likelihood  
A change in 
property values  Operation  Unknown  Yes Local  Long -term  Cannot be 
determined 
based on 
available 
information  Uncertain  
Accidents (non -
routine) events 
from hazardous 
products  Operation  
Negative  No Site Long -term  Could be 
significant if 
they occur  Unlikely  
Source : Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the Renewstable Barbados Hybrid Solar Power Plan 
with Hydrogen Storage  
14 Challenges  / Constraints  
In completing the Gender Assessment for the RSB project a number of gender constraints and challenges were 
identified, as corroborated by the Soc ial Impact Assessment Baseline Study and the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. 
These specific gender related constraints  / challenges are captured below in bullet format for ease of reference:  
● Women’s lack of inclusion from the project inception (design phase) in the execution of large -scale 
renewable energy infrastructure projects  – Although the design of the RSB project benefitted from both 
the early inclusion and participation of women in senior technical -level positions within the project team 
and in the con duct of the Social Baseline Assessment as part of the ESIA , men’s over representation in the 
construction sectors can mean that during implementation the gender and social biases identified could 
be largely ignored and not appropriately considered in the p roject’s implementation.  
● Men’s over representation/ dominance in the energy and construction sectors  – The energy and 
construction industries, and similarly the renewable energy sectors, are male dominated fields. On energy 
infrastructure projects where mo st of the employment opportunities are generated from the construction 
sector, men are most likely to be the main beneficiaries as women are less likely to have the training in 
STEM related fields which provide the skill sets and training needed to perform  these job roles. Where 
women do possess the training and skill sets,  they  are still significantly under -represented in comparison 
to men and are most likely to be in junior or administrative positions and/or roles.  
● Project construction sites are gender -insensitive workspaces  – Construction sites, due to entrenched 
gender norms and stereotypes, are traditionally gender -insensitive workspaces. The prevalence of sexual 
harassment, gender -based violence and gender discrimination are known to widely exist. In curbing these 
issues,  it is important that the appropriate procedures and protocols are put in place and the appropriate 
Page 104


---
*Page 109*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         34 / 43  
training provided to increase awareness around these issues and ensure that preventive measures are 
enacted.  
● Women’s lack of participation/ involvement in dec ision making positions  – A number of factors hinders 
women’s participation in energy sector related infrastructure projects and their ability to also participate 
in decision making positions within such projects. It is therefore critical that actions which  include the 
adoption of inclusive gender responsive recruitment policies and practices, the scheduling of meetings at 
times convenient for women and in spaces women feel comfortable as well as the participation of 
women’s base groups for institutions be e ffectively considered in the project’s implementation.  
● Women are more adversely impacted by the project's impacts and are least likely beneficiaries of 
community and social engagement benefit programmes  – The Social Impact Baseline Assessment Study, 
showed  that women are most likely to be impacted by the RSB project. Research also shows that women 
are least likely to benefit from community  or social benefit programmes as their needs and concerns are 
often not prioritised or even considered.  The first step i n addressing this issue is in the collection of sex -
disaggregated  data  which will be used to inform the design and development of community and social 
benefit programmes for community residents.  
15 Recommendations  
In addressing the gender constraints/ challenges referenced above the following recommendations are being 
proposed. These recommendations will be integrated where feasible within the Gender Action Plan to ensure that 
appropriate  steps are taken to reduce t he gender vulnerabilities and biases uncovered while enhancing women’s 
participation and empowerment at all levels of the project.  
● Develop a Gender Action Plan  – To support the implementation of gender specific actions which address 
the gender constraints and challenges identified under the Gender Assessment. It is important that a 
project specific Gender Action Plan be developed which identifies specific activities, objectives , indicators  
and outcomes.  Principal among these, are actions which seek to supp ort the participation of women at 
all stages of the project implementation and support their inclusion in high -level decision -making positions 
such as gender responsive recruitment and hiring practices and the updating of the project’s Standard 
Operating P rocedures ( SOP) to reflect gender considerations.  
● Design and Implementation  in collaboration with relevant training institutions  of the RSB Young 
Professional Green Hydrogen Energy Sector Internship Programme  encouraging female participation in 
the sector via technical roles  – Recognizing that the energy sector is a male dominated field the RSB 
project team should  seek to increase the level of participation of women in the technical related areas of 
the field through the creation of a paid internship progra mme. The internship programme would target 
new entrants as well as recent graduates of any Diploma, Graduate or Postgraduate energy  and/or gender  
related programmes on offer by tertiary level institutions  in Barbados.  The programme would reserve a 
percentage of its enrolments  to women seeking to pursue a career in this field.  
Page 105


---
*Page 110*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         35 / 43  
● Develop Mandatory SEAH and SGBV Training Courses and Update Project SOPs to reflect Gender 
Sensitivity in Workspaces  – Construction sites are widely known as gender insensitive workspaces with a 
high occurrence and incidence of sexual harassment, exploitation, gender -based violence and gender 
discrimination. In addressing these  concerns,  the RSB project team should seek to  enlist the assistance of  
the University of West Indies Cave Hill Campus , namely  Institute for Gender and Development Studies 
(IGDS) Unit in developing  specific training courses and modules in SEAH and SGBV. Th ese courses should 
become a mandatory requirement for all RSB project staff and construction personnel hired under the 
Project.  Technical support could also be provided in the updating of the Project’s specific SOPs to include 
gender sensitivity with the project’s operational policies and procedures.   
● Development  and implementation  of a community -based Grievance/Complaints Mechanism (GRM) -
Women may face unique challenges and grievances related to the project's activities  (given that women 
are more likely to be adversely impact ed than men ). Having a well -defined and accessible GRM allows 
women to raise their concerns and complaints in a safe and supportive environment. It ensures that their 
grievances are heard, taken seriously, and addressed appropr iately, providing them with a pathway to 
seek redress. An inclusive and community -based GRM can therefore provide a confidential and secure 
platform for women to voice their concerns without fear of reprisals, ensuring their safety and protection.  
● Organize  experience  sharing workshops  with key government agencies  and partners - By engaging 
government and non -government stakeholders and sharing the importance of integrating gender  
considerations  into renewable energy pr ojects opportunities may be created to  influence policy 
development and decision -making processes. When decision -makers recognize the value of the RSB 
gender -responsive renewable energy project, they are more likely to advocate for and support gender -
inclu sive policies  and projects  in the energy sector. In addition, the workshops can showcase how women 
in the RSB project can actively participate in the renewable energy sector, both as beneficiaries and as 
decision -makers . The potential exists for the  RSB pr oject to serve as a  model for gender integration into 
future large scale renewable energy projects.  
● Conduct gender sensitive stakeholder consultations to inform and solicit input from community 
members  into the design, implementation and monitoring phases of the Project  -Gender -sensitive 
consultations provide an opportunity to include women's voices and perspectives, especially those of 
women -headed households. This inclusion can empower women by giving them  opportunities to share 
their concerns and needs a nd where possible have these gender specific considerations be effectively 
incorporated and/or address in the project’s implementation. It also creates opportunities for women to 
share information on how  decisions related to the RSB project that directly a ffect their lives, livelihoods, 
and access to resources.  At least  one inclusive community -based  stakeholder consultation  should  be held 
once every quarter  this total  at minimum four (4) stakeholder consultations per year.  
  
Page 106


---
*Page 111*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         36 / 43  
 
● Education and awareness raising programs and d evelop ment  a community -based handbook - The 
handbook and related capacity building sessions for small farmers and community members will  provide 
valuable information about the renewable energy project, hydrogen energy production, and its 
applications in the energy and agricultural sectors  (specifically as it refers to  the application of solar and 
rain water harvesting within the agricultur e sector  to support sustainable farming practices ). The 
handbook will act as a guide in  promoting sustainable practices and reducing greenhouse gas emissions  
while highlighting the benefits of adopting a gender approach within large scale renewable energy 
projects . Women involved in agriculture can benefit from learning about these innovative techniques and 
contribute to more eco -friendly farming practices.  
● Establish an Inclusive and Participatory Project Steering Committee  that  includes the Institute for 
Gender and Development Studies (IDGS ) – Women ’s voices, needs and concerns  are often left out of 
decision making. This is because of their lack of inclusion and involvement in projects of this nature and 
at a decision -making  level. To this end, the RSB proj ect team should establish a Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) and ensure in its composition adequate space is made for the inclusion of women. Moreover, in 
seeking to ensure that the voices of all women are heard, specific to the project across all levels, the PSC 
should  include  representation from the UWI -IGDS Unit  or other qualified gender or social inclusion  
consultant . This would help to  ensure that decision making is not only inclusive,  but gender informed.  
● Develop a Community and Social Engagement Benefits Sharing Pla n which takes on board gender 
considerations in the development of a community -based programme to benefit residents within St. 
Philip  – Women are often among those most negatively impacted by energy infrastructure projects, yet 
they are among those least t o benefit. The RSB project team should develop a Community and Social 
Engagement Benefits Sharing Programme which considers gender to benefit the community residents 
within St. Philip with a specific focus on women and youth. The Plan should  outline several community -
based  projects and activities which are meant to directly benefit the neighbouring and surrounding 
residents within the St. Philip community.  
 
  
Page 107


---
*Page 112*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         37 / 43  
16 Conclusion  
Although, Barbados has and continues to put in place policy measures which aim to bridge the gender gap between 
females and males , the energy sector, and the renewable energy sector more specifically, is still very much a male 
dominated field. Men are stil l among those most represented in the technical related areas of the sector, they 
(men) hold the highest percentage of the decision -making and senior -level positions and by extension are among 
those highest paid in comparison to their female counterparts.  
In this regard, the Renewstable Barbados Project represents an opportunity for gender considerations to be 
appropriately integrated within the scope of a large -scale renewable energy infrastructure project in Barbados. In 
this regard, the RSB project would  also become a practical demonstrable model for the integration of gender into 
future large -scale community -based renewable energy projects on small -island states. The Gender Action Plan 
developed  by the Project  detail s the specific objectives, outcomes an d activities that will be followed to improve 
women’s participation and enhance their social and economic empowerment within the project.  
An important component of the project would be  the social and community -based  activities and engagement to 
be outlined  within the Community and Social Engagement Benefits Plan. The Plan would  highlight all of the 
community -based  activities and projects to be undertaken by RSB and the proposed benefits of these activities to 
the St. Philip community. Gender will be appropr iately considered within the scope of the design and 
implementation of these actions to ensure both women and men are able to benefit , as well as the youth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 108


---
*Page 113*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         38 / 43  
17 References  
Caribbean Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency .  Barbados Energy Report Card , 2019 . Available at:  
https://www.ccreee.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/07/2019 -Energy -Report -Card -BRDB -9-Jul-2021.pdf  
 
Caribbean Development Bank. Barbados Country Gender Assessment (CGA) , 2016.  Available at:  
https://www.caribank.org/publications -and-resources/resource -library/gender -assessments/country -gender -
assessment -barbados -2016  
 
ILO. Gender -inclusive service provision: A quick guide for financial and business development services providers , 
2022 . Available at: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ ---asia/ ---ro-
bangkok/documents/publicatio n/wcms_837254.pdf  
International Network on Gender and Sustainable Energy . Energy Access , 2023. Available at: 
https://www.energia.org/what -we-do/wh y-gender -and-energy/  
 
International Renewable Energy Agency.  Renewable Energy: A Gender Perspective . 2019.   Available at: 
https://www.irena.org/ -
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Jan/IRENA_Gender_perspective_2019.pdf  
 
STANTEC . Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the Renewstable Barbados Hybrid Solar Power Plant 
with Hydrogen Storage . 2022.  Available at:  https://www.renewstable -
barbados.com/_files/ugd/22dce1_ef2c386467dc4fd78fdcc15c17177f01.pdf  
UNESCO. Instit ute of Statistics, Science Report , 2023 . Available at:  https://www.unesco.org/en/days/women -girls-
science  
 
UND P.  Issue Brief: Just Transition Brief , 2022 . Available at: https://climatepromise.undp.org/research -and-
reports/issue -brief -just-transition  
 
UN WOMEN . Handbook on G ender Mainstreaming for Gender Equality Results , 2022. Available at: 
https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital -library/publi cations/2022/02/handbook -on-gender -mainstreaming -for-
gender -equality -results  
 
UN Women. Guidance Note Gender Analysis in Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure , 2022 . Available at: 
https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital -library/publications/2022/12/gender -analysis -in-technical -areas -energy -
infrastructure  
 
UN World Population Prospects . Demographics of Barbados , 2019. Available at: 
https://statisticstimes.com/demographics/country/barbados -demographics.php  
 
World Economic Forum . Global Gender Gap Report 2023 , 2023. Available at: 
https://www.weforum.org/reports/global -gender -gap-report -2023/  
 
Page 109


---
*Page 114*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         39 / 43  
18 Annex  
 
Table 7. Names  of Roads  and Communities  Included  in the  Survey  
 
Name  of Road/Community  Number  of respondents  Percentage   
Total 
% Female  Male  Female  Male  
Padmore  Village  19 17 12.3%  11.0%  23.2%  
Circular  Road  14 17 9.0%  11.0%  20.0%  
Marchfield  Village  Road  12 12 7.7%  7.7%  15.5%  
Harrow  Land  10 5 6.5%  3.2%  9.7%  
Neil Kirk Gardens  6 5 3.9%  3.2%  7.1%  
Farm  Road  6 3 3.9%  1.9%  5.8%  
Harrow  Road  1 6 0.6%  3.9%  4.5%  
Crescent  Drive  5 2 3.2%  1.3%  4.5%  
Farm Gardens  4 1 2.6%  0.6%  3.2%  
Farm  Road  Terrace  2 1 1.3%  0.6%  1.9%  
Harrow  Park  2 1 1.3%  0.6%  1.9%  
Green  Way  / Farm  Gardens  1 1 0.6%  0.6%  1.3%  
Bushy Park  Road  0 1 0.0%  0.6%  0.6%  
Neil Kirk Road  0 1 0.0%  0.6%  0.6%  
Total  82 73 52.9%  47.1%  100%  
 
Table 8: Heads of Households  
 
Head  of Household  Number  of Respondents  Percentage  Total  
% Female  Male  Female  Male  
Female -headed  Household  56 53 36.1%  34.2%  70.3%  
Joint  responsibilities  14 16 9.0%  10.3%  19.4%  
Male -headed  Household  12 4 7.7%  2.6%  10.3%  
Total  82 73 52.9%  47.1%  100%  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 110


---
*Page 115*
---

 GENDER ASSESSMENT      R E N E W S T A B L E ® B A R B A D O S  
  
  
DISCLAIMER: Read the disclaimer in this document prior to use.         40 / 43  
Figure 2 Employment Status of Other Households  
 
 
 
Table 7: Community Attributes Valued by Respondent s 
 
 
Attributes  Frequency  of Response  Percentage   
Total %  Female  Male  Female  Male  
It is peaceful  and quiet  60 40 38.7%  25.8%  64.5%  
The people  who  live in the 
area  are friendly  48 36 31.0%  23.2%  54.2%  
Proximity  to commercial,  
social  and community 
services (e.g.,  businesses, 
healthcare,  schools, church, 
recreational  spaces,  social  
clubs)  34 29 21.9%  18.7%  40.6%  
It is safe and secure  33 28 21.3%  18.1%  39.4%  
It is an attractive  area  16 20 10.3%  12.9%  23.2%  
It is breezy  1 1 0.6%  0.6%  1.3%  
Nothing  0 1 0.0%  0.6%  0.6%  
21.4%  
48.5%  
30.1%  
Employed  Unemployed  Retired  
Page 111


---
*Page 116*
---

 
1 
 Renew stable Barbados  Inc 
Green Climate Fund - Gender Action Plan  
July 2023 
This gender action plan has been developed to support the implementation of gender specific actions which address the gender 
constraints and challenges identified under the Gender Assessment. This Gender Action Plan identifies specific activities, 
objectives , indicators and outcomes .  
 
1 This activity will be led by the RSB Project Manager with support from the ESG and Communication Lead.  Impact Statement :  To enhance the  resilience of energy supply to female  and male headed households, small farmers, busines s 
owners/ operators within  the Farm Road, Padmore Village and Six Roads  communi ties by improving sustainable energy generation 
in Barbados.  
 
Outcome :  
▪ The renewable energy sector  through the use of hydrogen energy improves its capacity to respond to gender issues by 
implementing at least  five (5) gender responsive interventions by the end of the RSB project (Outputs  1, 2, 3, 4 and 7). 
 
Output 1:  Gender specific gaps and requiremen ts are identified and incorporated into the Renew stable Barbados Project  
 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost  ($USD)  
Output 1. 1 -Ensure findings 
of the Gender  Assessmen t 
are incorporated into the 
Project ’s Results 
Management  Framework  The R SB Project Results  
Management  Framework  
include s specific gender 
activities, targets and 
indicators as outlined in the 
Project  Management Plan  
 
(Yes/No)  
 Complete by year 
1 RSB Project Management 
Team  
1. ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  This cost is subsumed 
within the project’s 
implementation1 
Page 112


---
*Page 117*
---

 
2 
 Target 1. 1.1- Integrate the 
recommendations of the 
Gender Assessm ent Study 
within  the RSB Results 
Management Framework  
Output 1. 2- Ensure that the 
project’s Environmental  & 
Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) promote s gender 
sensitive actions through the 
project’s life cycle.  Develop/ Update the project’s 
ESMP to address gender 
requirements and include 
specific gender actions and 
host sensitization sessions and 
workshops with vari ous 
stakeholder groups on these 
gender issues  
 
Target 1. 2.1- Develop/ Update 
the ESMP to address gender 
requirements and include 
gender specific actions  
 
Target 1. 2.2- Conduct 
sensitization and awareness 
sessions with various 
stakeholder groups on  and 
across the project on  the 
gender actions specific to the 
ESMP  
 
(<1 sensitization 
session/workshop)  
 
 Comple te by year 
2 RSB Project Management 
Team  
1. ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2. Project Director  The cost  associated with 
the d evelopment/ 
update of the ESMP  is 
subsumed within the 
project’s implementation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$5,000.00  (this cost 
covers the hosting of the 
related awareness 
sessions and workshop s 
including rental of 
workshop facilities, 
equipment, etc)  
Page 113


---
*Page 118*
---

 
3 
  
2 This activity  will be led by the Project Director with support from the ESG and Communication Lead.  
 Output 1. 3-Ensure updates 
to the p roject’s Standard 
Operating Procedures  (SOPs)  
and (For example; EPC 
Contracts, Labour 
Management Plans, etc) 
address the requirements of 
gender  as well as  sexual 
exploitation, abuse and 
sexual harassment (SEAH), 
sexual and gender base 
violence (SGBV).  
 Update the project’s SOP 
documents to reflect specific 
gender requirements and 
considerations.  
 
Target 1. 3.1- No. of project 
specific documents and SOPs 
developed and revised to 
include gender considerations  
 
 Complete by year 
1 RSB Project Management 
Team  
1. Projec t Director  
2. ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  This cost is subsumed 
within the project’s 
implementation2 
Output 1.5 - Conduct training 
with the RSB Project staff on 
the updated  SOPs  that 
include gender 
considerations.  Facilitate training sessions with 
the RSB Project team and staff 
(inclusive of the RSB and EPC 
team and employees) on the 
gender inclusive updated SOPs 
and other related documents.  
 
Target 1. 41- No. of trainin g 
workshops/ information 
sessions hosted  
(<2) 
 
Target 1. 4.2- No. of RSB staff 
who have participated in the 
training disaggregated by sex. 
 
(Yes/ No)  End of Pr oject RSB Project Management 
Team  
1. Project Director  
2. ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  This cost will be 
subsumed in Output 1.2 
as it is envisioned that 
this activity will be done 
simultaneously with 
Output 1.2   
Page 114


---
*Page 119*
---

 
4 
  
3 The development of the MOU will be led by the RSB Project’s ESG and Communications Lead  Output 1. 6 -Organize 
experience  sharing 
workshops  with key 
government agencies  and 
partners .  By engaging 
government and non -
government stakeholders 
and sharing the importance 
of integrating gender 
considerations into 
renewable energy pr ojects 
opportunities may be 
created to  influence policy 
development and decision -
making processes.  Host information sharing 
workshop(s)/session (s) with 
Gov’t stakeholders and 
partners  on the importance of 
integratin g gender into scalable 
renewable energy project s for 
Gov’t  consideration and use  in 
future renewable energy  
project s. 
 
Target -1.5.1 -No. of 
information  
sessions /workshops  hosted   
(<2) 
 
Target 1. 5.2- % of stakeholder s 
who have participated in the 
information 
sessions/workshops 
disaggregated by sex  
 
(Yes/ No)  End of Project  RSB Project Management 
Team  & Government 
Ministries ( Ministry of 
Energy  and the Ministry of 
Agriculture ) 
 $5,000.00.00 (hosting of 
workshops and 
awareness sessions with 
Governmental agencies 
on gender integration in 
RE projects ) 
Output 2:  Enhance capacity of the RSB project staff (inclusive of all project  related contractors and employees ) to integra te 
gender considerations/ requirem ents in renewable energy projects  
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost ($USD)  
Output 2.1 - Establish a MOU 
between HDF Caribbean and 
the UWI Cave Hill Campus 
and/or other  tertiary level  
educational institutions  (for 
example;  BCC and SJPI ) to 
support the training, skills Develop a MOU between HDF 
Caribbean and tertiary level 
institutio ns in Barbados to 
support training, skills 
development and knowledge 
transfer in green energy 
hydrogen production and use.  Complete by year 
1 RSB Project Management 
Team and key education  
institutions  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  This cost is subsumed 
within the project’s 
implementation3 
Page 115


---
*Page 120*
---

 
5 
 development and capacity 
building of all RSB Project 
staff in gender sensitivity, 
SEAH and SGBV training   
Target 2.1.1 - One (1) signed 
MOU between HDF Caribbean  
and tertiary level institutions in 
Barbados  2- UWI Cave Hill 
Campus (IGDS & 
Sustainable Energy 
Department)  
3- Barbados 
Community College  
(BCC) 
4- Samuel Jackman 
Prescod Institute  of 
Technology  (SJPI) 
 
Output 2.2 - Develop a 
project specific SEAH and 
SGBV Training Programme to 
reflect Gender Sensitivity in 
Workspaces for all RSB 
Project employees (inclusive 
of contractors , construction 
workers  and other related  
employees)  
 
 
 Develop in partnership with 
the UWI IGDS Unit , gender 
sensitive training modules 
specific to SEAH and SGBV for  
the energy related 
construction sector.  
f 
Target 2.2. 1- No. of training  
modules/courses developed to 
support training of project 
staff (<2) training courses one 
in SEAH and one in SGBV  Complete by year 
2 1. UWI  Cave Hill 
Campus -IGDS Unit  
2. ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
3. Project Director  
 $40,000.00 (course 
development, creation of 
instructional videos 
training, training 
materials and facilities 
rental)  
Output 2.3 - Develop online 
self-paced mandatory SEAH 
and SGBV training  to reflect 
Gender Sensitity i n 
Workspaces  for all RSB 
Project employees (inclusive 
of contractors and 
employees)  
 
 
 Target 2.3.1 - No. of RSB 
project staff that have 
completed the mandatory 
online SEAH and SGBV training  
 
(% of females; % of males 
captured and documented)  Complete by year 
2 1. ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2. Project Directo r 
3. UWI Cave Hill 
Campus -IGDS Unit  
 
Page 116


---
*Page 121*
---

 
6 
  
4 This activity will be led by the ESG and Communications Lead . Output 3: Increase participation of women performing technical roles in the renewable energy sector  
 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost ($USD)  
Output 3.1-Develop in 
collaboration with relevant 
training institutions National 
/ CARICOM Vocational 
Qualification ( N/CVQ ) 
programmes  in hydrogen 
energy production, storage 
and use  
 Target 3.1.1- No. of N/CVQs 
developed specific to hydrogen 
energy production, storage 
and use  
 
(<1) End of Project  RSB Project Management 
Team and key Education 
Institution and Training 
Centres  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Technical Vocational 
Education & 
Training ( TVET ) 
Council  
3- BCC 
4- SJPI 
 $18,000.00  (NVQ/CVQ 
development inclusive of 
external and internal 
verification cost and 
certification)  
Output 3.2-Design and 
implement in collaboration  
with relevant training 
institutions the RSB -Young 
Professional  Green Hydrogen  
Energy Sector Internship 
Programme encouraging 
female participation in the 
sector via technical roles  Target 3.2.1- No. of women 
who applied or registered for 
the RSB - Young Pro fessional 
Energy Sector Internship 
Programme  
 
(<10) End of Project  RSB Project Management 
Team and key Education 
Institutions  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- BCC 
3- SJPI 
 
 
 This cost is subsumed 
under the project 
implementation4 
Output 3.3-  Design and 
implement in collaboration 
with relevant training 
institutions the RSB -Young Target 3.3.1- No. of female 
interns participating in the 
RSB- Young Professional End of Project  RSB Project Management 
Team and key Education 
Institutions  $16,200.00 (stipend co -
financing  between RSB 
(inclusive of HDF and 
Rubis) ) 
Page 117


---
*Page 122*
---

 
7 
  
5 3 interns pe r year for 3 months each.  Professional Green Hydrogen 
Energy Sector Internship 
Programme encouraging 
female participation in the 
sector via technical roles  Energy Sector Internship 
Programme  
 
(6)5  1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- BCC 
3- SJPI 
4- UWI -IGDS  
5- UWI -Sustainable 
Energy  
 
 
 
Output 3.4- Collaborate with 
the Ministries of Education 
and Energy to host public 
education campaigns/  
workshops which encourage 
the participation of girls and 
young women to a spire to 
leadership and technical 
roles in the renewable 
energy sector.  
 Target 3.4.1- No. of public 
engagement campaigns/ 
workshops hosted which 
encourage female 
participation in the RE sector  
 
(1) Through -out the 
project  RSB Project Management 
Team and k ey Education 
Institutions  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Ministry of Energy  
3- Ministry of 
Education  
4- BCC 
5- SJPI 
 $5,000.00  (hosting of 
workshops and 
awareness sessions 
inclusive of rental of 
facilities, catering and 
workshops materials and 
facilitators)  
 
Output 4: Conduct gender sensitive stakeholder consultations and awareness -raising programmes to ensure public knowledge 
and buy -in on the use of the RSB hydrogen energy solution and potential impacts.  
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost ($USD)  
Output 4.1-Conduct gender 
sensitive stakeholder 
consultations to inform and 
solicit input from community 
members (i.e., heads of 
households, small farmers, Target 4.1.1- No. of gender 
sensitive stakeholder 
consultations and awareness 
raising programmes hosted 
during the project 
implementation  At least quarterly 
until project ends  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Project Manager  $12,000.00  (this cost 
covers th e hosting of 
Town Hall  Meeting, 
Community workshops 
and sensitization 
workshops)  
Page 118


---
*Page 123*
---

 
8 
  
6 This activity is expected to be led by the ESG and Communications Lead.  business owners and 
vulnerable populations) into 
the design, implementation 
and monitoring phases of 
the Project   
(<4) community -based  
sensitization sessions, 
workshops or Town Hall 
Meetings hosted per year  
Output 4.2- Update the RSB 
Proje ct webpage to host 
communication outputs 
including (press releases, 
new articles, stories and 
communication events) 
related to the RSB Project. 
In-addition to 
Communications/ Grievance 
Complaints Section which 
provides project’s responses 
to community concerns as 
well as allow community 
members to formally issue 
any grievances and 
compl aints that they may 
related to the project via a 
formal online GRM 
mechanism.  
 Target 4.2.1- No. of 
communication events 
published on the RSB webpage 
which provides opportunity for 
the sharing of information and 
updating of community 
members on the status of the 
project.  
 
(<3 communication stories, 
press release or related/ 
relevant updates captured per 
year  and is captured  on the 
RSB website ) 
 
Target 4.2.2- No. of stories and 
other communication outputs 
developed which highlight the 
gendered impacts of the RSB 
project on the RE sector.  
 
(<3 communication stories, 
press release or related/ 
relevant updates captured per 
year which reflects gender 
specific considerations and is 
captured on the RSB website ) Throughout the 
project  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Project Director  This cost is subsumed 
within the existing 
Project Management 
cost6 
Page 119


---
*Page 124*
---

 
9 
  
7 This activity is expected to be led by the ESG and Communications Lead.  
  
 
Target 4.2.3- Creation of an 
Online Complaints/ G rievance 
Mechanism as part of the RSB 
webpage which allows 
community members to issue 
complaints that may be 
disaggregated by sex with 
scope of real -time responses 
and feedback.  
 
((1) Grievance/ 
Complaints 
Mechanism which is 
virtually accessible 
and provid es an 
opportunity or 
community residents 
to raise concerns and 
issues .) 
Output 4. 3- Develop a 
Community and Social 
Engagement Benefits 
Sharing Plan which takes on 
board gender considerations 
in the development of a 
community -based  
programme  to benefit 
residents within St. Philip Target 4. 3.1-Numb er of 
women and men benefitting 
from the  programme  
 
(Report s developed / data 
collected captures the gender 
specific benefit or % male and 
% female beneficiaries from 
the community activities and 
projects ) Throughout the 
Project  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Project  Director  This cost is subsumed 
within the existing 
Project Management 
cost7 
Page 120


---
*Page 125*
---

 
10 
 with a specific focus on 
women and youth.   
Target 4. 3.2 -Number of 
community -based  projects 
identified to benefit women 
and youth  
Output 5: Increase capacity of the RSB Project Management Team to respond to complaints from community members and 
other stakeholders.  
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost ($USD)  
Output 5.1- Develop and 
implement  
) a community -based 
Grievance/ Complaints 
Mechanism  (GRM)  that is 
easily accessible by all 
stakeholder groups. The 
GRM will outline the 
project’s grievance 
mechanisms across the 
various stakeholder groups, 
the procedures associated 
with issuance of such 
grieva nces and timelines for 
response.  Target 5.1- Develop as part of 
the ESMP a Grievance/ 
Complaints Mechanism plan 
for the different stakeholder 
groups. The plan will outline 
the procedures, actions and 
timelines for responses for the 
various responses being 
posed . 
 
(1)  (Yes/ No)  
 
Target 5.2- Develop as part of 
the ESMP a community based 
GRM mechanism and Action 
Plan which facilitates  the 
issuance of complaints by 
community members  for 
appropriate responses and 
feedback to be issued.  
 
(1) (Yes/ No)  
 
 
 Complete by year 
1 RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Project  Director  This cost is subsumed 
within the existing 
contract of the ESG & 
Communications Lead  
Page 121


---
*Page 126*
---

 
11 
 Output 6:  Female and male heads of households, small business owners and other vulnerable populations have an increase d 
awareness and understanding of the use and application of the RSB project in enhancing energy resilience.  
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost ($USD)  
Output 6.1- Develop a 
community based  
handbooks/tool kits which 
are user friendly and 
increase the awareness and 
understanding of key 
stakeholders ( female and 
male  headed households, 
business owners and other 
vulnerable populations) on 
the benefits and impacts of 
hydrogen energy production.  
 Develop a community -based 
hand -book(s)/tool kit(s) on the 
RSB project and its hydrogen 
energy production and use in 
the energy and agricultural 
sector.  
 
Target 6.1.1. - (<1) 
handbooks/tool kits develop 
for specific community groups.  Complete by year 
2 RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Project Director  $8,800.00  (this cost 
covers the develop ment 
of the Handbook a long 
with some printing of the 
documents for 
dissemination)  
Output 6.2- Conduct 
education awareness 
sessions with key 
stakeholders (female and 
male headed households, 
business owners and other 
vulnerable populations) on 
the benefits and impacts of 
hydrogen energy production 
using the handbooks and 
tool-kits developed.  
 
 Conduct education awareness 
workshops on the RSB projects 
and its hydrogen use and 
impact in the energy and 
agricultural sector.  
 
Target 6.2.1- (<2) community -
based education workshops/ 
information using the 
handbook/ toolkit developed.  End of Project  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
2- Project Manager  This cost is subsumed in 
the public engagement 
and sensitization lines.  
Output 7: Female and male heads of households, small farmers, business owners and other vulnerable populations have a n 
increase d understanding of how the demineralize d water produced by the hydrogen energy plant  or rain water harvesting  can 
be used for irrigation and other ancillary us es 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost  
Page 122


---
*Page 127*
---

 
12 
 Output 7.1 - Undertake 
sensitization and awareness 
sessions targeting 
community members, small 
farmers and business owners 
and operators and other 
vulnerable populations  
 No. of sensitization/ 
awareness workshops hosted  
 
Target 7.1.1 - (<1) community 
level sensitization / workshop 
sessions held targeting Female  
and male community  
members, small farmers, 
business owners and other 
vulnerable populations)  
 
(Where possible will include 
50% females; 50% males ) 
 
 
(Yes/ No)  End of Project  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- Project Director  
2- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  $10,000.00 (this cost 
covers hosting of 
workshops and 
awareness sessions 
inclusive of rental of 
facilities, catering and 
workshops materials and 
facilitators)  
 
 
 
 
Output 7.2 - Provide training 
in the rainwater harvesting 
techniques targeting small 
farmers, community 
members, business owners 
and operators and other 
vulnerable populations  
 Target 7.2 .1- (<1) training 
sessions conducted on 
rainwater harvesting and 
usage. Targetin g small farmers, 
female and male community 
members, business owners 
and operators and other 
vulnerable populations  
 
(Yes/ No)  
 
Target 6.2.2 - Provide training 
in rainwater harvesting to at 
least (<1) school in the 
Community.  
 
(Yes/ No)  End of Project  RSB Pr oject Management 
Team  
1- Project Director  
2- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  
Page 123


---
*Page 128*
---

 
13 
 Output 8: Small farmers and community members have an increase d understanding of how hydrogen energy production can 
support sustainable agriculture including sustainable farming techniques  
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost  
Output 8 - Undertake 
education and awareness 
raising programs with small 
farmers and industry 
stakeholders in the 
agricultural sector on the 
synergies between 
renewable energy and the 
sustainable agricultural 
sector  No. of workshops and 
education sessions hosted on 
the synergies between 
hydrogen energy produ ction 
and sustainable agricultural 
and farming techniques  
 
Target 8.1.1 (<1) training 
sessions conducted on 
renewable energy 
technologies and sustainable 
agriculture and farming 
techniques. Targeting small 
farmers and agricultural 
stakeholders.  
 
Where poss ible will include 
50% females; 50% males ) 
 
(Yes/ No)  End of Project  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- Project Director  
2- ESG & 
Communications 
Lead  This cost is subsumed in  
the community 
sensitization, training and 
engagement activities 
related to Output 7.1 and 
7.2  
 
 
Output 9: Enabling a gender responsive project management and governance environment for the duration of the Project  
 
Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timelines  Responsibilities  Cost  
Output 9.1 - Establish an  
Inclusive  and Participatory 
Steering Committee (PSC) 
that includes the Institute for 
Gender and Development 
Studies (IDGS) at the UWI 
Cave Hill Campus or Bureau 
of Gender Affairs (BGA) or a Establish a PSC inclusive of a 
UWI IDGS or BGA 
representative  
 
Target 9.1.1 - PSC established 
inclusive of the UWI IDGS or 
BGA or a Gender/ Social 
Inclusion Consultant  Complete by year 
1 RSB Project Management 
Team  
1- Project Director  No stand -alone cost 
identified (Staff time); 
However, the inclusion of 
the UWI IDGS or the 
Bureau of Gender Affairs 
(BGA ) may require a 
participatory stipend . If a 
Gender/ Social Inclusion 
Page 124


---
*Page 129*
---

14 Gender/ Social Inclusion 
Consultant to increase 
participation of women in 
decision -making  Consultant is preferred a 
cost may be incurred for 
time served.  
Output 9.2  -Conduct gender 
sensitive training with the 
RSB Project Management 
Team to ensure gender 
dimensions are effectively 
considered throughout the 
duration of the project  Conduct at least one (1) 
gender sensitive training 
among Project Management 
Team and Staff per year. 
Where new staff are 
introduced, they will be 
required to undertake the 
training.  
Target 9.2.1 - (<1) training per 
year for project staff.  End of project  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1-ESG &
Communications
Lead
2-Proje ct Director
3-UWI IGDSThis cost  will be shared 
with Output 1.2 and 
Output 2.2 to ensure 
synergy and coordination 
between the project 
activities and keep cost 
down.  
Output 9.3 - Present annually 
to the PSC to report on the 
status and implementation 
of the Gender Action Plan 
(GAP)  Target 9.3.1 - (<1) report 
developed and discussion held 
per year on the RSB GAP 
progress and implementation.  
Total ( 3) for project duration 
2023 -2025  
(Yes/ No)   Annually  RSB Project Management 
Team  
1-ESG &
Communications
Lead
2-Project Directo rThis cost is consumed 
within the existing 
contract of the ESG & 
Communications Lead  
Page 125
__________