=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20231003164044+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.6.20320
/ModDate: D:20231003164044+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.6.20320
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
23 – 26 October 2023  
Tbilisi , Georgia  
Provisional agenda item 12 GCF/B.3 7/02/Add. 08 
2 October 2023  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum  VIII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 217 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to 
Climate Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and Landscape 
Restoration "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Indepen dent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.37/02 /Add.08  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  140 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  141 
Secretariat’s assessment  144 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   161 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  172 
Gender documentation  173


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project title:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Country(ies):  Rwanda  
  
Accredited Entity:  Ministry of Environment  
Date of first submission:  2022/02/25   
Date of current submission  2023/09/11  
Version number  V.6


---
*Page 4*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 1 
 
  
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G  GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H  ANNEXES


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 2 
 
  
(a) PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)   
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   GCF  
contribution  Co-financiers' 
contribution  
Mitigation total  8 % 0 % 
☐ Energy generation and access  0 % 0 % 
☐   Low-emission transport  0 % 0 % 
☐   Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  0 % 0 % 
☒ Forestry and land use  8 % 0 % 
Adaptation total  92 %  100 %  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  13 %  49 %  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  2 % 0 % 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  0 % 0 % 
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services  77 %  51 %  
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome        1,084,291 tCO2eq  A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  Direct 
Beneficiaries:  
1,254,242 
(654,404 
females)  Indirect 
Beneficiaries: 
9,260,745 
(4,769,284 
females)  
30.9 % of the 
CND population  69.9% of 
Rwanda’s 
population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  50,000,000 USD  
A.9. Project size  Small (Up to USD 50 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  39,056,421 USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  ☒  Grant  39,056,421 USD   
☐  Loan  - 
☐  Guarantee  - ☐  Equity       - 
☐     Results -based payment    - 
A.11. Implementation 
period  5 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
 
TBD 
 A.14. ESS category   
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☒    No ☐M 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence   
Yes ☒    No ☐


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Rwanda Forestry Agency (RFA)  
Country of Registration: Rwanda  
Ownership Type: Government agency.  
A.21. Executive summary  
Rwanda’s Congo -Nile Divide (CND), an area of 444,600 hectares, is a high -elevation landscape of remnant 
natural forest reserves embedded in a mosaic of intensively managed smallholder farms and commercial 
plantations. Extending along a north -south ridge with an altitudinal gradient from 1,900m to 4,507m, the CND 
separates the drainage basins of the Congo and Nile Rivers. It is part of the Albertine Rift, which is one of 
the most biologically rich regions in Africa and “ one of the most important regions for conservation” on the 
continent1, containing more than half of Africa’s birds and 40% of its mammals.  At its highest elevations, the 
region is crowned by the Volcanoes, Gishwati -Mukura, and Nyungwe National Parks, con taining Rwanda’s 
only remaining montane forests, one of the most biodiverse ecosystems on the African continent, with high 
levels of endemism (species found nowhere else on Earth) and dozens of threatened species, including 
populations of mountain gorillas  and chimpanzees. Nyungwe has been recognized as one of the six highest 
priority protected areas in the Albertine Rift due to its high endemism and globally threatened species 
(Plumptre et al 2016). Though covering barely 5% of the country, this archipelag o of protected forests is of 
critical importance for:  
● Its globally recognized high biodiversity values2,3, 4, 5; 
● Its role in Rwanda’s acclaimed ecotourism offerings serving as the primary source of Rwanda’s 
foreign revenue and as a major economic devel opment driver6, 7; 
● The ecosystem services provided for surrounding subsistence farmlands, as well as for commercial 
tea and coffee plantations offering employment opportunities for women while providing the 2nd and 
3rd highest sources of foreign revenue8,9;   
● The regulation of water capture and release to growing urban centers on the CND periphery10, the 
nation’s extensive river network, and downstream hydroelectric operations11; and  
● The sequestration and storage of nearly 60% of Rwanda’s national carbon stocks12. 
These values and services are already compromised by a combination of anthropogenic and climatic factors; 
they will be much more severely threatened by the potential negative feedback loops associated with 
projected climate change  impacts. The Project will promote an ecosystem -based approach to forest 
protection and restoration and will enhance the extent and resilience of forest ecosystems and species, 
including functionally linking currently isolated forest fragments. Through the se approaches, the Project will 
protect, restore and rehabilitate forest ecosystems, enhancing biodiversity and reducing key threats, while 
 
1  Plumptre, A.J., et al. 2007. The biodiversity of the Albertine Rift. Biological Conservation 134:178 -194. 
2  Plumptre, et al. 2016. Conservation Action Plan for the Albertine Rift. Wildlife Conservation Society  
3  UN/CBD. 2020. Rwanda 6th National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity  
4  2012. .Eastern Afromontane Biodiversity Hotspot. Critical Ecosystems Partnership Fund.  
5  2023. Nyungwe National Park. BirdLife International. www.birdlife.org.  
6  RDB. 2021. Rwanda Development Board Annual Report  
7  2010. In the Kingdom of Gorillas . Weber & Vedder.  
8  Andrew, G., Masozera, M. 2010.  Payment for Ecosystem Services and Poverty Reduction in Rwanda . Journal of 
Sustainable Development in Africa (V12, No.3)  
9  RDB. 2021. Annual Report . 
10  Karamage, F., et al., 2017. Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water 2017, 9(2), 14.  
11  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2009. Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report, 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.  
12  Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. N at. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 4 
 
 increasing the provision of critical ecosystem services to strengthen adaptation of vulnerable communities.13 
14 
The CND landscape supports nearly one -third of Rwanda’s population on barely one -fifth of its land base. 
Average population density is 736 people/km2, with some districts now exceeding 1,000 people/km²15. The 
highest rates of rural poverty in the country are reported from the CND, including its most vulnerable 
subsistence farmers. While high rainfall has historically permitted generally sufficient food production, the 
region’s rugged topography requires farming on extremely steep slopes. With more frequent extreme rainfall 
events in recent years, this agricultural landscape is recognized as the region of Rwanda most vulnerable to 
floods and landslides16. Between 2013 -2016 heavy rains generated landslides that killed at least 174 people 
and destroyed  the homes of more than 5,000. Many of these landslides caused flooding of highly productive 
raised -bed cultivation systems in the CND’s many valleys and surrounding bottomlands and many hectares 
of crops being washed away annually17. An estimated 1.5 mill ion tons of fertile soil are lost annually to 
erosion18. 
CND forests are essential to the region’s climate resilience. Since independence, the total natural forest 
cover has declined 40%, from 219,000 ha to 130,700 ha, mostly from episodic planned excision s as well as 
uncontrolled incursions. The loss around the Gishwati and Mukura core forest area has been most extreme. 
Of the original 32,098 ha in the 1980s, now only 3,460 ha remains as natural forest: almost a 90% loss (see 
Annex 2). In comparison, the V olcanoes and Nyungwe boundaries have been stable for decades. The recent 
creation of the Gishwati -Mukura National Park is an important step toward halting and partly restoring this 
forest, particularly for its land stabilization and other ecosystem service s within the CND’s most vulnerable 
lands and dependent communities.  
IPCC models predict rising temperatures and increasingly intense precipitation events for the CND through 
the rest of this century. The rainfall implications are especially threatening for  smallholders farming on steep, 
heavily deforested slopes, where they are most exposed to landslides, leading to loss of crops, homes, and 
lives. Yet their adaptive capacity is low because crop yields are vulnerable to rainfall variability and because 
high population density severely limits their options for relocation in the event of disaster. This is particularly 
true for women who, until very recently, had fewer legal land rights than men. The expected 2 ℃ increase in 
temperature would further result in a  more than 470m rise in vegetation zone elevations, impacting traditional 
crop selection and management practices for future farmers. An increase of this scale would also 
dramatically alter the optimal ranges for tea and coffee production, introducing pote ntial competition between 
these important export crops and alternative land uses.  
This Project is designed to sustain and expand critical forest ecosystem functions in the CND, and ultimately 
enhance the resilience of the vulnerable communities who depend on them. This will be done by 
strengthening government capacity for spatial planning, resulting in institutional and regulatory policies to 
promote and integrate climate adaptation strategies, based on the latest science, through coordinated 
planning at th e national and district levels. It will also protect, restore and expand natural forest in and around 
 
13  2003. Interlinkages Between Biological Diversity and Climate Change. CBD Technical Series Number 10 . 
14  2022. Ecosystems and ecosystem services Sectoral Guide. Green Climate Fund. 
15 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR); The Fifth Rwanda Population and Housing Census, Main 
Indicators Report, February 2023  
16  https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/National_Risk_Atlas_of_Rwanda_electronic_version_0.pdf  
17  Nsengiyumva JB, et al., 2018  Landslide Susceptibility Assessment Using Spatial Multi -Criteria Evaluation Model 
in Rwanda. International Journa l of Environmental Research and Public Health. 15(2):243. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15020243  
18  Bizimana, H.; Sönmez, O. 2015 Landslide Occurrences in the Hilly Areas of Rwanda, Their Causes and Protection 
Measures.  Disaster Sci. Eng. 2015, 1, 1 –7


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 the core national parks; consolidate and expand some smaller but critical "stepping stones"19 of remaining 
natural habitat between these national parks (m ainly small forest patches and wetlands/ riparian areas); 
improve the landscape linkage function of key high altitude landscape linkages between the protected areas, 
while at the same time securing ecosystem services through afforestation and improved nati ve species mix 
for plantation forests on steep slopes; silvopastoral interventions on cultivated pasture; and agroforestry 
interventions in regenerative agricultural areas. Complementary activities will address key drivers of 
deforestation while creating a lternative livelihood pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and 
income -generating, climate -resilient crops, as well as strengthening supportive financial services.  
Project interventions will include 10,000 ha of land (including both forest and si lvopastoral sites) under 
improved, climate -resilient management; and improve agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of on -farm 
plantations, directly benefiting 1,254,242 people (654,404 women) in CND with more climate resilient 
livelihoods from reduced expos ure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and more knowledge on climate 
risks, value of forests and forests ecosystems, climate adaptation options, access to indigenous and 
agroforestry quality materials and improved ecosystem services. The project will a lso indirectly benefit 
9,260,745 people  nationally mainly from the education and outreach program on climate change and gender 
issues, climate risks, value of forests and forest       ecosystems, climate adaptation options , and will create 
approximately  24,212 job opportunities in CND forest -dependent communities. The total mitigation impact 
from reduced deforestation, forest restoration introduction and adoption of improved cookstoves is estimated 
to be      1,084,291 t CO 2-eq by 2043.  
 
(b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1 (a). Climate context  
This section draws from the Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment presented in Annex 2.1, where more 
comprehensive elaboration can be found. Discussion on climate predictions is based primarily upon multi -
model means from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project’s sixth phase (CMIP6)20, used in the Sixth 
IPCC Assessment Report. Results are shown for paired Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) and 
Representative Concentration Pathway (RC P) emission scenarios; for some variables emphasis is placed 
on a “pessimistic” high SSP -high RCP scenario (SSP5 -8.5), for greater distinction between present day and 
future conditions as a consequence of anthropogenic climate change. Specialized modeling performed at 
ultra-high resolution for the East African Great Lake Environments project (EAGLE)21, and findings from 
scientific literature are utilized as well. Key findings are outlined in Table 1, and each climate component 
theme is discussed in the sect ion on projected climate change impacts below.  
 
19  Bagchi, R., et al. 2018. Forecasting potential routes for movement of endemic birds among important sites for 
biodiversity in the Albertine Rift under projected climate change.  Ecography. 41: 401 -413. 
20  Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6. Link 
21  Grim, J. A., Pinto, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon , A., 2020:  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset. Link


---
*Page 9*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 Table 1.  Principal Climate Hazards of the Congo Nile Divide through Mid -century  
Climate 
component  Character of 
change  Level of 
confidence  Near -term 
concern  Mid-century 
concern  Project Response  
Temperature  Upward trend 
from global 
greenhouse gas 
emissions and 
land-use change  Very high for  
+2.6 °C net 
increase 
1970 -2040  Elevational 
range of biota 
including   
pests and 
pathogens 
increasingly out 
of balance  Major uphill 
displacements 
of biota 
including 
cultivars due to 
~470 m rise in 
thermal 
conditions  Promotion of agroforestry 
practices : contribute to the 
conservation of soil moisture 
and its recharge through the 
infiltration of rainfall and runoff 
water, the creation of sheltered 
microclimati c conditions, and 
the inclusion into the soil of 
organic matter that contributes 
to moisture retention.  
Promotion of silvopastoral 
practices : Improve soil 
properties due to greater 
uptake of nutrients from deeper 
soil layers, enhanced 
availability of nutr ients from 
leaf-litter and increased 
nitrogen input by N2 -fixing 
trees.85 Moreover, 
silvopastoral systems enhance 
the resilience of the soil to 
degradation, nutrient loss, and 
climate change, while 
enhancing water holding and 
infiltration capacity of the s oil 
which contributes to the 
regulation of the hydrological 
cycle by reducing runoff 
intensity22,23.  
Protective restoration 
measures at erosion -prone 
areas :  Reduce exposure to 
soil erosion and floods of 
communities and their assets 
living in the road and  river side.  
Restoration  of degraded 
natural forests in protected 
areas  
Improve protected areas 
management to reduce 
potential human threats (forest 
encroachment , mining, fire).  
The project will support 
activities aimed at  
(1)promote alternative 
livelih oods that are resilient to 
climate change  
(2) decrease of demand and (3) 
increase of wood supply 
capacity. Dissemination of 
Improved Cook Stoves  
The project will support the 
development of an integrated Annual 
precipitation  Increasing totals  Moderate, 
but 
considerable 
model 
variation  Low concern, 
with natural 
interannual 
variability still 
dominant  Moderate 
concern, with 
majority of 
models showing 
upward trend  
Precipitation 
intensity  Increasing short -
period rainfall 
and storm totals  Almost 
certain to 
occur  Severe 
landslide 
hazard already 
present and 
increasing, 
building flash 
flood potential  Extreme hazard: 
widespread and 
frequent 
landslides and 
flash floods  
Cloud base 
height  Rising cloud 
base and levels 
of fog immersion 
in forests  Likely 
ongoing, will 
continue with 
temperature 
increase  Already 
significant in 
deforested 
highlands with 
some loss of 
moisture 
provision  Of major 
concern to forest 
ecology in 
protected 
landscapes  
Drought/dry 
spells  Increasing 
intensity  Moderate  Some increase 
in vegetation 
desiccation 
potential, 
possibly 
enhancing fire 
risk Sustained risk of 
increase in 
desiccation and 
fire risk, possibly 
offset by rainfall 
increases  
Wildfire  Increasing 
occurrence and 
extent in 
forested areas  Low Relatively 
random 
occurrences, as 
in the recent 
past, that could 
be managed by 
improved 
vigilance  If rainfall 
increases do not 
occur, increased 
vegetation 
desiccation 
would intensify 
risk for 
widespread fire  
Climatic 
seasonality  Disappearance 
of mid -year dry 
season  Low, but 
explicitly 
shown in 
some models  No concern  Increasing 
convective 
storm 
occurrences in 
June -Aug may 
eliminate dry 
season


---
*Page 10*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
land use plan at landscape 
level  that identifies and 
integrates the trade -offs 
necessary to improve delivery 
of ecosystem services, 
conserve natural resources and 
sustain economic growth.   
● Climate baseline and current impacts  
The climate of western Rwanda and its CND landscape features conditions highly supportive of tropical 
montane forests, rich biodiversity and human activities alike.  Despite being located deep in the tropics just 
south of the equator, the elevated terrain of the CND landscape, mostly above 2,000 meters, ensures 
relatively cool temperatures through the year ( Figure 1 ).   
 
 
 
Figure 1 (left) Topographic map of Rwanda with riverine drainage channels overlaid. Source : Rwanda (2019)24; (right) Congo Nile 
Divide, identified by the 1,900 m elevation contour and showing the presence of natural and plantation forests.  
Rainfall is abun dant for nine out of 12 months, and a reliable mid -year dry season adds dynamic character 
to phenological cycles, pollinator activity and agricultural practices ( Figure 2 ). Prior to landscape conversion 
for agricultural purposes, continuous dense forest co ver yielded augmentation of precipitation through fog 
interception in tree canopies, and near -daily cloud immersion sustained cloud forest ecosystems and species 
assemblages. The forests also maintained slope stability in steep terrain and yielded percolat ion and 
groundwater recharge rather than direct runoff of heavy precipitation.  Such conditions are now constrained 
to within the CND’s protected forests within national parks, covering just 30% of the CND landscape and just 
5% or Rwanda’s total land surfa ce. These are Rwanda’s only remaining montane forests yet represent 
 
22  Ibrahim M, Guerra L, Casasola F, Neely N, 2010.  Importance of silvopastoral systems for mitigation of climate 
change and harnessing of environmental benefits. In: Abberton M, Conant R, Batello C (Eds) Grassland carbon 
sequestration: management, policy and economics. Proceedings of the workshop on the r ole of grassland carbon 
sequestration in the mitigation of climate change. Integrated Crop Management, Vol. 11. FAO, Rome, Italy. 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1880e/i1880e09.pdf .  
23  Jose S., 2009. Agroforestry for ecosystem services and environmental be nefits: an overview. Agroforest Syst 76 
(1):1 –10. 
24  Vital Signs, 2019: Rwanda Atlas. Environment, Agriculture and Livelihood Options . Vital Signs and WCS Rwanda. 
Link.


---
*Page 11*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
58.7% of national tree carbon stocks25 and are imperiled by intense population pressures, with 30.7% of the 
country’s population residing within the CND landscape districts.  
   
 
Figure 2. Annual ( left) and monthly ( right ) rainfall (mm) climatology over Rwanda (period of record: 1981 –2017), based on 
algorithms that calibrate satellite -based rainfall estimates with surface observations.  Source : Jonah et al., 2021.26  
A reconstructi on of temperatures for the past 140 years for Rwanda, based on quality controlled instrumental 
records and centered on Kigali, shows that global climate change already has strong local expression. Rapid 
temperature increase commenced in the 1970s, with a n et gain of approximately +1.1 °C since 197027 
(Figure 3 ). 
 
25   Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.o rg/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
26  Jonah, K., Wen, W., Shahid, S., Ali, M.A., Bilal, M., Habtemicheal, B.A., Iyakaremye, V., Qiu, Z., Almazroui, M., 
Wang, Y. and Joseph, S.N., 2021. Spatiotemporal variability of rainfall t rends and influencing factors in Rwanda.  Journal of 
Atmospheric and Solar -Terrestrial Physics , 219, p.105631.  
27  Berkeley Earth (website): Rwanda Country Profile. www.berkeleyearth.org


---
*Page 12*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 3. Berkeley Earth temperature reconstruction based on instrumental measurements for Kigali in central Rwanda. The 
“Climate Stripes” offers a visual display that effectively communicates bot h individual year temperature anomalies and the overall 
multi -decadal trend behavior. Source: Berkeley Earth Rwanda Country Profile. www.berkeleyearth.org   
The regional warming of the climate over the past half -century coincided with widespread forest conversion 
to farmland along the CND. As a consequence, at fine spatial scales climatic conditions across the CND at 
present mimic the landscape mosaic, whereby onl y the protected forests will retain much of the past climatic 
character while converted landscapes are likely to be significantly warmer by day, have reduced cloud cover 
and higher cloud bases, and experience slightly reduced rainfall as well.  Due to the increased moisture 
carrying capacity of warmer air (7% increase per °C of warming)28, ongoing climatic warming promotes 
increasingly intense short -period rainfall, which acts synergistically with landscape conversion on steep 
slopes to cause quickflow runo ff, yielding large increases in landslide occurrence and soil erosion more 
generally ( Figure 4 ). With its high topographic relief, the CND is highly susceptible to soil erosion. 
Throughout Rwanda, soil erosion has increased by 54% since 1990 with the bulk of the increase 
experienced and highest erosion levels over western Rwanda.29 Between January and June in 2018, 
landslides caused more than 200 mortalities, and in May 202030, 65 deaths from landslides and flash flooding 
occurred during a single night of s torms focused on the eastern slopes of the CND.31   
 
28  Trenberth, K.E., 2011. Changes in precipitation with climate change. Climate Research , 47, pp.123 -138. 
29  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2019: Rwanda Natural Capital Accounts -Ecosystems. p. 23  
30  Reuters 2018. https://www.reuters.com/article/us -rwanda -floods -idUSKBN1I81I  
31  Associated Press 2020. https://apnews.com/article/b7658b76a403fd9bc8cba249f9d484fd


---
*Page 13*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 4.  (left) Intensity of soil erosion in Rwanda assessed for the year 2015. Source: NISR: National Institute of Statistics of 
Rwanda, 2019. ( right ) Observed landslide occurrences in Rwanda against a topographic background, showing intense clusters 
along both the east and west sides of the CND landscape. Source : Nsengiyumva et al., 2018.32 
Wildfire occurrence in forested lands exacerbated by climatic  warming is a rapidly mounting concern globally, 
and montane forests of the CND carry increasing vulnerability to loss from burning. Absence of fire -adapted 
flora in CND highland forests, however, suggests that fire has not been a major selective force wit hin the 
forest ecosystem. The 1997 visitation of weeks -long uncontrolled wildfires in the Nyungwe forest had an 
ecological imprint that remains evident 25 years later, as burned areas revegetated with dense ferns rather 
than replacement forests,33 represen ting a net loss of 12% of Nyungwe’s forest cover and corresponding 
loss of its carbon endowment.  Despite increased propensity for drying of vegetation as the climate warms, 
forests remain sufficiently moist such that fire causing forest losses are infrequ ent, and when they occur are 
usually tied to anomalous dry spells paired with human ignition, as was the case in 1997.34  
Cloud base altitude, which is highly influential in CND montane forest ecology and species composition, is 
likely rising above recent past conditions due to both climatic warming and conversion of forests to 
agricultural lands. Fog interception by vegetation augments montane forest precipitation in central African 
highland forests by an estimated 10%35, so highland forest loss by human a ction therefore represents a local 
reduction to the ecosystem service of rainwater provision).  
Projected climate change impacts  
Temperature increases . Localized projections for the CND landscape of climatic changes for coming 
decades, generated for the mo st recent IPCC assessment, present a strong consensus on temperature 
increase for the next two decades. The magnitude of net temperature change by late -century, and the 
tendency of warming to accelerate, hold steady, decelerate or even begin an overall tem perature decline is 
unknowable at present, but a large number of climate model simulations show common patterns, whereby 
divergence in possible temperature outcomes will only become apparent around 2040 ( Figure 5 ).  These 
 
32  Nsengiyumva, J.B., Luo, G., Nahayo, L., Huang, X. and Cai, P., 2018. Landslide susceptibility assessment using 
spatial mu lti-criteria evaluation model in Rwanda.  International journal of environmental research and public health , 15(2), 
p.243.  
33  Masozera, A.B. and Mulindahabi, F., 2012. Post -fire regeneration in Nyungwe National Park -Rwanda. WCS White 
paper report.  
34  Seimon, A., 2012: Climatology and Potential Climate Change Impacts of the Nyungwe Forest National Park, 
Rwanda. WCS White paper report, Wildlife Conservation Society, New York, USA, 44 pp.  
35  Bruijnzeel, L.A., Mulligan, M. and Scatena, F.N., 2011. Hydromet eorology of tropical montane cloud forests: 
emerging patterns.  Hydrological Processes , 25(3), pp.465 -498.


---
*Page 14*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
results are also consistent with o utputs from the previous CMIP5 model suite for western Rwanda (e.g., 
IFAD report 2020)36. As such, using the consensus values of such models is a sensible choice for 
environmental planning, with a +2.0 °C increase over the IPCC -referenced 1995 -2014 baselin e conditions 
offering a representative value for warming by mid -century. However, the observed warming of +0.6 °C 
registered between 1970 -95 prior to the IPCC baseline period must be recognized as well, suggesting net 
warming of +2.6 °C from a more represe ntative 20th century baseline.   
 
Figure 5 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble predictions for mean annual temperature over western Rwanda across the 21st century 
under a variety of SSP -RCP combinations. Source : World Bank37  
Annual mean precipitation changes. The CMIP6 results for precipitation changes over coming decades 
are less consistent than the temperature projections. Recent studies focused in East Africa have identified 
limitations to global model utilization for regio nally specific predictions, such as failure to represent observed 
precipitation magnitude and distribution in the present, and reliance on approximations (i.e., 
parameterizations) that inadequately represent the role of convective storms in precipitation d elivery38. The 
CMIP6 ensemble means for annual precipitation over western Rwanda have a baseline value of 
approximately 2,000 mm per year, which is considerably higher than actual values ( Figure 6 ; compare 
values with Figure 2 above). The higher emissions scenarios show increasing totals over time, which is 
plausible given the increasing water vapor carrying capacity of the warming atmosphere. Strangely, the most 
optimistic scenario (SSP1 -1.9) shows strongly varying trends at decadal scales, increasing far more rapidly 
 
36  Hunter. R., Crespo. O., Coldrey , K, Cronin, K, New, M. 2020. Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future 
Crop Suitability in Rwanda. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome.  
37  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
38  Wainwright, C.M., Marsham, J.H., Rowell, D.P., Finney, D.L. and Black, E., 2021. Future changes in seasonality in 
East Africa from regional simulations with explicit and param eterized convection.  Journal of Climate , 34, pp.1367 -1385.


---
*Page 15*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
in the near -term than other scenarios. Such inconsistencies reduce confidence in the overall product suite 
for precipitation predictions.  
 
 
Figure 6 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble prediction for mean annual precipitation over western Rwanda across the 21st century under 
a variety of SSP -RCP combinations. Left -axis scale is thousands of mm per year.  Source : World Bank39 
There is also major inconsistency between CMIP model suites. As assessment for western Rwanda from 
CMIP5 under RCP 8. 5 comparing historical and mid -century outputs suggested rainfall decreases of 5 -10% 
in most months, with net annual decrease of 86 mm 40; the baseline time periods and geographic domains 
of these two CMIP ensemble compilations for western Rwanda differ, b ut the reversal from drier to wetter 
gives low confidence in the utilization of precipitation predictions specific to the CND if derived from global 
models.  
To generate more refined results, Grim et al., (2020)41 performed regional simulations of East African climate 
at ultra -fine, convection -allowing scale (WRF model at 3.3 km model resolution); these were based off the 
global CESM2 model (part of the CMIP6 suite) boundary conditions under the high emissions RCP8 .5. The 
regional model was configured to optimize parity with regional climate station data. The resulting high spatial 
resolution output suggests a strongly amplified rainfall signal over the 21st century over western Rwanda 
relative to the CMIP6 ensemble  mean for RCP 8.5 ( Figure 7 ). Also notable is that the rest of Rwanda exhibits 
 
39  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
40  Hunter. R., Crespo. O., Coldrey, K, Cronin, K, New, M. 2020. Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future 
Crop Suitability in Rwanda. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome.  
41  Grim, J. A., P into, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon, A. (2020).  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset (NCAR Technical Note TN -563+STR).  Link


---
*Page 16*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
far smaller increases, suggesting that the CND’s hydrological significance as a water tower for the nation 
will be reinforced over time.  
 
Figure 7.  EAGLE projects high -resolut ion WRF simulation of annual mean precipitation ( left) and difference between end of century 
and recent past ( right ) across East Africa, where values are in mm per year. The CND landscape and Lake Kivu show comparable 
increases to eastern Lake Victoria, an d represent the largest rainfall increases across the modeled domain.  Source : Grim et al. 
(2020)42 
Precipitation intensity changes . Due to well -understood physical properties of the atmosphere, as 
warming progresses short -period rainfall rates and individ ual storm totals, especially for the fraction of 
higher -end events that can cause flash flooding and promote landslides, will increase and should amplify 
very significantly over time43. The CMIP6 ensemble means for monthly counts of days with heavy 
precipi tation suggest an upward trend is now underway ( Figure 8 ). Forthcoming increases are most 
pronounced for November through January. Such increases in heavy precipitation events are to be expected 
under a warming climate and are of major social and ecologica l concern, being a driver of landslide 
occurrences and major contributors to soil erosion intensity.  
 
42  Grim, J. A., Pinto, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon, A. (2020).  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset (NCAR Technical Note TN -563+STR).  Link 
43  Fowler, H.J., Ali, H., Allan, R.P., Ban, N., Barbero, R., Berg, P., Blenkinsop, S., Cabi, N.S., Chan, S., Dale, M. and 
Dunn, R.J., 2021. Towards advancing scientific knowledge of climate change impac ts on short -duration rainfall extremes. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A , 379(2195)


---
*Page 17*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 8 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble prediction for monthly changes in the number of days with rainfall >20 mm over western 
Rwanda across the 21st century under RCP8.5. Source : World Bank44 
Drought/dry spells.  Warming will also increase the propensity for vegetation to desiccate during dry spells, 
intensifying wilting of natural vegetation and cultivars. The capacity of air to extract moisture from landscapes 
through direct evaporation and evapotranspiration of vegetation will also increase exponentially as 
temperatures rise. This means that land surfaces and vegetation will dry out more quickly between rainfall 
episodes in the future than in the pas t. It also means that to maintain hydrological balances that natural and 
human systems depend upon, total rainfall must increase in proportion to intensifying evaporation rates. The 
CMIP6 ensemble results for the CND region suggest such a favorable balance  may indeed be maintained 
through at least mid -century ( Figure 9 ). Under the full range of emissions scenarios considered, there is 
almost no change in ensemble means through mid -century.  
 
Figure 9.  Western Rwanda CMIP6 model -model ensemble mean time series of the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration 
index (SPEI) for a range of climate change scenarios across the 21st century. The SPEI is a measure of the integrated water deficit 
 
44  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link


---
*Page 18*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
in a locati on, taking into account the contribution of temperature dependent evapotranspiration of a 12 -month period. Source : World 
Bank45  
A more useful variable for assessing drought potential at daily -seasonal times scales is the Vapor Pressure 
Deficit (VPD). This  is an absolute measure of the difference between the water vapor content of the air and 
its saturation value, and as such, represents a direct metric of the ability of the atmosphere to extract 
moisture from the land surface46. High resolution VPD predictions for present day, mid -century and late -
century under boundary conditions prescribed by the CESM model under the high emission RCP 8.5 
scenario are shown in Figure 10 . Annual cycles of VPD for model grid points high in the N yungwe Forest 
and at lesser elevation in Kigali east of the CND both show remarkably little variation in VPD over the course 
of the century. Owing to the cool, persistently moist highland climate that characterize the CND landscape, 
the VPD values are cons istently low in Nyungwe throughout the year for the three decadal time periods 
2009 -18, 2055 -64 and 2090 -99. This contrasts significantly with results from Kigali, where VPD registers 
four times higher than in Nyungwe during the mid -year dry season (20 vs.  5 hectopascal pressure deficit). 
This represents a favorable outlook over several decades to come for the CND in terms of limiting desiccating 
conditions that would elevate fire potential, stress crops and rapidly draw down hydrological resources.  
Importa ntly, however, not clearly evident in these model outputs is that rising cloud bases and associated 
warming temperatures increase the rate of drying of vegetation, increasing wildfire risk during rain -free 
periods, especially in lower reaches of forested t errain bordering settled areas where risks of anthropogenic 
ignition are highest.  
 
  
Figure 10.  Modeled Vapor Pressure Deficit (VPD) on slope of Mt Bigugu in the Nyungwe Forest ( left) and Kigali ( right ) for the recent 
past (2009 -18, blue, mid -century (20 55-64, green) and late -century (2090 -99, red). Source : EAGLE project47 
Precipitation seasonality.  The annual cycle of climate along the CND sees abundant rainfall for much of 
the year interrupted by a marked dry season in the June -August months when rainfa ll becomes light and 
sporadic, and during which hydrological deficits develop as evaporation far exceeds precipitation and 
resultant runoff. While highland orography largely explains the enhanced rainfall along the CND, the 
 
45  World Bank  Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
46  Seager, R., Hooks, A., Williams, A.P., Cook, B., Nakamura, J. and Henderson, N., 2015. Climatology, variability, 
and trends in the US vapor pressure deficit, an important fire -related meteorological quantity.  Journal of Applied 
Meteorology and Climatology , 54(6), pp.1121 -1141.  
47  East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) project. Link


---
*Page 19*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
occurrence of the dry seasons oc curs region wide irrespective of terrain elevation ( Figure 11 ). This finds 
explanation in the seasonal north -south migration of a pan -equatorial band of enhanced cloudiness and 
rainfall known as the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)48. The slight reduction in rainfall experienced 
over several weeks along the CND in January and February reflects much more pronounced dryness to the 
north in Uganda; conversely, the more defined mid -year dry season along the CND spanning June through 
Augus t is associated with enhanced southeasterly airflows that effectively push the zone of atmospheric 
convergence promoting rainfall across the equator into Uganda.  
In this light, an unusual finding from the EAGLE project’s high -resolution modeling studies i s that the CND 
landscape has a heightened risk of major change in climatic seasonality. By the 2055 -64 period: the mid -
year dry season effectively disappears. Being the output of a single model run under a high -end greenhouse 
gas emissions scenario may mak e this seem implausible; It is highly dissimilar from mid -century predictions 
of the consensus of global models, which sustain the dry season. It finds corroboration, however, in a new 
study on East African rainfall, which found that the parameterization o f convection in global models may be 
a source of uncertainty for projections of changes in seasonal timing, and that potentially impactful changes 
in seasonality are therefore quite plausible49. Such an eventuality is exceptionally difficult to plan for, a nd 
since it would only come to fruition well after the project period, if at all, additional studies could be conducted 
to provide needed guidance.  
 
  
Figure 11 . (left) The average number of “wet” days in Rwanda with rainfall exceeding 3 mm for the month s of June -August. The 
wettest parts of the CND only receive significant rainfall on ~10% of days during the dry season. Source : Meteo Rwanda50: (right ) 
Annual cycle of rainfall rate (mm/day, note logarithmic scale) at Nyungwe Forest National Park showing d aily means (thick lines) 
and extremes (thin lines) for 10 -year time periods centered on 2014 (blue), 2060 (green) and 2095 (red). The dry season evident in 
the 2014 mean reaching below 1 mm/day, effectively disappears by the 2060 time period.  Source : EAGL E project51  
 
48  Siebert, A., Dinku, T., Vuguziga, F., Twahirwa, A.,  Kagabo, D.M., delCorral, J. and Robertson, A.W., 2019. 
Evaluation of ENACTS ‐Rwanda: A new multi ‐decade, high ‐resolution rainfall and temperature data set —
Climatology.  International Journal of Climatology , 39(6), pp.3104 -3120.  
49  Wainwright, C.M., Marsham, J.H., Rowell, D.P., Finney, D.L. and Black, E., 2021. Future changes in seasonality in 
East Africa from regional simulations with explicit and parameterized convection.  Journal of Climate , 34, pp.1367 -1385.  
50  ENACTS online tool  at Meteo Rwanda. Link 
51  EAGLE project: Link


---
*Page 20*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
● Climate risks, vulnerability and impacts  
Without strategic actions to confront mounting stresses borne by climate change interacting with 
unsustainable land -use practices, the CND would doubtless undergo a profound transformation over coming 
decades with significant loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services, reducing agricultural potential, severe 
hazards to humanity and loss of livelihoods. Temperature increase and loss of fog immersion will cause 
desiccation of the lower margins of protected forests promoting die -offs, arrival of pests, pathogens and 
invasive species, and increasing fire ignition potential. Current cultivation practices of both subsistence crops 
and valuable cash crops like tea and coffee will be drawn uphill, adding  to pressure to convert protected 
forests to farmland. Whereas climatic changes will act as inexorably mounting stressors, unsustainable land 
surface conversion and land use practices will greatly exacerbate their impacts. The steep hillsides that 
characte rize much of western Rwanda will experience intensifying erosion and risk of landslides, while built 
infrastructure such as road and bridges will be overwhelmed since they were engineered to withstand rainfall 
intensities expected under past climatic condi tions that are sure to be exceeded, and with increasing 
frequency, as time progresses and temperatures steadily increase.  Precipitation intensity will increase for 
short -period rainfall rates and individual storm totals, especially for the fraction of hig her-end events that can 
cause flash flooding and promote landslides. This is certain to occur, is probably already discernible, and 
likely to amplify very significantly over time as warming progresses. This ties directly to landslides in 
particular, which already cause high mortality and significant destruction each year, and the CND’s elevated 
vulnerability due to high topographic relief and deforested slopes makes this hazard of paramount concern 
to address ( Figure 12 ).  
 
Figure 12 . Rwanda landslide susceptibility map showing past observed landslides. Source:  Nsengiyumva et al., 2018.52 
Significant temperature increases are almost certain to continue for decades to come, and will have mounting 
impacts on both natural and human syste ms along the CND, and some are already discernible. Over 
equatorial Africa observed environmental lapse rates feature temperature decreases by approximately 
5.5 °C per kilometer of elevation increase53, so 2 °C of warming expected by mid -century translates  to a 
vertical rise on the order of 473 meters, promoting large uphill displacements of a wide range of organisms, 
 
52  Nsengiyumva, J.B., Luo, G., Nahayo, L., Huang, X. and Cai, P., 2018. Landslide susceptibility assessment using 
spatial multi -criteria evaluation model in Rwanda.  International journal of environmental research and public healt h, 15(2), 
p.243.  
53  Camberlin, P., 2018. Climate of Eastern Africa. In  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science . Link


---
*Page 21*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
ecological processes, cultivars and human activities.  While temperatures over the CND region are not 
expected to rise to levels for heat stre ss to elevate mortality54 or reduce labor productivity, the indirect effect 
of rising temperatures through increased disease incidence is substantial55.   
Western Rwanda is the most productive region in the country for the cultivation of both tea and coffe e, where 
conditions are optimized on the CND’s sloping terrain. Both are cash crops with high export value, and are 
the target of active expansion through both governmental programs and private enterprise. Intensifying 
environmental stresses from climate c hange particularly due to thermal increases and the arrival of invasive 
pests from lowland regions, present challenges both for current plantings and in planning for expansion to 
new areas; the same concerns apply to other cultivars.  
Cloud base altitude, w hich is highly influential in montane forest ecology and species composition, is likely 
already elevated above recent past conditions due to conversion of forests to agricultural lands, and certain 
to rise further in proportion to the degree of warming ove r coming decades. Ecosystems and species 
assemblages in the lower reaches of protected forests may already be out of balance with this important 
environmental variable, and this imbalance will only increase over time, promoting rapid species turnovers, 
enhancing potential for invasives, and act as a strong driver of upward range extensions. Rising cloud bases 
in concert with warming temperatures also increase drying of vegetation, enhancing wildfire risk during rain -
free periods. Fog interception by vegetat ion also augments montane forest precipitation by an estimated 
10%, so rising cloud bases will act to remove this important hydrological input too. Highland forest loss 
therefore represents a local loss to the ecosystem service of rainwater provision that could be partially 
restored through reforestation.   
Such challenges highlight how essential highland forests are to the climatic resilience of CND communities, 
for the ecosystem services and products they provide for both the region’s vulnerable communiti es and the 
national economy. They also recharge aquifers; regulate water flow; control flooding; retain soil; provide 
wood fuel energy and timber; underpin the country’s tourism, which provides the largest contribution to 
Rwanda’s foreign exchange earnings56; and provide wider benefits of atmospheric pollution control that 
sustain the country’s economy and the wellbeing of its people57.   
Forest conversion to farmland in the CND highlands has until recently served as a release valve for lowland 
population p ressure at the expense of drastically reduced national carbon stocks, diminished resilience to 
climate change, enhanced potential for destructive outcomes, reduced ecosystem service provision and 
disrupted biological connectivity. The resultant loss of eco system services and functioning and intensifying 
environmental stresses borne by climate change now require redirection towards forest restoration and other 
actions to ensure a sustainable future. Safeguarding the Congo -Nile Divide’s remaining highland for ests, 
and setting long -term goals of reforesting functional linkages connecting them, therefore serve Rwanda’s 
national long -term interests on lessening the severity of impacts of climate change and sustaining critical 
ecosystem services both locally and d ownstream, while contributing to global efforts to draw down 
greenhouse gas concentrations.  
B.1 (b). Summary of spatial biodiversity assessment  
The majority of Rwanda’s remaining montane forests are restricted to the national parks, which support a 
variety of threatened and endemic species. A few fragmented forest patches are situated outside of the 
National Park boundaries. Landcover change (espe cially for widespread smallholder agriculture), fuelwood 
 
54  Asefi -Najafabady, S., K. Vandecar, A. Seimon , P. Lawrence and D. Lawrence, 2018: Climate change, population 
and poverty: vulnerability and exposure to heat stress in East Africa. Climatic Change , 148, 561 -573. 
55  World Bank, 2022: Rwanda Country Climate and Development Report. World Bank, Washington  DC. Link 
56  Rwanda Development Board 2017 Annual Report Link 
57  Andrew, G. and Masozera, M., 2010. Payment for ecosystem services and poverty reduction in Rwanda.  Journal 
of sustainable development in Africa , 12(3), pp.122 -139.


---
*Page 22*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
harvesting, and human -induced fires, coupled with climate change impacts, especially landslides, erosion 
and downstream flooding, have compromised the delivery of critical ecosystem services derived from these 
forests. A detailed spatial analysis of biodiversity in the Congo Nile Divide was conducted to delineate priority 
areas for the long -term conservation and restoration of forests, and the sustainable management of 
landscapes, in order to secure t he ecosystem services needed to improve the resilience of vulnerable 
communities to climate change impacts.  
The spatial biodiversity assessment for Rwanda’s Congo -Nile Divide (CND) (see details in Annex 2 and 
Annex 2.2) is based on a rapid systematic conse rvation plan, using MARXAN decision -support software. 
The key analyses involved identifying and mapping the remaining areas of natural forest and other 
ecosystem types, modeling bioclimatic change and identifying climate change refugia, a Condatis landscap e 
connectivity and bottlenecks analyses, and evaluating ecosystem threat and protection levels. The analyses 
thus build in landscape connectivity, climate change refugia, biodiversity values, ecosystem services and 
social costs.  
The final outcome of the MARXAN and Condatis connectivity analyses split the CND domain into four major 
landscape categories with a set of priority implementation areas, each with their own place -bound project 
interventions. Interventions range from the restoration of natural forest, establishment and improvement of 
protective forest on steep slopes and along riparian areas; and to implement biodiversity -friendly 
agroforestry to reduce landslides, erosion and downstream flooding. Over and above these place -bound 
interventions a re a variety of other mechanisms for promoting the sustainability of rural livelihoods and 
protecting montane forest in Rwanda’s CND landscape.   
The Systematic Conservation Plan analyses covered a range of biodiversity features, including:  
● Terrestrial ecosystems, including their IUCN Red List threat status and protection level. The analysis 
focussed on identifying priority remaining intact areas, based on the development of a map of 
ecological condition.  
● Protected Areas, Protected Forests an d Protected Wetlands. All the identified ecosystems to be 
gazetted for protection are included.  
● Climate change refugia based on projected changes in bioclimatic envelopes under a range of 
climate change scenarios.  
● Identification of key landscape linkage ar eas and bottlenecks.  
● Hydrological process areas – Rivers and Streams, including buffers.  
● Hydrological process areas – Wetlands and Lakes, including buffers.  
● Hydrological process areas – Areas with high rainfall.  
● Landscape process areas - Steep slopes (over  55%) which are most important for minimizing erosion 
and landslide risk.  
Individual species were not separately considered in the assessment as all key species are tightly linked  
to their underlying intact habitat (in particular intact forest patches as w ell as wetlands and riparian areas); 
and available distribution data for species was much broader than the ecosystem data. In selecting priority 
conservation areas, the SCP methodology always attempts to be spatially efficient by meeting conservation 
targe ts in as small an area as possible, while avoiding conflict with other land users, at the lowest possible 
cost for other sectors. The following was taken into account in the prioritization:  
● Urban and dwellings, tea, roads, plantations, cultivated pasture, coffee, bamboo and agriculture.  
● Areas of greatest population density.  
● Areas with highly impacted land cover classes.


---
*Page 23*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Results of the MARXAN spatial analysis:  
The MARXAN landscape prioritization ( Figure 13 ), which builds in landscape connectivity, climate change 
refugia, biodiversity values, ecosystem services, and social costs (in terms of avoiding, where possible, 
areas with highest population density, agriculture etc), splits the landscape into four key planning categories 
(Figure 14 ): 
● Core Protected Area (PA) Nodes:  National Parks comprise the “Core PA Nodes” that need to be 
secured and well managed, which include Volcanoes, Gishwati -Mukura and Nyungwe National 
Parks. Priority activities include strength ening PA management and sustainability, rehabilitation and 
restoration of natural forests, other conservation -oriented land use activities that reduce stress on 
PAs and natural forests (e.g. improved wood stove efficiency to reduce pressure on natural fore sts) 
and supporting sustainable biodiversity compatible activities (e.g. improved beekeeping). These 
nodes also include buffer areas around the National Parks.  
● Stepping Stones:  These are priority nodes outside of the current National Parks that are critica l for 
maintaining landscape connectivity, consisting of small, isolated patches of forest, at Dutake and 
Karehe -Gatuntu Protected Forests and the extensive Gishwati Pastures. These areas would be a 
sensible focus for some (patches of) forest restoration an d protection, beekeeping and energy 
efficient stoves. The Gishwati Pastures are a focus for agroforestry on pastoral land to increase the 
coverage of native trees to secure reasonable landscape connectivity for forest species.  
● Landscape linkages:  These are  key landscape linkages and knickpoints in the farming landscape 
that require afforestation on steep slopes and riparian areas to link the CND at a landscape scale. 
Compatible land use activities include agroforestry, increasing the use of native species, reforesting 
steep slopes, beekeeping and energy efficient stoves. Note that the analysis is based on some 
level of improved connectivity via patches of protective forest and riparian strips, as well as 
overall improved species composition and tree coverage  (within mixed agroforestry 
systems). It does not imply a continuous natural forest corridor; as this potential no longer 
exists, and its creation would not be possible in this highly used landscape without 
unacceptable impacts on livelihoods.  
● Broader Far ming Mosaic:  These are broader areas of moderate priority where conservation 
interventions can support broader sustainable landscapes and ecosystem service delivery but are 
likely to be beyond the scope of most project interventions except for those linked  to land use 
planning.


---
*Page 24*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 13. The MARXAN irreplaceability map for the Congo Nile Divide showing the landscape prioritization, ranging from high 
priority in red to low priority in green.  
To aid prioritization and description of the landscape categories above, the four categories were further split 
into specific planning areas, referred to as “Landscape Implementation Sectors”, as shown Figure 14  and 
in Table 2  with a description of each pl anning category and associated ideas, required outcomes, core 
benefits and associated benefits in Table 3.


---
*Page 25*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
Table 2.  Summary table of landscape categories and associated implementation sectors for the CND.  
Landscape Category  Landscape Implementation Sector  Area (ha)  
Core PA Nodes  Volcanoes NP and “Buffer”58 
Nyungwe NP and Buffer  
Mukura NP and Buffer59 
Gishwati NP and Buffer59 19 487,0  
116 794,9  
4 713,5  
4 013,7  
Stepping Stones  Gishwati Pastures Stepping Stone  
Karehe -Gatuntu Stepping Stone  
Dutake  Stepping Stone  15 547,4  
401,1  
903,0  
Landscape Linkages  Nyungwe NP to Mukura NP Linkage  
Gishwati NP to Volcanoes NP Linkage  
Mukura N to Gishwati NP Linkage  23 375,4  
5 014,8  
7 823,7  
Broader Farming Mosaic  Nyungwe to Mukura Broader Farming Mosaic  
Volcanoes Broader Farming Mosaic  
Mukura Broader Farming Mosaic  
Gishwati Broader Farming Mosaic  
Nyungwe Broader Farming Mosaic  21 164,4  
11 694,4  
4 814,0  
28 433,2  
11 437,0  
Priority Areas for Implementation Activities:  
Specific priority areas for a range of interventions were spatially identified, including:  
● Natural forest rehabilitation and restoration with the National Parks (and their buffers) and in the 
Stepping Stones.  
● Protective forests for steep slopes and riparian areas, particularly in the L andscape Linkages.  
● Agroforestry interventions in key highland Landscape Linkages.  
● Specific agroforestry priorities on pastoral land (silvo -pastoral practices).  
● Indigenous shade trees for tea and coffee plantations.  
● Beekeeping in National Park buffers and S tepping Stone buffers.        
 
 
58Note that buffers refer to both the specific legally designated buffers around Nyungwe and Gishwati -Makura NPs, as well 
as broader buffer areas adjacent to all these NPs, as well as Volcanoes NP.  
59In order to allow for specific landscape description, we s eparately refer to Gishwati NP and Makura NP where necessary, 
even though these areas are managed as Gishwati -Makura NP.


---
*Page 26*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 14. The four major landscape categories (Core PA Nodes, Stepping Stones, Landscape Linkages and the Broader Farming 
Mosaic) were split into specific areas to aid prioritization and description.


---
*Page 27*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Table 3.  A description of the four key landscape planning categories and associated ideas, required outcomes, core benefits and 
associated benefits.  
Landscape 
Component  Core PA Nodes  
The National Parks  Stepping Stones  
Priority nodes 
outside of current 
Pas Landscape 
linkages  
Key landscape 
linkages and 
knickpoints in the 
farming landscape  Broader Farming 
Mosaic   
The broader 
landscape mosaic  Institutional 
issues 
Description  The current core 
national parks and 
protected forests.  Critical pieces of 
biodiversity 
outside of the PAs 
required for 
landscape 
connectivity, 
maintenance of 
biodiversity and 
delivery of 
ecosystem 
services.  The parts of 
landscape within 
identified key 
corridors, where 
functional 
connectivity and 
ability to deliver 
ecosystem serv ices 
needs to be urgently 
maintained or 
improved.  Remaining farmland 
areas of the CND.   The non -geographic 
specific elements of 
the CND system  
Key ideas  Protect and 
manage for climate 
resilience.  Restore and 
protect to ensure 
landscape 
connectivity and 
ecosystem 
service delivery.  Functional linked 
farming landscapes 
delivering ecosystem 
services.  Diverse climate 
change resilient 
farmland delivering 
ecosystem 
services.  Strong, well -
capacitated and 
equitable 
environmental 
governance and 
land use planning.  
Required 
Outcome  PAs effectively 
protect and 
manage natural 
forests improving 
resilience to climate 
change impacts 
and risks.  
Natural forests 
protected, 
connected, more 
resilient to climate 
change impacts 
and risks.  Critical landscape 
nodes / stepping - 
stones are 
secured and 
where necessary 
restored to a 
natural state.  Priority portions of 
the farming 
landscape are 
specifically managed 
to improve overall 
connectivity and 
ecosystem service 
delivery.  Sustainably 
managed farmland 
landscape is  more 
biodiverse, supports 
delivery of 
ecosystem services 
and is resilient to 
climate risk.  Government and 
civil society are well 
capacitated to 
ensure robust 
landscape planning 
that supports 
climate resilience.  
Core benefit  Maintain globally 
significant, 
species -rich natural 
forests.  
Core areas secure 
best possible 
source and/or 
refuge areas for 
species under 
climate change.  Biodiversity value 
of critical 
landscape nodes 
is maintained.  
Landscape 
connectivity 
supported 
through retention 
of key stepping - 
stones for species 
movement across 
the landscape.  Improved 
connectivity of the 
landscape ensures 
long term climate 
resilience.  
Value of core PAs 
and priority nodes is 
retained (i.e. the 
inevitable 
degradation of sites 
due to isolation is 
avoided) .  Generally improved 
farmland 
management 
ensures rural 
sustainability and 
supports 
livelihoods.  Integrated land use 
plans, with 
community 
participation and 
spatial planning 
tools/ monitoring  
Associated 
benefits   Improved delivery 
of ecosystem 
services (especially 
water) and support 
of rural economies 
and livelihoods.  Improved delivery 
of ecosystem 
services 
(especially water) 
and support of 
rural economies 
and livelihoods.  Improved delivery of 
ecosystem services 
(especially water) 
and support of  rural 
economies and 
livelihoods.  Improved delivery of 
ecosystem services 
(especially water) 
and support of rural 
economies and 
livelihoods.  Cross sectoral 
planning and 
management.  
This study was a rapid assessment to support project proposal development and does not replace a full 
conservation planning process. There are significant additional steps which are required to develop a 
product that is useful for land use planning during project implementation. These changes include a robust 
stakeholder engagement process, at a national, district and local scale; incorporation of issues relating to


---
*Page 28*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
land use rights, both of landowners and farm tenants; incorporation of issues relating to so cial safeguards, 
especially for marginalized groups; inclusion of issues related to planning processes and strategies, at a 
national and local scale; finer scale planning (ideally at a 1:50 000 scale); and improved biodiversity data, 
including revised data  on forest degradation, validation of the ecological condition map, and specific species 
data where possible.      
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  
The theory of change for this Project is founded on several key principles. Central to all, the CND represents 
a complex landscape – a geospatial mosaic of forest and farming patches, each dependent on the other. 
These coupled, biological and socio -economi c systems are under great strain due to intense land pressure, 
which has resulted in a negative cycle of natural resource degradation that undermines the well -being of 
both natural and socio -economic systems. The advent of climate change is a forceful driv er that intensifies 
this cycle of degradation, with the resultant loss of key ecosystem services that importantly link forests and 
people. This cycle must be disrupted in order to chart a path toward climate resilience for natural and human 
systems. Ecolog ical connectivity must be established within this mosaic of land uses to promote landscape 
heterogeneity to help build resilience to climate change of forest ecosystems and people who depend on 
them. The approach to be taken by this Project is therefore based on principles of ecosystem -based 
adaptation: that healthy and resilient ecosystems form an essential foundation for adaptation to climate 
challenges60. Climate -aware management of both natural and human -dominated ecosystems – interacting 
and integrat ed at a landscape level – can break the cycle of degradation and instead lead to a positive 
sequence of mutually reinforcing, climate -smart, sustainable, and resilient benefits..  
In sum, the goal statement of the Project is:  
IF Rwanda’s CND landscape of native forests and neighboring farmlands is effectively managed for climate 
resilience  
THEN  the CND will comprise an interconnected  and interdependent set of globally significant, species -rich 
natural forests  in a matrix of sust ainable farmlands , acting as buffers against damage from extreme weather 
events : assuring  landscape integrity, stability and adaptability,  providing  vital ecosystem services and 
improving livelihoods for vulnerable people and the nation at large and contributing importantly to the 
conservation of biodiversity, the national economy, and mitigation of GHGs  
BECAUSE  building the capacity and management of integrated, climate -resilient forest and farming systems 
will ensure natural forest perpetuity and b reak and reverse the climate change -induced intensifying cycles 
of drought, flooding, and landslides that lead to degradation of livelihoods and resultant increased pressure 
on forest resources.  
The status and future of the CND’s forests and people are tig htly intertwined: both heavily dependent on the 
natural resources and processes that provide a foundation for their ability to thrive. They represent ecological 
and socio -economic systems that are importantly coupled in a complex landscape, linked in parti cular by the 
ecosystem services that flow throughout these systems (hydrological and microclimate regulation, soil 
conservation, and nature -based tourism). At present these services, and the consequent relationships 
between forests and people – especially those who are most vulnerable in Rwandan society – are deeply 
 
60  Scarano, F.R. et al, 2017 . Ecosystem -based adaptation to climate change: concept, sustainability and a role for 
conservation science,  Perspectives in Ecology & Conservation 15(2), 65 -73.


---
*Page 29*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
strained61. Forests have been reduced in extent, fragmented, and degraded by fire62, overuse of resources63, 
and introduction of exotic species64. The sharply sloped rural lands of the CND have been farmed more and 
more extensively and intensively on steeper and steeper slopes65,66 and throughout riverine bottomlands, 
further reducing tree cover outside forest blocks: thereby further compromising the ability of the land to retain 
soils67, avoid f looding68, provide consistent and healthy water44, ameliorate microclimate49, store carbon69, 
and remain productive. The coupling of these stressed systems has led to a negative feedback cycle of 
insecurity and constrained the well -being of farmers. Having little access to alternative sources of livelihoods 
or capital to enable change70, smallholder farmers have consequently increased pressures on natural forests 
for land, fuel, and other forest resources46. Such pressures in turn cause furth er forest loss and degradation 
and decline in biodiversity – reducing their ability to provide essential ecosystem services to people living in 
the landscape and across the nation, including tourism revenues and employment that are of national import. 
Thus , these systems are caught in a negative cycle that has proven difficult to break, despite significant 
sector -specific efforts. One such pressure – demand for fuelwood – is quite substantial given that a recent 
Government of Rwanda (GoR) census found that 77% of Rwandan households use wood as their primary 
fuel for cooking71. 
With the advent of climate change, these already strained systems are showing clear signs of breakdown. 
Increased variability in the timing and intensity of rains along with rising tem peratures are causing increased 
landslides72 and soil erosion50, increased desiccation and drought50, and unpredictable timing for agricultural 
plantings and harvest73. This is reducing farm productivity and security, driving even greater pressures on 
the remaining forested estate, thereby compromising further the essential ecosystem services that are 
necessary to such well -being. At a larger scale, climate -induced forest degradation and decline of 
biodiversity in the CND compromise national -level benefits of water provision and quality1, nature -based 
tourism74, the supply of hydroelectricity,7,75 and carbon storage10 [see diagram A below].  
 
61  Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows and potential 
supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.  
62  Masoz era, A.B., Mulindahabi, F., 2007. Post-Fire Regeneration in Nyungwe National Park , Rwanda. Wildlife 
Conservation Society.  
63  Republic of Rwanda, 2011. Green Growth and Climate Resilience: National Strategy for Climate Change and Low 
Carbon Development . 
64  USAID, 2019. Rwanda Tropical Forests and Biodiversity Analysis . 
65  Camberlin, P., 2018. Climate of Eastern Africa . In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science.  
66  Seimon, A., 2022. An Overview of Climate Change and its Impacts along the Congo -Nile Divide in Rwanda . 
67  World Bank, 2019. Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic . 
68  Karamage, F., et al., 2017. Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water  2017,  9(2), 14.  
69   Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M.,  Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
70  Clay N., King B., 2019. Smallholders' uneven capacities to adapt to climate change amid Africa's 'green 
revolution': Case study of Rwanda's crop intensification program . World Dev.  
71   Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.  
72  Uwihirwe, J., et al., 2020 . Landslide precipitation thresholds in Rwanda . Lan dslides.  
73  World Bank; CIAT. 2015. Climate -Smart Agriculture in Rwanda . CSA Country Profiles for Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America and the Caribbean Series. Washington D.C.: The World  Bank Group.  
74  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2015 . Rwan da State of Environment and Outlook Report.  
75  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2009 . Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report , 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.


---
*Page 30*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
 
 
This context calls for new mechanisms of land -use planning and management that are based on 
consideration of the C ND as a landscape, consisting of an inter -dependent mosaic of forests and farms, the 
management of each determining the health of the whole. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination 
across geographic and sectoral boundaries, while mainstreaming cli mate risks into management planning 
will be key – and the foundation for a paradigm shift. Use of this framework to design and apply practical, 
precedent -setting Project actions in -forest and on -farm is expected to shift mindsets and management 
systems. Th is, in combination with establishing durable sources of financing, is thereby intended to shift the 
natural and human ecosystems themselves toward sustainable climate resilience. [see diagram B above, 
and the ToC (Theory of Change) diagram below.


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 
Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 15. Theory of change


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 29 
 
  
Outcome 1. Landscape planning, policies and management are effective and coordinated across 
sectors and scales to address climate risks and adaptation benefits.  Major barriers currently stand in 
the way of moving in this direction, as outlined in the ToC diagram. Awareness, understanding, attention, 
and action regarding climate risks to natural resources are currently insufficient . Planning and 
adaptation to climate impacts are constrained by a lack of information, site -focused modeling, spatial 
analysis, and real -time monitoring. Where some capacity exists, it operates within sector initiatives rather 
than across them . It also proceeds largely within governmental programs, with mechanisms for inclusive 
land-use planning inadequate , not fully engaging rural peoples – particularly women and youth. Because 
of these barriers, coordination of landscape planning and management is weak across governmental and 
non-governmental sectors (agriculture, forestry, national parks, economic development), scales (local, 
district, natio nal), and actors (women, youth, smallholder farmers, commercial businesses, as well as 
governmental agencies). Activities outlined in Component 1 , aimed at integrated landscape land -use 
planning and the capacity for effective management, are intended to he lp ensure ecosystem services persist, 
and thereby align the ties between forests and people as they are faced with climate challenges. Activities 
under this component will provide the government and public with up -to-date information on climate 
adaptation (1.1.1), build agency capacities for incorporation into land -use planning – particularly spatial 
analysis and forest monitoring (1.2.2, 1.2.3), establish mechanisms for integrated landscape planning – 
including public participation and operations of an int er-agency task force (1.1.2, 1.2.1), and facilitate the 
creation of a climate -smart, integrated CND land -use plan (1.1.2).  
Outcome 2. Natural forests are protected, connected, more resilient to climate impacts and risks.  
Particular to the CND, another key barrier is that natural forests are as yet undervalued and under -
resourced  despite the fact that they play vital roles in stabilizing natural and human CND ecosystems76,77. 
The national parks of the CND (Volcanoes, Nyungwe, and Gishwati -Mukura) are globally significant 
regarding their outstanding species richness, levels of endemism, and presence of endangered and rare 
species78. Although these are well -recognized for their  tourism potential, and strong governmental policy and 
practice exists to protect them, barriers to their full valuation remains: their ecosystem services are yet to 
be fully recognized  or financially supported, and their support is vulnerable to global to urism trends  
(with COVID -reduced tourism as a current example). As climate change considerations enter into landscape 
management, the values of these natural forests for fog interception, precipitation infiltration, soil retention, 
drought mitigation, and hydrological balance are only now becoming more prominent. In order to provide 
such services into the future, Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura NPs are in need of restoration and 
connection79,80. Yet the understanding and capacity for recovering their richness and function is nascent at 
best, particularly in light of climate change. Activities outlined in Component 2  are therefore designed with 
forest sustainability at the core. To build climate considerations into forest planning and management, the 
Project will facilitate revision of park management plans (2.1.1) that enhance dimensions of fire prevention 
and management (2.1.3), and will support in -park forest restoration (2.2.2). Establishment of restored forest 
at park boundaries (2.2.2), riparian linkages outside the parks (2.2.2), and forested “stepping stones” that 
 
76  Gatwaza O.C., Wang X., 2021 Mapping of biodiversity hubs and key ecosystem  services as a tool for shaping 
optimal areas for conservation.  PLOS ONE 16(8): e0253151  
77  Andrew, G., Masozera, M., 2010. Payment for Ecosystem Services and Poverty Reduction in Rwanda . Journal of 
Sustainable Development in Africa (V12, No.3).  
78  This a rea is also significant for global biodiversity – with the Albertine Rift being one of the most biodiverse regions 
within Africa, including conservative estimates of at least 980 endemic species, 15 Critically Endangered species, 34 
Endangered species, and  99 Vulnerable species. Source: Plumptre, A.J., et al. 2016. Conservation Action Plan for the 
Albertine Rift . Wildlife Conservation Society.  
79  Nyandwi, E., Mukashema, A., 2011. Excessive Deforestation of Gishwati  Mountainous Forest & Biodiversity 
Changes . Participatory Geographic Information Systems (P -GIS) for natural resource management and food security in 
Africa.  
80  Ordway, E., 2015. Political shifts and changing forests: Effects of armed conflict on forest co nservation in Rwanda . 
Global Ecology and Conservation.


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 allow for forest species to move between parks (2.2.1, 2.2.3) is intended to enhance biodiversity and forest 
functions across th e CND landscape.  Fundamental to forest sustainability as well is sustainable long -term 
financing, which will be addressed by providing technical support from the Project to RBD and REMA to 
assess various financial instruments (conservation and/or water fu nds, bonds, revenue streams) to be 
employed for revenue generation post -GCF (2.1.2).  
Outcome 3. Vulnerable rural livelihoods are more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable 
and nature -positive.  The sustainability and climate resilience of th e agricultural matrix of this landscape is 
challenged by additional, multiple barriers. Rural agricultural practices and livelihoods are constrained by 
the very small size of landholdings (avg. 0.3 ha81), creating intense pressure to utilize all arable lan d for food 
and near -term income -generating products56, thus creating reluctance to incorporate trees or other soil 
conservation measures on the land82. The resultant lack of fuelwood in turn continues to drive 
deforestation of natural forests12, and occupi es important time for women and youth  who could 
instead be engaged in productive and empowering roles. Overall, local communities and extension 
services83 have limited skills, information and knowledge to design and implement farming methods  
that would enh ance their capacity to mitigate the impacts from climate -induced soil erosion, flooding and 
droughts. Farmers also lack access to financial know -how56 and capital, proven alternative livelihoods, 
and markets  that could incentivize and enable change12. They  are therefore caught in a cycle of immediate 
need that – without alternatives – forecloses options that could recover and sustain benefits from improved 
ecosystem services, other forest functions, and new livelihoods. Component 3  aims to redress these 
conditions via activities that will demonstrate, incentivize, facilitate, and support actions that maintain and 
recover ecosystem services, benefit from forest functions and provide alternative on - and off -farm based 
incomes that reduce pressure on forests. T o these ends, the Project will support reafforestation on steep 
slopes (>55%), on both public and smallholder private lands (Activity 3.1.1). It will develop farm -based 
agroforestry for climate -resilient species that produce fuelwood and/or market products , while conserving 
and enriching soils (3.1.2, 3.2.1). The Project will complement land -based production with a scaling -up of 
alternative value -chain products for smallholders that are nature -positive, including but not limited to tourism -
based income, bee keeping, and improved cooking stoves (3.2.2, 3.2.4). Central to these activities will be 
facilitation of access to market chains (3.2.3) and financial mechanisms for establishing and maintaining 
businesses (3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3). Given that these activities  are designed at the core to be profitable and 
promote financial sustainability, it is intended that they be replicable, and sustained once GCF funding 
expires.  
Assumptions . Success in achieving Project outcomes will depend on important assumptions being m et, 
among them that governmental and non -governmental actors will be willing to work in collaboration across 
sectoral and geographic boundaries; rural adoption of alternative farming and off -farm revenue generation 
can be scaled up to drive a landscape -level transition to sustainability; financing and revenue -generating 
mechanisms will be established that assure continuance of initiated actions; and governmental commitment 
to natural forest restoration and ecosystem -based adaptation continues in national st rategies and in meeting 
global commitments.  
The pathways summarized in this ToC are expected to contribute to the overall goal and outcomes of the 
Project : natural forests  and vulnerable communities  will be more resilient and sustainable despite climate 
impacts, with effective, coordinated management across the CND landscape. In doing so, important co -
benefits will accrue. Intentional, inclusive engagement in management coordination will empower women 
and youth  in environmental thinking and decision making.  Forest conservation and restoration, along with 
agroforestry, will contribute to greater carbon sequestration and storage, while fire management and 
greater cooking efficiency will reduce GHG emissions . The globally unique, endemic biodiversity of 
 
81  USAID, 2017. LandLinks Country Profile: Rwanda. https://www.land -links.org/country -profile/rwanda/   
82  Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority, 2017. Forest Investment Program for Rwanda . 
83  Foster & Graham, 2014. Connectivity and the Tea Sector in Rwanda: Value Chains and Networks of Connectivity -
Based Enterprises in Rwanda.


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 31 
 
 Rwanda’ s forests, from great apes to rare orchids, will recover on the basis of healthy, more connected and 
resilient forest habitat.   
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low- 
emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliance
s MRA 4  
Forestry 
and land 
use ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communitie
s ARA 2  
Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructur
e and built 
environmen
t ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1. 
Landscape 
planning, policies & 
management 
effective & 
coordinated across 
sectors and scales 
to address climate 
risks & adaptation 
benefits  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 2. Natural 
forests protected, 
connected, more 
resilient to climate 
impacts & risks  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 3. 
Vulnerable rural 
livelihoods more 
climate -resilient, 
diverse, 
economically 
sustainable & 
nature -positive  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
Co-benefits 
number  Co-benefits  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1 : 
Globally unique, 
endemic 
biodiversity 
maintained  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2 : 
Women and 
Youth 
empowered  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
       
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Rwanda’s CND region is a complex, naturally integrated landscape. Its diverse high elevation forests capture 
and store water resources, releasing them in a sustained manner throughout the year to surrounding steep 
hillside and bottomland farms and plantati ons, before feeding into the national network of wetlands, rivers, 
and lakes. The Rwanda portion of the CND runs from the Virunga Mountains and Volcanoes National Park 
(VNP) on the border with Uganda in the north, down through Gishwati Mukura National Park  (GMNP), to the 
south end of Lake Kivu and Nyungwe National Park (NNP) on the southern border with Burundi. These three


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 32 
 
 national parks contain the country’s only remaining montane forests. The boundaries of the CND landscape 
are defined as all areas greate r than 1900m in elevation.  
Administratively, the CND overlaps three Provinces (Western, Southern, Northern) and ten Districts 
(Karongi, Musanze, Ngororero, Nyabihu, Nyamagabe, Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru, Rubavu, Rusizi, Rutsiro).  
 
 
Figure 16. Map of CND Landscape


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Map of CND Landscape drainage basins  
 
To address the present and intensifying threats from climate change requires that this region also be 
managed as an integrated and ecologically connected system. This need is recognized in several key 
policies and plans enacted in recent years by the Rwandan government. However, implementation and 
integration84 of these have lagged, their decentralized application on the ground is largely unrealized, and 
climate -related technic al capacity remains limited in key institutions at all levels. This Project is designed to 
increase the climate resilience of the CND. Its intended outcomes are:  
● The development and implementation of effective landscape planning, policies, and management, 
coordinated across sectors and scales, to address climate risks and adaptation benefits;  
 
84   Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows and 
potential supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 34 
 
 ● Improved protection, restoration, and connection of existing natural forests, with enhanced resilience 
to climate impacts and risks; and  
● The transformation of vulnerab le rural livelihoods to be more climate -resilient, diverse, economically 
sustainable, and nature positive.  
The Project has three main components directly targeting vulnerabilities within climate impact chains. 
Detailed analyses of the underlying rationale are provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2). Please see 
section 4.1 of that study, for a list and descr iption of relevant existing and previous projects in the region.    
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning   
There is an urgent need for more effective collaboration among Rwandan government agencies, civil society, 
private sector, and diverse partners to balance difficult -yet-inevitable land use trade -offs that will have 
profound impacts on the climate resilience of both natural systems and people. The GoR recognizes that a 
piecemeal approach to decision mak ing has exacerbated competition over scarce land resources and 
reduced the adaptive capacity of both ecosystems and rural populations85. Rwanda’s Baseline Climate 
Change Vulnerability Index (2015) recommends establishing a multi -ministry technical climate resilience 
coordinating committee, including NGOs86. In 2017 the MoE developed the Strategic Programme for Climate 
Resilience (SPCR), to focus on three cross -cutting priorities to achieve climate change resilience: (a) 
technical capacity building and stren gthening institutional coordination; (b) integrated land use and spatial 
planning; and (c) climate services and disaster risk management87. The SPCR is a key step towards ensuring 
inter-ministerial and multi -sectoral collaboration and integration of climat e resilience considerations into 
development plans and actions. However, there remains a need to comprehensively implement the strategy 
and mainstream climate change adaptation at the sub -national level, engaging a diverse set of actors and 
sectors and emp owering women to provide input into decision making at district and community levels.  
Output 1.1: Landscape -wide land -use plan developed for climate -resilient livelihoods and forest 
ecosystems, integrating district strategies.  
The GoR completed a National Land Use and Development Master Plan (NLUMP 2020) to guide land use 
planning and regulate permitting processes. However, effective and strategic land use has yet to be applied 
at a local and district level, and the conversion of plantation and riparian for ests to agriculture continues and 
development projects are approved without sufficient knowledge of climate change risks or the value of 
existing forests for ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA)88. The Project will add climate -change  resilience and 
adaptation content to central government efforts such as NLUMP and the SPCR process by acquiring, 
synthesizing, and disseminating key information on climate trends, the importance of remaining natural 
forests, and the value of ecosystem services. This information wil l also be shared at district and community 
levels through var ious outreach networks and workshops, with particular attention to reaching disadvantaged 
women, youth and vulnerable groups.  
Building on the information base outlined above, the Project will wor k with the National Land Authority (NLA) 
to establish a working group, with participation from relevant ministries, agencies, and districts, including 
representatives of women, youth, and vulnerable groups interests, to develop a climate -resilient land -use 
 
85  National Land Use Management Plan.  
86  United Nations, 2015. Economic Commission f or Africa; Rwanda Environment Management Authority. Baseline 
climate change vulnerability index for Rwanda. Kigali. Rwanda Environment Management Authority.  
87  Rwanda’s Green Fund (FONERWA), 2017. Strategic Programme for Climate Resilience (SPCR) Rwanda - 
December 2017. Link. 
88  Scarano, F.R. et al, 2017 . Ecosystem -based adaptation to climate change: concept, sustainability and a role for 
conservation science,  Perspectives in Ecology & Conservation 15(2), 65 -73.


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 35 
 
 plan for the CND landscape. At the national level each relevant ministry and government agency will select 
and appoint a working group member while at the district level, participants will be selected from the Joint 
Action Development Forum (JADF). JADF i s a multi -stakeholder platform meant to facilitate and promote 
the full participation of citizens in the decentralized and participatory governance and improve service 
provision processes with representatives from the public sector, private sector and civi l society. The following 
stakeholders will form the basis of the collaboration: a) the Ministry of Environment represented by four of 
its agencies: the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA); the National Land Authority (NLA), 
Rwanda Water Board (R BA) and the Rwanda Forest Authority (RFA); b) the Ministry of Agriculture, including 
the Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB);  c) the National Agriculture Export Board (NAEB) d) Ministry of Local 
Government; e) Rwanda Development Board (RDB); f) Gender Monitori ng Office (GMO); g) Districts 
Decentralized Structures – the District Administrative Units, which supervise several technical and 
administrative activities; h) civil society, international organisations, academia and community based 
organizations. This lis t will be discussed during the inception period and expanded as necessary. From this, 
a spatial framework for district level land use planning will be developed that accounts for current and future 
climate risks, reconciles cross -sectoral land -use conflict s, and guides development decisions. All the 
activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forest Authority in collaboration 
with National Land Authority, and districts.  
Activity 1.1.1.  Synthesize and disseminate informati on on value of natural forests and ecosystem services  
This activity will involve conducting a stakeholder mapping & consultation exercise in order to better 
understand the use of climate adaptation data in existing sectoral planning processes, and identify  cross -
sectoral linkages or conflicts. These results, along with a comprehensive literature review, will inform the 
design of high -level information packages that will synthesize information on climate risks for various sectors 
(e.g. agriculture, forestry)  and highlight the value of forests for increasing resilience of local communities. An 
information dissemination program (e.g., presentations, workshops, and newsletters) will be implemented to 
share this knowledge among key ministries as well as governmen t, non -government and community 
organisations. The Project will use JADF as a platform to disseminate information to key stakeholders. 
Particular attention will be paid to ensure women, vulnerable and youth groups from Ubudehe categories c, 
d and e are rep resented . In addition, the program will use mass media in the form of a radio program and 
complementary community action campaigns to improve community, women, youth, other vulnerable groups 
knowledge on climate information, climate risks and climate adap tation options. This will stimulate discussion 
on issues pertaining to climate risks and other social issues locally and support engagement of each in 
responding effectively to climate adaptation and resilience options.   
Cross -sectoral tradeoffs and climate adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral implications will also be 
highlighted, in order to begin promoting the benefits of integrated land -use planning. To complement the 
high-level information dissemination program, a suite of technical training materials will also be developed 
for delivery to district technical staff. These materials will provide training on climate risks & the need to 
incorporate climate adaptation into land -use planning, with a focus on the technical skills required for climate -
sensitive planning (e.g. sourcing climate data, mapping ecosystem services).  
Sub-activities will include:  
1.1.1.1 Map the sectors involved in land -use planning in the CND and review how forest ecosystem services 
and climate resilience are incorporated in to each sector’s planning process


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 36 
 
 1.1.1.2 Conduct comprehensive literature review & stakeholder consultation to collect & synthesize 
information on climate risks for various sectors (e.g. agriculture, forestry), the value of forests for increasing 
resilien ce of local communities, and highlight adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral implications.  
1.1.1.3 Host workshops & presentations with key ministries, government organizations, NGOs and 
community organizations to disseminate high -level knowledge on valu e of forests for increasing resilience 
of local communities.  
1.1.1.4 Develop guidelines for integrating climate risk into land use planning and cross sectoral planning  
1.1.1.5 Develop outreach materials on climate and related risks in the CND and the value  of forest 
ecosystems for increasing resilience  
1.1.1.6 Implement outreach program tailored to different stakeholders (local government, civil society, 
communities, women, youth) to enhance capacities for land -use planning, funding mobilization, and delive ry 
of climate adaptation actions  
1.1.1.7 Conduct climate literacy seminars for local government and civil society organizations, aimed at 
increasing women and youth participation.  
1.1.1.8 Provide financial and logistical support to trained organizations in grassroots mobilization to increase 
women and youth participation in climate adaptation planning.  
1.1.1.9 Introduce social safeguards at a high level at each meeting, including the GRM, FPIC, and Access 
Restrictions Mitigations as safeguar ds to be in place for work with local communities.  
Activity 1.1.2.  Develop climate -resilient landscape land -use plan  
This activity aims to ensure that climate change adaptation requirements are fully integrated into planning 
processes at local, district a nd national scales. This will involve i) participatory scenario analysis to 
understand the problems local communities and district officials face in terms of natural disasters (flooding, 
soil erosion, forest loss/degradation) and climate change, as well as  the future land use plans of the districts, 
including an assessment of the national consequences of these problems in terms of ecosystem service 
delivery and climate change resilience and adaptation capacity; ii) risk assessment to estimate the impacts 
of the planned land use changes, as well as climate change, on flood risk, soil erosion, forest 
loss/degradation and the well -being of local people, especially any disproportionate impacts on women, 
youth and vulnerable groups; iii) climate change adaptation  and mitigation measures development to decide 
possible climate actions for both adaptation and mitigation and prioritize these actions according to their 
feasibility and urgency in consultation with local communities, district leaders, and other stakehold ers; and 
iv) land use plan development based on the recommendations from the previous 3 steps. A comprehensive 
consultation and feedback process will be undertaken to incorporate views of stakeholders at all levels (e.g. 
civil society; men, women, youth, a nd historically marginalized people in local communities; district & national 
government), upon which the plan will be finalized and approved by the Government of Rwanda.  
Sub activities will include:  
1.1.2.1 Engage district officials, Joint Action Develo pment Forums (JADF), and community members in the 
CND (especially women) in reviewing and interpreting the National Land Use and Development 
Management Plan (NLUMP), to ensure the plan accounts for current and future climate and related risks, 
while buildi ng local support for climate sensitive planning


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 37 
 
 1.1.2.2 Conduct participatory land -use planning process in communities from village to district level to 
support integrated climate resilient land use planning  
1.1.2.3 Develop Integrated Land -use Plan that su pports Resilient Livelihoods and Ecosystems in the CND, 
ensuring alignment with National Land Use and Development Master Plan and ensuring the CND plan guides 
the district plan  
1.1.2.4 Develop and roll out a series of trainings (virtual sessions and online  modules) on gender sensitivity 
and mainstreaming women and youth into planning  
1.1.2.5 Assess specific climate impacts on historically marginalized and Category c,d,e populations through 
a participatory NR process to ensure the Project components address their needs for adaptation  
Output 1.2 Local and national institutional capacities strengthened to integrate biodiversity and 
climate risks into land use planning and management  
Forest data in Rwanda has historically been generated in an ad -hoc fashion89 through the support of external 
agencies. This precludes comprehensive consideration of forest and biodiversity data in land -use planning 
processes. As Rwanda moves to achieve the goals outlined in the Green Growth and Climate Resilience 
Strategy and the Nat ional Land -Use Development Master Plan, building governmental capacity in generating 
and utilizing spatial data to inform decision making is essential. The activities under this output will involve 
recruiting experts in mapping, remote sensing and ecosyste m service modeling, in order to establish a formal 
spatial planning unit within government. These experts will also lead a formal information dissemination and 
capacity building program, in order to i) promote the importance of considering forest & climate  resilience 
into land -use planning, and ii) deliver detailed training to technical staff on forest mapping, climate and 
ecosystem service modeling. The Project will also increase the understanding of the importance of forest 
landscape restoration in securi ng ecosystem services for local economic development and resilient 
livelihoods. It will ensure that the public, decision -makers and other stakeholders in the CND landscape have 
a high level of awareness of the risks to the economy and livelihoods associate d with deforestation under 
current and possible evolution of these risks with the changing climate, and the benefits of reforestation in 
an integrated landscape approach.  
Women’s land rights need some key consideration for an effective integration of wome n in land use planning 
and management, among which include advocacy for women’s knowledge of their rights, women’s 
confidence in the dispute resolution process and outcomes, men’s respect of women’s rights, and modest 
improvements in physical and social ac cessibility of the local justice system for women are most critical 
avenues for success. These factors will be considered throughout project implementation of the activities 
proposed within this project using a gender -responsive, participatory and fully tr ansparent approach. For 
example, under the project trained institutions will hold meetings to train women, youth and marginalized 
people on forests and mobilize them to participate in planning processes and local institutions will be trained 
to build capac ity of rural people, specifically women and youth, to participate in climate adaptation processes 
Program Staff and government officials will be trained understand gender barriers, understand how to 
mainstream gender equality principles into planning  and  support women, youth and marginalized 
participation in meetings.  
Furthermore, the Project will support dialogue with the private sector and planning processes needed to 
mainstream climate change and biodiversity in the tea sector. Projected climate chang es predict significant 
elevation rises in CND agro ecological zones, including the potential for tea cultivation at much higher 
 
89   Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change  in Western Rwanda during periods of wars and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 38 
 
 elevations than at present. This is unlikely to threaten Rwanda’s existing montane forest parks, as foreign 
revenues from touris m in these reserves far surpass those from tea. However, tea remains a significant 
source of foreign revenue and a government target for expansion. Any increased tea production in the CND 
would therefore most likely affect lands outside of parks: smallhold er, cooperative, and district holdings, 
many of which might also be targets for reforestation, agroforestry, and biodiversity stepping stone initiatives 
under this Project. The integrated land use planning included in this Project design, will bring togeth er tea 
industry, agriculture, forestry, biodiversity, and tourism interests to identify and reduce such potential 
conflicts over use of the CND’s limited land resource base. Through this integrated land use planning we 
aim to establish a formal public -private sector forum at the landscape level to help improve communication 
across sectors, appreciation of environmental issues, and increase synergies between interventions to avoid 
conflicting targets and indicators between sectors.  
This output will comprise the following activities and sub activities which will be executed by the Rwanda 
Forestry Agency (RFA) in collaboration with key government agencies, private sector and civil society 
organizations.  
Activity 1.2.1 Create interagency taskforce institutionali zing integrated landscape planning and policy  
Insufficient mechanisms for integrated land use planning constitute one of the key barriers for sustainable 
natural management in Rwanda. Planning processes within government agencies are carried out in silos 
without paying attention to the impacts a certain land use activity or project will have on other sectors of the 
economy. This Project aims to facilitate improved collaboration among government agencies by 
strengthening the government’s existing cross -secto ral planning task force. The existing task force was set 
up to support cross -sectoral implementation of the National Strategy for Economic Transformation, but it 
suffers a number of weaknesses, including: i) a lack of official mandate for the task force to  carry out 
activities; ii) irregular attendance of members; and iii) lack of clear and regular funding to facilitate meetings. 
This activity will review the mandate and structure of the cross -sectoral task force and promote solutions for 
strengthening its operation to RFA (the task force coordinator). It will also facilitate quarterly meetings of the 
task-force, in particular between institutions in charge of agriculture and agroforestry, to encourage synergies 
and avoid overlapping mandates and redundancy in different climate resilience interventions. The involved 
staff at both national and local levels shall be empowered to readily share information and activity plans, and 
will be offered technical support to generate materials that can inform decision -making (e.g. policy briefs, 
map, presentations). The Project will support collaborative integrated landscape planning, which secures 
climate resilience undertaken with appropriate social safeguards.  
Sub activities will include:  
1.2.1.1 Review & strengthen operationalisation of the current cross -sectoral task force  
1.2.1.2 Hold quarterly sectoral planning meetings with both national and district administrations in CND and 
the private sector involved in mining, agriculture, and livestock production in the landscape  
1.2.1.3 Facilitate discussions and provide technical  support (e.g. policy briefs) in decision -making for cross -
sectoral actions around climate adaptation and forest resilience in the CND  
1.2.1.4 Continue to introduce social safeguards at each meeting including the GRM, FPIC, and Access 
Restrictions Mitigati ons as safeguards to be in place for work with local communities. For those at the district 
or community level, provide options for feedback on the process and best ways of communication with local 
partners.


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 39 
 
  
 
Activity 1.2.2 Build capacity for spatial plan ning in national agencies re climate change  
Spatial planning is emerging as a valuable tool for the development of evidence -based land use and climate 
resilience strategies90. This subcomponent will develop capacity within the Rwanda’s university network a nd 
the MoE to use remot e sensing, ecosystem service modeling and spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, 
InVEST, RIOS, SWAT and other open access tools such as Open Foris) to inc orporate climate risks and 
climate resilience strategies into development plans and to readily identify and reconcile land use conflicts. 
A prime example of the latter is the potential for climate -driven shifts in optimal elevation zones for coffee 
and tea cultivation conflicting with current subsistence agricul ture in the case of cof fee, and key remaining 
natural forest fragments with regard to any upward migration of tea. These spatial planning tools will be 
procured by the project and will be made available to the spatial planning unit.  
The Project will assist the GoR in developing  a dedicated spatial planning unit (SPU) within an appropriate 
ministry or cross -cutting agency. The appropriate hosting institution will be determined during the project 
implementation in consultation with key government agencies operating under the Minis try of Environment.  
This will include support for training high level Rwandan specialists to provide the technical expertise needed 
to process and integrate spatial planning into decision -making within and across secto rs. A specific 
contribution of this S PU in coordination with appropriate governmental and non -governmental partners is 
the development and operationalization of an innovative, scientifically credible, scalable system for 
monitoring trends in natural forest cover and forest types at multiple s cales. This SPU will also allow Rwanda 
to measure and report on the land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector as part of a national 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory (GHG -I). This system will build on the national FMES that was established with 
the sup port from ENABEL.  
Capacity building is essential for execution of the Project; even more so for the sustainability of Project 
elements in the long run. To improve Rwanda’s collective ability to integrate land use planning in support of 
climate change resi lience and delivery of ecosystem services, these sub -activities are planned:  
1.2.2.1 Recruit spatial planning expert/s to support spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.2 Assess and identify the institutional home and operationalize the spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.3 Conduct a capacity needs assessment and identify the appropriate tools for spatial planning to fit the 
Rwandan context and conduct familiarization  
1.2.2.4 Led by the spatial planning unit, develop capacity within the University of Rwanda and the MoE to 
use remote sensing, ecosystem service modeling and spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, InVEST, RIOS, 
SWAT) to incorporate climate risks into land use planning processes  
1.2.2.5 Deliver training workshops on utilization of earth system models for land use pl anning purposes, 
utilization of remote sensing resources (lightning, satellite radiances) for hazards detection and climate 
monitoring and on regional climate monitoring and applications.  
Activity 1.2.3 Develop an effective forest monitoring system to unde rpin forest management decisions  
 
90  Mathias S., et al, 2019. The Spatial Development Framework to facilitate urban management in countries with 
weak planning systems, Internatio nal Planning Studies, 24:3 -4, 235 -254, DOI: 10.1080/13563475.2019.1658571


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 40 
 
 Within Rwanda, forest -related data is limited in scope and generally outdated91. Consequently, the current 
state and trends of Rwanda’s forests are not well understood. Efforts to improve the situation through 
individual st udies have been valuable but have not led to systematic increases in spatial information on 
trends in different forest cover types and resilience at the scales at which land use decisions are being made. 
For example, the FMES software focuses on forestry a nd plantation forests, but does not address natural 
forests. This activity will update and monitor forest cover data in different ecological zones and forest types 
using high resolution satellite imagery, field work, and remote sensing techniques. In addit ion to remote 
sensing techniques,  the Project team, once selected, will meet with government and international partners 
to assess best monitoring tools and platforms, including Open Foris. Close attention will also be given to the 
system used by Mugabowind ekwe et al (2023)92 for the most recent, highly detailed forest inventory from 
2007 imagery. RFA will recruit a Rwandan expert who will work with WCS experts in applying spatial planning 
and forest monitoring tools in support of  government agencies during  the project implementation  to  
strengthen the capacities of RFA, NLA and  GIS Center at the University of Rwanda.  
An adaptive forest, climate change and land use monitoring system will be established to support climate 
resilient forest management decisio ns through the following:  
1.2.3.1 Recruit Forest ecologist or remote sensing expert to support the design and implementation of 
indigenous forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.2 Review existing forest mapping data and monitoring software, and assess utility for generating 
quantitative assessments of indigenous forest cover from local to national scales  
1.2.3.3 In collaboration with REMA, MINAGRI, RAB, RDB, RISA, MoE and affiliated agencies and University 
of Rwanda, design structure and operation of fo rest monitoring system, including required inputs (data, 
computing, personnel), desired outputs, and operational structure (e.g. location, reporting structure, funding)  
1.2.3.4 Purchase and install 2 new weather automatic stations in the CND  
1.2.3.5 Establ ish & operationalize forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.6 Generate updated maps & statistics for indigenous forest cover, forest type etc. using forest 
monitoring system  
1.2.3.7 Develop capacity within hosting institution for continued operation of forest moni toring system  
Component 2: Forest and landscape management and restoration  
The GoR has prioritized forest management and restoration – including natural forests in protected areas – 
as a key component of climate change adaptation strategies for the CND landscape.93 Natural forests within 
the national park system have been generally well protected and managed in recent years, earning high 
marks for biodiversity conservation while also developing a high quality – and quite lucrative – set of 
ecotourism att ractions. Current park management plans, however, include little attention to the potential 
effects of projected climate change. Outside of parks, few areas with natural forest cover remain and forest 
management and restoration approaches are not being imp lemented at the scale required to significantly 
improve forest climate resilience. Where forests are restored, most use exotic species and mono -specific 
 
91  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017. Analysis of forests and climate change in Eastern 
Africa.  Forests and Climate Change Working Paper 16.  
92  Mugabowind ekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al.  Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang.  13, 91–97 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
93  IUCN, 2014. Forest landscape restoration opportunity assessment for Rwanda . Link.


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 41 
 
 plantations that are generally incompatible with mixed agricultural uses; they are also vulnerable to d iseases 
and pests with climate warming.  
In this component, targeted interventions will integrate climate change awareness and adaptation into 
national forest park planning, policies and management, as well as restore degraded areas within those 
parks. Thes e efforts will help sustain the forests’ rich biodiversity, the lucrative tourism revenues that flow 
into local and national economies, and the ecosystem services needed for climate resilience of vulnerable 
communities. This suite of activities will also i dentify priority areas outside of parks – in remnant natural 
stands, around wetlands, and along streams – for protection and restoration as “stepping stones” and  
linkages for long -term climate change connectivity.  
Output 2.1 Protected Area management effec tiveness improved re climate risks and adaptation  
The remnant natural forests of the CND harbor globally significant biodiversity across multiple taxa, from 
primates to birds and orchids. More than 10% of these species are regionally endemic94 – 47 flowering plants 
are endemic to Nyungwe Forest alone95. Though each has suffered from significant past habitat loss, the 
Nyungwe and Volcanoes National Parks have been generally well -managed under the Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB), with assistance f rom NGOs, PPPs, and the private sector. Rwanda’s reputation 
for ecotourism and nature tourism attractions is world class. It has also earned conservation recognition for 
the dramatic recovery of its endangered mountain gorillas, sustained protection of its  remaining biodiversity, 
and creation of a significant revenue -sharing program with parks -adjacent communities. The recent addition 
of Gishwati -Mukura National Park to this mountain forest network underscores the government’s 
commitment to conservation, th ough both forest blocks require significant restoration for the purposes of 
biodiversity conservation, connectivity, and ecosystem services enhancement.  
In contrast to Rwanda’s areas of conservation success, relatively little attention – and less action – has been 
focused on climate change and its potential impacts on habitats and biodiversity, especially in the climate -
adapted mountain forests of the CND. The investment required to build and sustain the institutional and 
human capacity to achieve Rwanda’s recent conservation success now needs to be joined with a parallel 
investment to ensure that PA management plans, policies, and actions address the realities of climate 
change both within and outside of their boundaries.  
Activity 2.1.1 Facilitate revision of PA management plans to address climate risks  
Climate change is increasingly recognized as not only a major future threat to protected areas, but one that 
will also exacerbate existing threats and vulnerabilities96. This is particularly true for the thre e national parks 
of the Congo Nile Divide landscape that are surrounded by a large number of smallholder farmers who are 
dependent on natural resources for their livelihoods. The park planning processes need to be expanded to 
best meet challenges posed by climate change as well as ensure full incorporation of buffer zone and 
landscape linkage requirements, and the ability to engage with the larger CND and district landscape 
management planning processes. The revised management plans will aim to:  
● Develop spe cific goals and objectives for improving climate resilience  
● Identify areas and species of particular importance to climate adaptation, mitigation and resilience  
● Identify and prioritize threats that exacerbate climate impacts  
● Identify and prioritize critical actions for strengthening resilience  
 
94  CBD. 2020. Rwanda 6th National Report to the Convention on Biodiversi ty 
95  Fischer, E. and Killmann, D., 2008. Illustrated field guide to the plants of Nyungwe National Park Rwanda . 
University of Koblenz -Landau.  
96   World Bank, 2019. Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 42 
 
 ● Identify areas important for climate change adaptation and mitigation into protected area zones and 
regulations  
● Develop indicators of climate resilience  
To this end, the Project will undertake these sub -activities:  
2.1.1.1 Review and update existing national park management plans to ensure climate and related 
landscape changes, risks, impacts and required management responses are integrated  
2.1.1.2 Provide technical and financial suppo rt to planning, research and monitoring as well as community -
based conservation units within RDB in managing the parks as part of larger CND landscapes  
2.1.1.3 Train PA staff to integrate gender and social inclusion into programming  
2.1.1.4 Train PA staff on integrating needs of women, youth, historically marginalized and Ubudehe 
Categories c,d,e populations into climate adaptation risks and responses  
2.1.1.5 Train PA staff on SEAH, GRM, FPIC, and Access Restriction Mitigation Processes to ensure NP 
climate  change responses are undertaken in a way which supports social inclusion and equity  
Activity 2.1.2 Establish long -term plans for CND financial sustainabilit y post -GCF 
Rwanda has recently developed a Biodiversity Finance Plan97 through support from BIOFIN.  This plan has 
identified a number of financing solutions that will not only contribute towards improved biodiversity 
protection in Rwanda, but also aligns with Rwanda’s sustainable development and green growth objectives. 
These solutions include:  
● Introdu ce a Biodiversity Conservation Fund into Rwanda’s National Fund for the Environment 
(FONERWA) to help streamline and attract domestic and international sources of finance to support 
conservation investments and thereby reduce transaction costs to increase conservation benefits.  
● Improve efficiency and effectiveness of environmental fees and fines to strengthen the effectiveness 
of the regulatory environment that will ultimately improve ecosystem and biodiversity conservation 
goals.  
● Water User Fees for Catchm ent Management to secure the financial resources necessary for 
effective water catchment management.  
● Pilot Business Plans for Selected Wetlands to enable the sustainable development of wetlands for 
ecotourism and biodiversity -friendly enterprises such as handicrafts, fisheries, and sustainable 
agriculture.  
● Promote biodiversity -friendly enterprises in the transition to a green economy and accelerate the 
transition to a green economy by incentivizing and supporting businesses to adopt sus tainable 
practices and attracting investments in new conservation enterprises.  
● Strengthen the tourism revenue sharing scheme to improve biodiversity outcomes and effectively 
address conservation -development objectives  
● Develop a Protected Area Finance Strat egy to support the goal of increasing the financial and 
ecological sustainability of Rwanda’s Protected Area System (PAS)  
There are also new emerging solutions such as the Wildlife Conservation Bond (WCB) which essentially is 
a payment for performance -base d financial instrument that channels investments to achieve conservation 
outcomes – measured in this case by specific conservation targets that could be set (e.g., hectares of native 
forest restored, or an increase in umbrella species populations). In the case of Rwanda, gorillas and 
 
97  BIOFIN Rwanda – Biodiversity Finance Plan, REMA, 2019.


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 43 
 
 chimpanzees are considered umbrella species that play a crucial role in shaping entire ecosystems on which 
countless other species depend. For the WCB, a grants -based, outcome payer is needed, which could be 
the GCF. Through th e WCB, and in collaboration with the World Bank (WB), the WB could issue bonds and 
investors could support the financing of activities to protect and grow a critically endangered species with 
clear conservation targets, contributing directly to biodiversit y and bringing jobs to local communities through 
the creation of conservation -related employment in rural areas of the CND. A third -party, independent verifier 
is also needed to evaluate whether conservation targets have been met. A meeting is planned with  the WB 
in the second half of February 2023 in Rwanda to determine the scale and feasibility of the WCB in the CND. 
The South African Rhino Bond has already attracted foreign investment, and it is a good model Rwanda 
could emulate98. The Government of Rwan da, represented by the Rwanda Development Board, is in 
advanced stages of negotiation with the World Bank for establishing a wildlife Bond. There is, therefore, 
clear interest in the bond which suggests that investors still see value in investing in such a n instrument.  
A technical advisor will be recruited by this project to provide technical support to RDB, REMA, MINECOFIN 
and MoE and explore these various solutions to identify financial instruments that could be employed for 
revenue generation post -GCF for sustainable management of the CND landscape. The technical advisor will 
work closely with the NSC to facilitate buy-in from stakeholders such as RDB and MINECOFIN into 
compliance with environmental laws through greater emphasis on the links to climate resilience and N DC 
objectives . 
Activity 2.1.3 New fire management curriculum developed and operationalized Given the expected increase 
in drought, and the natural forest vulnerability already demonstrated in the past, the capacity for effective 
fire prevention and managem ent in core PAs and adjacent landscapes will be increased.  
While current climate projections call for increased rainfall in the CND, they also project higher temperatures 
and a rise in elevation of the natural forests’ cloud cover zone  (Annex 2.1). The com bination of the latter two 
trends raises the potential for increased fire risk. In order to sustainably address the threat of fire to the 
natural forests and regenerated areas in particular, this project will increase the capacity of RDB in the area 
of fire prevention, with emphasis on education and outreach, monitoring of fire danger conditions across the 
parks, response plans, and fire suppression.  A collaborative effort in fire management planning and 
implementation in CND districts will be carried out, facilitated by a fire management expert. Based on training 
needs, the project will also carry out RFA district and sector foresters’ training in Integrated Forest Fire 
Management approaches and activities and firefighting; they will then build the capacity  of community fire 
brigades.  
Sub-activities include:  
2.1.3.1 Develop a curriculum tailored to needs and capacities of different stakeholders  
2.1.3.2 Build the capacity of RDB to manage fire in National Parks  
2.1.3.3 Build the capacity of RFA, local authori ties and communities to collaboratively manage fire in forests 
outside Pas  
2.1.3.4 Implement a “fire wise” outreach and awareness program for communities and local government 
(district, sector, cell), as well as Rwanda Forest Authority, surrounding natural  forests to reduce the incidence 
of human -caused fires.  
 
98  World Bank, 2022. Wildlife Conservation Bond Boosts South Africa’s Efforts to Protect Black Rhinos and Support 
Local Communities.  Press Release NO: 2022/059/AFE.


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 44 
 
 Output 2.2: Natural Forest cover restored, biodiversity connections established.  
The natural forests of the CND exist as an archipelago of isolated islands within a surrounding matrix of 
intensive human land use. Although some have raised the possibility of reconnecting these islands, it is 
important to understand that their isolation is not a recent phenomenon (with evidence of the initial isolation 
of the main forest blocks from the pre -colonial era). Furthermore, large -scale proposals for landscape 
linkages have thus far failed to provide alternatives for the tens of thousands of rural smallholders who would 
be displaced by such schemes. However, important actions can be taken to restore  degraded natural forest 
lands and protect or reestablish natural “stepping stones” and ensure a functional level of ecological linkage  
between the existing parks.  
In some areas where natural forests have been cleared, the Project will work to restore fore st cover. This 
will be done primarily around the Gishwati and Mukura reserves, using native species and building on 
nursery and planting techniques already tested in Rwand a. New techniques may need to be developed to 
expand reforestation to degraded lands on steep slopes and along waterways and wetlands. Tree species 
will be carefully selected considering the following attributes: pioneer species which grow in full sun, fast 
growing (height and canopy width), and animal pollinated and dispersed. These “tree  islands” serve several 
purposes. First, by growing quickly and providing canopy cover, they shade out competing vegetation and 
change the soil microclimate (very important for later successional species establishment). Site -generalist 
native species such as Albizia, Dombeya, Macaranga and Polyscias  respond to these characteristics. 
Secondly, they entice a variety of animal species into the expansion area, thereby dispersing seeds. In 
certain areas the Project will favor natural regeneration from seed banks .  
All work outside of protected areas will require careful attention to private land ownership claims and related 
social and gender equity issues. Part of the communities’ responsibilities will be afforestation of the degraded 
forest with indigenous trees  and clearing invasive species from the natural forests and buffer zones. Part of 
the benefits for the communities will be harvesting of non -timber forest products (NTFPs) from the natural 
forests, under sustainable use plans. The project will provide trai ning on improved harvesting techniques, 
processing, packaging and marketing, to those engaged in NTFP value chain (financed under outcome 3).  
Activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from WCS.  
Activity 2.2.1 Secure key remaining natural areas outside PAs  
Outside of current protected areas, the Project will identify remaining natural areas and seek to secure their 
continued protection within district management plans or through other means. These are mostly small 
stands of natural vegetation on rocky outcroppings or strips  of forests along the CND’s myriad of waterways. 
Although these will not permit large mammals (e.g. elephants or mountain gorillas) to migrate betwee n the 
forested parks, these small remaining natural areas provide critical intermediate stepping stones for the 
broader biodiversity elements of the CND forest ecosystems.  For the CND’s rich assemblage of bird species, 
these vegetated patches and gallery g roves could prove to be essential stepping stones for connectivity 
under changing conditions. Small mammals and insects are likely to also directly benefit. And most 
importantly, the movement of birds and small mammals will support the transfer of seeds be tween forest 
patches, greatly improving the ability of forest ecosystems to adapt to changing climates, and continue 
supplying key ecosystem services to the people of the CND.  
Sub-activities include:  
2.2.1.1 Raise awareness on remaining protected natural f orests in CNDL to secure their protection


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 45 
 
 2.2.1.2 In collaboration with RFA, REMA, districts identify and implement actions that support conservation 
and management of remnant protected natural forests in CNDL  
Activity 2.2.2 Restore natural forest cover in  and outside Protected Areas including riparian linkages  
While the boundary integrity of the Nyungwe and Volcanoes NPs has been maintained for several decades 
now, internal degradation has occurred. Prior to 2004, approximately 12% of Nyungwe National Park had 
been affected by wildfire, including a catastrophic fire during a period of prolonged drought in 1997.99 The 
natural vegetation was quickly replaced by a carpet of invasive ferns. In recent years, teams of local 
community workers led by W CS have demonstrated that careful removal of the fern cover reveals still viable 
native tree seeds and seedlings that respond to this exposure by rapid growth and the formation of new 
forest stands. The project will expand this labor -intensive process of a ssisted regeneration to the remaining 
4,500 ha of burned lands within  the NNP, restoring forest values and generating significant employment for 
local rural communities.  
For the Gishwati Forest, restoration with native species will take place on adjacent, previously cleared lands. 
This and other restoration efforts should benefit from tree nursery techniques and planting trials already 
initiated by RFA, RDB, and NGO partners around Nyungwe, Volcanoes, and Gishwati itself. The project will 
work with the Nati onal Tree Seed Centre to provide training on tree propagation and supply of quality 
seeds/seedlings/propagation materials, especially of indigenous species and plantation species not being 
sourced locally.  
A special element within the CND landscape is its dense network of waterways. Historically forested riparian 
habitats along these streams and rivers, however, have been largely cleared of their forest cover. Riparian 
reforestation efforts will restore an important erosion control factor as well as recreat e important biodiversity 
connectivity along linear corridors. RWB will co -finance these riparian restoration efforts. With support from 
district and sector leaders as well as community representatives, community members will be hired from 
neighboring villa ges to the project sites. The project will make efforts to recruit the most vulnerable 
community members in category c,d and e, women, young landless, and others to carry out these activities.  
Key sub -activities include:  
2.2.2.1 Review mapping of degraded natural forest areas in core NPs, stepping stones, and unprotected 
riparian lands using updated imagery and ground truthing  
2.2.2.2 Identify parcels for restoration in core PAs, stepping stones, and riparian lands using desktop and 
field-based assessment  
2.2.2.3 Establish indigenous tree seed nurseries in the CND to serve core PAs, stepping stones, riparian 
land restoration and promotion of indigenous trees on farms and in protective forests  
2.2.2.4 Recruit, train (in forest restoration methods), and equip community workers to be involved in core 
PAs restoration and riparian linkages  
2.2.2.5 Assisted rehabilitation of 4,500 ha of indigenous forest in NNP  
2.2.2.6 Active restoration of natural forest on 500 ha Gishwati Mukura National Park  
2.2.2.7 Restore 1,500 ha of riparian lands  
 
99  Masozera, A.B., Mulindahabi, F ., 2007. Post-Fire Regeneration in Nyungwe National Park, Rwanda.  Wildlife 
Conservation Society.


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 46 
 
 2.2.2.8 Using permanent plots sampling, collect field monitoring data on tree species recruitment and growth 
for estimation of biomass, species richness, etc. in restored parcels in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura 
National Pa rks as well as on riparian lands to assess success of initiatives, then replicate or adapt as needed  
2.2.2.9 Perform Environmental and Social Screening on all positions being created by the project  
2.2.2.10 Establish a grievance process for laborers  
2.2.2. 11 Update emergency and preparedness plan including risk mitigation guidance to local conditions at 
restoration sites  
2.2.2.12 Train all workers on their rights and how to access the GRM  
2.2.2.13 Provide code of conduct and emergency preparedness and safet y training for all laborers  
2.2.2.14 Hire and train labor and safety leads at each site to provide guidance to staff, be available for 
grievance issues, and monitor health and safety conditions for workers  
2.2.2.15 Develop and implement strategy (including  social marketing) to ensure that women and youth 
participate and benefit from forest restoration projects  
 
Activity 2.2.3 Promote silvopastoralism with indigenous trees around Gishwati  
Roughly 80% of Rwandans own livestock of some sort. While it is govern ment policy to expand this 
percentage, conflicts over competing land uses are inevitable, especially for the country’s most vulnerable 
rural populations. In the area around the protected forest of Gishwati, the presence of many slopes greater 
than 55% open s the possibility for reforestation of larger blocks with tree species compatible with an 
undergrowth of grass or other forage. In addition, some existing pasturelands could be enriched with tree 
species. These areas could then provide critical off -farm fo dder for goats, sheep, and perhaps even cows, 
while also serving vital ecosystem services.  
Plans for tree planting/restoration on pasture lands will be elaborated in collaboration with the local 
communities and technical (extension and local government) s ervices. Areas meant to produce fodder and 
for water retention will be demarcated during community consultations for action plans. Already, important 
forage grasses, such as Brachiaria  grass known to increase milk production while reducing methane 
emission  from cattle, have been identified while tree fodder such as Calliandra, Leucaena, Acacia, Gliricidia  
are well accepted but not widely adopted due to local capacity barriers. Improving adoption of better 
management practices will require technical assistan ce considering needs of cattle owners, local milk 
cooperatives, and traders.  
Beneficiaries of these activities will be pasture land owners and cattle keepers in the Gishwati area. They 
will be identified in collaboration with district and sector leaders, RFA, EE and representatives of pasture 
lands and cattle owners. Special attention will be paid to specific groups such as women -headed households, 
youth, and historically marginalized groups if they own grazing land in the Gishwati area and for paid work. 
Awareness and consultations with these pastoral communities will be conducted during project inception to 
ensure farmers' involvement in identifying and selecting key areas for restoration, suitable species to grow 
in their pastoral areas, capacity barrier s, and associated technical assistance to be provided to adopt better 
management practices.  
Key sub -activities include:


---
*Page 50*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 47 
 
 2.2.3.1 Assess the status of pasture lands in the Gishwati area and identify key areas for restoration and the 
potential to introduce in digenous species  
2.2.3.2 In collaboration with landowners, identify suitable indigenous species for fodder trees, shrubs, 
grasses, and herbaceous legumes that have potential to improve rangelands and increase their climate 
adaptive capacity  
2.2.3.3 Produce  and disseminate fodder trees, shrubs, grasses, and herbaceous legumes to project 
beneficiaries  
2.2.3.4 Train beneficiaries on improved livestock and pasture management  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient  livelihoods  
Increasing the extent of protective forests, enhancing and restoring forest plantations, and increasing 
agroforestry tree cover are key steps to restoring ecosystem function and services identified in the National 
Forest Policy Report (NFPR 2017), especial ly i) reducing the risk of flooding, landslides and soil erosion 
from extreme climate events and ii) increasing long -term supply of wood fuel resources (the primary energy 
source for 77% of Rwandans100). Together with fuel efficient cookstoves, these trees will provide a 
sustainable source of fuelwood and reduce the amount of time women spend collecting fuelwood, enabling 
them to participate in other economic activities and programmatic opportunities. These outputs (cookstoves, 
plantation restoration, and ag roforestry) will deliver carbon sequestration benefits totaling 522,606 tCO 2eq 
over 20 years.  
In working to develop a comprehensive land use plan that incorporates climate adaptation, and while 
ensuring Rwanda’s forest ecosystems are strengthened through f orest management and restoration, 
attention must be paid to people who live next to the forests and those who are the most prone to causing 
degradation of these forest systems. In particular, this includes people who either do not have access to 
land or wh ose land holdings are insufficient to meet their daily needs. These people are most likely to enter 
into and unsustainably use protected and protective forests to help meet their daily needs. Thus, this Project 
component targets these vulnerable households  – youth, people from historically marginalized groups, and 
farmers with insufficient holdings – to build their capacity in financial literacy and enterprise, in order to 
strengthen their resilience to economic and climate shocks.      
Also, to maximize the  opportunities from improved silvicultural practices, it is necessary to improve business 
practices and market linkages for farming communities. More specifically, organizing and linking farmers to 
local and national wholesale traders will enable them to s ell their produce more efficiently, maximizing profit 
and reducing wastage. To facilitate these linkages, this component will also build the business capacity and 
market linkages necessary to support the transition of farmers and their communities away fro m 
unsustainable practices that magnify their vulnerability to climate change and towards more secure 
livelihoods and expanded income opportunities. This includes strengthening capacities, developing inclusive 
business models, and developing market value ch ains for livelihoods that do not depend on traditional 
smallholder farming.  
The project will develop alternative sources of income to improve living conditions for people in the CND 
who depend for a large part of their income on exploitation of the forest and natural vegetation. This 
approach, focusing on vulnerable groups, aims at real economic empowerment of the concerned families 
through the realization of their own business plans. Several promising activities related to the use of the 
forests aside  from wood -gathering (such as beekeeping, extraction of essential oils, herbs, and other forest 
 
100  Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020 . National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.


---
*Page 51*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 48 
 
 products) will be analyzed. These business plans, tailored to individual circumstances, will be realized with 
support and tools provided by the project.  
From the sec ond year onwards, these vulnerable groups will become members of existing cooperative 
organizations that will be supported by the project, particularly in value chains important for forest 
conservation, such as production and export of honey and the extrac tion of essential oils. These 
cooperatives provide various services (e.g., information on markets / export, input supply, aggregation of 
commodities, etc.) and they also play a role in the protection of the interests of their members.  
The project will deve lop the private sector strategy (which will include engagement of impact investors 
interested in conservation -friendly commodities) for livelihoods implementation in the target areas through 
the identification of new livelihood opportunities for the CND. W e will establish relationships with several 
buyers fitting our selection criteria, and engage partners such as Blue Ventures to expand market 
opportunities for products that meet international or local market opportunities. On the producer side, we will 
build strong relationships with other projects and programmes that support private sector engagement with 
community organizations, and producer associations to pursue promising market opportunities (local and 
international, as appropriate).  
For component 3 and the project overall, the eligibility criteria for selecting beneficiaries will be:  
● Households with limited access to financial resources for implementing climate adaptation measures 
as determined by Local Authorities  
● Women -headed households.  
● Households in the CND living in key areas such as those surrounding PAs, identified stepping -stones, 
landscape linkages, and broader farming mosaic with exposure to erosion.  
● Most vulnerable households including people with disabilities  
● Land owners where the project intervention will have to intervene  
These criteria will be further refined by the p roject EE in consultation with key stakeholders (MoE, Districts 
and community representatives) once the project is approved.  
Output 3.1 Farming methods enhance productivity, reduce erosion and flooding risks, contribute to 
ecosystem services, and support c onnectivity  
Soil degradation and loss, largely from the cultivation of steep slopes in the western highlands of the CND, 
has caused declines in agricultural productivity and serious downstream problems of siltation and flooding. 
While the former means that smallholder  farmers in the hills increasingly struggle to feed their families, the 
latter poses a threat to the long term v iability of water provision services in municipal areas and hydro -power 
generation101, which is a key pillar for Rwanda’s low carbon growth strategy.   
This Project will support smallholder farmers in high erosion risk areas to implement Sustainable Land 
Management (SLM) practices techniques and the active restoration  of degraded forest lands. By targeting 
high risk areas the Project can have a significant impact to reduce soil erosion, improving the resilience of 
agricultural livelihoods in the highlands, wh ile having a positive impact on water flow and water quality in the 
lowlands.    
 
101  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) , 2009. Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report, 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.


---
*Page 52*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 49 
 
 In each selected priority site, the Project will support the implementation of the full range soil erosion control 
best practices including agroforestry. While the erosion cont rol practices may vary (e.g. radical vs 
progressive terracing), agroforestry practices will be established across the entire 3,346  ha. RFA will mobilize 
participating landowners on whose lands soil erosion control best practices including agroforestry shal l be 
implemented. Landowners willing to participate will sign a consent form allowing project activities on their 
land and will be grouped in vigilance committees. These vigilance committees will sign MoU with Districts 
and RFA as a commitment to participa te and manage sustainably their land and trees with clear role and 
responsibilities of each (farmers, districts and RFA) specified. The consent forms will be granted to RFA and 
Districts where landowners are located. The vigilance committee will be respons ible for ensuring the 
sustainability of project interventions implemented on community land. The MoUs signed by Districts, RFA 
and the vigilance committee will not be legally binding but rather to establish certain understanding in the 
implementation of th e project.  
Interventions will be made in collaboration with district officials, according to agreed priorities and objectives, 
and involving local farmers and contracto rs. Table 29 in the feasibility study (FS) provides a preliminary list 
of the fuelwood, fodder, timber and fruit tree species that have been identified as suitable for agroforestry 
systems in the CND, based on their resilience capacity against climate -driven temperature and precipitation 
changes, as well as community preferences - particularl y the needs of women farmers, historically 
marginalized households, and youth. They also concur well with recommended species for the North and 
Western Province as described in the Agroforestry Technical Guide102.  
Activity 3.1.1 Restore high slope areas (> 55%) as protective forests  
In Western Province, a major part of the CND landscape, 80% of the increase in tree -planting in recent years 
has come from private landowners seeking to earn revenue or increase their access to wood -based fuel103. 
Beyond this utilitarian interest, however, the NFPR 2017 calls for increasing the extent of protective forests 
and enhancing and restoring forest plantations as key steps to restoring ecosystem function and services, 
especially i) reducing the risk of fl ooding, landslides and soil erosion from extreme climate events and ii) 
increasing long -term supply of woodfuel resources (the energy source for 77% of Rwandans104), providing 
biodiversity habitat, and sequestering 193,472 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
The curren t land use master plan discourages cultivation on slopes greater than 55% and encourages 
protection of existing vegetation and afforestation with indigenous species. This Project will promote 
indigenous species in rehabilitating existing forests and establ ishing new ones on bare lands . This activity 
will result in highly productive, climate -resilient woodlots and forestland with fully restored ecosystem 
services and significantly increased long -term carbon sequestration. It will afforest/restore 2,500  ha of  
degraded private smallholder land and district/state land by restoring existing degraded tree stock, 
afforesting bare areas, promoting good silvicultural practices, and facilitating the adoption of Simplified 
Forest Management Plans (SFMPs), as recommende d by 2013 forest law. In the priority regions selected 
for afforestation/restoration, awareness and capacity building activities will be undertaken to build support 
and understanding of the PFMU approach.  The objective of PFMUs is to combine economic profi tability, 
preservation of environment, and improvement of living conditions of the local population, as well as to apply 
a gender -responsive approach to wood resource management.  For privately owned land, only small -scale 
individual private landowners will  be included, and this activity will not involve restoration of private 
institutional plantations.  RFA will mobilize participating private landowners on whose lands afforestation 
 
102  Ministry of Environment. 2018. National Agroforestry Strategy.  
103  Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change in Western Rwanda during periods of war s and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).  
104  Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.


---
*Page 53*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 50 
 
 trees shall be planted. Landowners willing to participate will sign a consent  form allowing project activities 
on their land. Following this, private woodlot owners will then be organized into local groups (around 40 -50 
ha of woodlot per group), PFMUs (Private Forest Management Units) and assisted to form and register as 
cooperativ es and elect among themselves two cooperative committees: Administrative committee made of 
5 persons (President, Vice president, Secretary and two Advisors); supervisory committee made of 3 
persons (President, vice president and secretary). Note that gende r consideration is mandatory (at least 
30% women).  
When the cooperative committees are elected, they are mandated to represent forest landowners at different 
events and fulfill their interests, especially in seeking the best market for their forest product s and seeking 
for other income generating opportunities. RFA will sign MOUs with different cooperatives specifying each 
party’s respective role and responsibility.  
Experiences from pilot PFMUs established under the FMBE project in the districts of Gicumbi , Gakenke and 
Rulindo Districts of the Northern Province and Rwamagana District of the Eastern province have 
demonstrated that this approach is helping to achieve economic profitability, preservation of environment 
and improvement of living conditions of t he PFMU members. Forests are sustainably managed, and all 
PFMU members respect the management plan and planned harvesting period. All silvicultural practices are 
properly followed because cooperatives supervise all activities with technical guidance from t he district 
technicians. The forests within a PFMU are economically attractive to potential buyers due to good stock at 
harvesting time. PFMU members have access to small loans while waiting for the forest to mature. This 
shows that PFMUs established in th ese areas are also serving as demonstrations to other forest owners 
supported by other projects in the country. Green AMAYAGA and Green Gicumbi, and TREPA Projects are 
scaling up this approach in other parts of the country.  
On public land, forests will be  organized into state/district FMUs to be managed by professional private 
companies through long -term concession agreements in line with the government strategy. While a 
concession agreement will be signed between the private forest companies and the MoE, the Project will 
only support the design of the forest management plans and development of contracting documents. 
Registration of restored forest parcels will be guided by well -trained district forest officers and forestry sector 
extensionists, assisted by  the new FMES software and related GPS/tablets, which will provide automatic 
statistics, maps and register owners. For each FMU, a SFMP , reviewed or developed through a participatory 
process , will outlin e the basic information of the site (e.g. owner, spec ies etc.), as well as a harvesting plan 
and schedule for silvicultural operations (thinning, pruning etc.). However, some areas of the state 
plantations that are vulnerable and exposed to high risk of degradation (high slopes) will require setting up 
speci al protective measures. Restoration on identified vulnerable areas will be done by establishing 
appropriate tree plantations that will offer a better protection and conservation of biodiversity while providing 
other ecosystem services incl uding tree specie s that improve forage for bees . The choice of tree speci es 
planted will take into consideration women’s participation, use and priorities. The project will further strive 
and advocate for gender equity for selection of plots which will be done in consultat ion with communities.   
Sub-activities include:  
3.1.1.1 Introduce and raise awareness of indigenous species to target stakeholders in CND  
3.1.1.2 In consultation with RFA, National Land Authority, districts and communities, determine fragile areas 
(steep s lopes > 55%) to be allocated for protective forests and their ownership  
3.1.1.3 Assess the current status of the indigenous tree species in selected areas for protective forests and 
select indigenous tree species appropriate to CNDL


---
*Page 54*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 51 
 
 3.1.1.4 Develop restora tion plan for protective forests  
3.1.1.5 Build capacity of local stakeholders (men and women) on PFMU approach and methods  
3.1.1.6 Design and approve SFMPs of private FMUs  
3.1.1.7 Ensure consent of smallholders prior to planting trees  
3.1.1.8 In collaboration with smallholders reforest/restore 2,500 ha of public or private land with slopes >55% 
and ensure sustainable management under private FMUs according to approved SFMPs  
3.1.1.9 Support monitoring and evaluation of restored private FMUs  
3.1.1.1 0 Assess impacts of exotics on neighboring lands and mitigate their negative impacts  
3.1.1.11 Develop and implement strategy (including social marketing) to ensure that women and youth 
participate and benefit from forest restoration projects  
3.1.1.12 Asse ss the benefits and costs of each proposed tree and plant species and how those benefits 
affect different population segments  
Activity 3.1.2 Develop on -farm agroforestry for high -caloric and indigenous tree species  
The extreme land scarcity of the CND precludes smallholder farmers – many of them among the most 
vulnerable and land -poor of the region – from dedicating any significant proportion of their holdings to tree 
production. However, the use of certain agrofores try species that both enrich the soil and control erosion 
when interplanted with ground crops can greatly reduce this conflict.  
Under this activity, the Project will facilitate the production of on -farm afforestation plans with action plans 
for implementa tion. Formulation of the forest landscape restoration plans will follow the methodology 
introduced by the World Resources Institute (WRI) and IUCN and already tested in the country by the former 
Ministry of Natural Resources, as recently modified and appli ed for the Gatsibo Forest Landscape 
Restoration baseline conditions assessment. The methodology will involve three simple steps: a) Geospatial 
analysis to map degraded land that presents an opportunity for forest and landscape restoration (FLR), which 
will highlight areas with best potential for restoration; b) economic analysis to model the costs and benefits 
of degraded and restored land); and c) designing a restoration/afforestation action plan, based on an in -
depth assessment of the conditions required to implement the FLR in the selected sectors.  
For selected areas where Project activities may lead to reduced access to resources, the Project will 
undertake an in -depth Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) in the first year of 
implementation and design an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to guide 
implementation. This ESMP will include an access restriction mitigation plan, if deemed necessary. The 
matter of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) will be explored during the ESIA  and the approach applied 
if deemed appropriate. These documents will be based on materials contained in Annex 6.  
Drawing on experience with high -elevation species identified both in Rwanda and across East Africa, the 
Project will support the following su b-activities:  
3.1.2.1 Identify sub -areas of intervention for agroforestry dissemination in the CND  
3.1.2.2 Introduce and raise awareness of agroforestry in target communities  
3.1.2.3 Develop the capacity of extension agents at district/sector level and NGO s to support adoption of 
agroforestry technologies


---
*Page 55*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 52 
 
 3.1.2.4 Establish agroforestry/fruit tree nurseries to facilitate access to quality planting material  
3.1.2.5 Promote sustainable land management practices by stabilizing existing terraces, and plant high 
calorific agroforestry species to provide a sustainable source of fuelwood for energy -efficient cookstoves to 
protect sloping land against severe soil erosion.  
 3.1.2.6 Train RFA, extension agents, Project participants and community members on specific tec hniques 
for identification of and management of invasive pests and pathogens  
Participants in sub -activities 3.1.2.3 and 3.1.2.6 will be selected by districts, JADF, RFA and farmers 
representatives. Special attention will be given to youth, women and other  vulnerable groups. RFA and RWB 
will co -finance bub -activities 3.1.2.4 and 3.1.2.5.  
Output 3.2 Rural livelihoods generate alternative incomes & reduce pressure on forests  
To respond to the growing pressure on natural resources and increase the local commun ity's resilience to 
climate change in the CND landscape, the Project will address key drivers of deforestation by creating 
alternative livelihood pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and income -generating, climate -
resilient crops, as well as str engthening supportive financial services.  
The setup of interventions in this output will focus on enhancing on -farm production capacities in market -
facing promising value chains in agroforestry (especially avocado, macadamia and short -duration crops) for 
immediate income and beekeeping taking advantage of the agroforestry and the crops; the combination of 
these will promote ecotourism as supplementary income (avocado, macadamia, forestry, agroforestry, short -
term crops, and honey). This output will als o provide solutions to the growing households' energy poverty 
which has exerted pressure on natural resources and eventually exacerbated the local community's 
exposure to the stress of climate change in the CND landscape.  
This project will employ a ma rket systems development approach that encompasses business coaching, 
value chain development, and access to finance. This entails multi -stakeholder collaboration with business 
service providers, financial institutions, community -based enterprises, value c hain actors, and farmer 
cooperatives.  Ultimately, this project will develop and or promote a financial model that enhances the private 
sector ecosystem collaboration and partnership to stimulate finance in forestry and agroforestry sectors and 
support mark et-oriented access to energy -efficient cook -stoves to reduce pressure on forests.  
The value chain development for potential revenue generating streams such as honey, ecotourism, and 
efficient cookstoves requires grant support of GCF grant to finance the activities that are important for the 
most vulnerable, as well the drivers for the M SD to take root; these include the development of the identified 
revenue generating streams, strengthening access to market information, and improving quality of the 
products and produce aggregation.  
To target the poorest and most vulnerable, and empo wer women and youth towards meeting inclusive 
development goals, critical support at the nascent stages is essential. The GCF grant will facilitate the 
integration of the poorest and most vulnerable women and youth in the CND and position for private secto r 
investments that will build a firm back base for sustainable community development. The GCF grant will not 
only provide financing support but will be critical in creating enabling opportunities for market development 
beyond the project to catalyze privat e investments.  
While promoting the above -mentioned households cooking solutions and income streams, the selection of 
the beneficiaries will follow the government' procedures, and in the case of CND will focus on the vulnerable 
groups of youth, women, and historically marginalized people and will be selected based on an assessment


---
*Page 56*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 53 
 
 of poverty levels (also known as Wealth Categories) conducted by the government to ensure the most 
vulnerable are selected. Selection criteria will further take into account s ocial and cultural factors such as 
gender and age which intersect to predispose some groups more to vulnerability than others.  
                                             .     .                                                                                           .                                                                                                                     
Activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from CORDAID.  
Activity 3.2.1 Develop agroforestry related value chain for m arkets access.  
Most traditional tree farming in Rwanda is linked to fuel production in terms of firewood, charcoal, and timber 
for construction. However, to further strengthen community resilience to climate change, there is a need to 
introduce fruit and n ut trees that have high economic value in the agroforestry system to generate more 
income for smallholder farmers but also increase its adoption, especially women -headed households. 
Though women -headed households face the same issues and challenges as male -headed households, they 
are less likely to be included in income -generating activities and are disproportionately impacted by climate 
change because of prevalent gender inequality issues. In the Feasibility Study, avocado and macadamia 
have been identifie d as high economic value crops with high market potential, and the economic benefits of 
identified fruit trees is paramount to increase farmer adoption and buy -In. Since fruits and nuts take time to 
mature, short -term crops like chili and French beans will  be promoted to support smallholder farmers with 
limited land resources (less than 0.4 ha) to create additional, more quickly generated income and incentivize 
adopting agroforestry practices. Regular income will help vulnerable communities to cope with cli mate 
variabilities and shocks.  
The identified agroforestry value chains have market potential and potential for intercropping with short -term 
horticultural vegetables and fruits while providing further impacts on carbon sequestration, nutrition value, 
and market access in the CND. Selected fruit trees are expected to meet the dual purpose of soil protection 
and climate impact while generating long -term economic benefits to the most vulnerable community 
members of the CND region.   
For each crop value chain i dentified, specific bottlenecks will be addressed while focusing on specific 
product -place combinations within the CND. Especially, attention will be on enhancing the quality and 
quantity of production in sync with particular demands from market niches, de velopment of various models 
to improve access to finance together with financial institutions, and exploration of market opportunities that 
can generate off -farm jobs to absorb a good number of landless and other vulnerable groups of youth and 
women.   
Thes e priority crops are:  
● Macadamia: a low -volume, high -value export crop; in -country processing creates jobs for women and 
youth. Two hundred and four trees cover one hectare, and one mature tree produces up to 60 kg of 
macadamia nuts per year with an income of 25,000 FRW per kilogram. Furthermore, every tree must 
be separated from the next by 7 meters; thus, many other commercial and consumable crops may 
be planted and harvested while waiting for macadamia's fruiting maturity.105 The global demand for 
macadami a outweighs the available supply, which presents a huge business opportunity for 
macadamia farmers in Rwanda. For example, the current macadamia supply meets only 48% of 
global demand and the global market for macadamia is expected to further expand from $ 1.17 billion 
to $2.36 billion  by 2027. The project will build on the government export initiatives to promote 
 
105  DAPP Malawi, Odetta Chimwaza – Macadamia Nuts project . Link.


---
*Page 57*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 54 
 
 macadamia farming in CND areas through National Export Board (NAEB) and Rwanda Environment 
Management Authority (REMA) to include macadamia in its tree planting drive in the CND.  
● Avocado: The extensive penetration of avocado cultivation amongst smallholder farmers (SHFs) and 
the favorable growi ng conditions lead to avocado yields (21MT/ha) that are nearly double those of 
Kenya. The increasing demand for export, and cash yield/ha are higher than maize or Irish potato. 
Through linkage to local avocado private value chain actors, packaged avocados will be exported to 
the European Union, where the channel price for avocados is  $1.75 per kilogram, providing an 
estimated 32% margin.106 Avocado production presents numerous opportunities to smallholder 
farmers in CND: for example, earnings from avocado ex ports have been increasing from $1.6 million 
in 2020/21 to  $4.5 million  in 2021/22 and product ion increased from 1,000 tonnes to 2, 500 tonnes 
in 2021/22. According to the NAEB, the production is set to double this year and generate $8 million 
from exports. To further strengthen its avocado exports the government has launched sea freight, 
which wil l not only increase export volumes but also make them competitive in terms of pricing.   
● Avocado is projected to be the second most traded tropical fruit, after bananas, by 2030.The United 
States and the European Union, where consumer interest in avocados is fuelled by the fruit’s health 
benefits, are expected to remain the main importers, wit h 40% and 31% of global imports in 2030, 
respectively107. The project teams in CND will work closely with private sector partners and 
communities to develop value chain analysis, business development strategies, and business 
planning. The team, led by our L ivelihood Specialists, will work with these private sector partners to 
prepare action plans detailing technical services we will provide to train producers to supply 
commodities to markets.  
● Vegetable crops such as French beans and chili: It has been demons trated that these crops can 
double the income per hectare of maize and potatoes and employ a good percentage of the 16% 
reported unemployed women and youth108. Commercial farm wage reported labor in postharvest 
production handling at 72% women, 20% youth (s ee Annex 2.3). French beans can potentially deliver 
a gross margin of 22,040Rwf per acre and a return on labour of 2,755Rwf per day, while chili can 
offer a gross margin of 46,384Rwf per acre and a return on labour of 7,731Rwf per day.109 
The Project will a lso enhance ecotourism and honey value chains. Particularly in areas close to national 
parks, the potential business development of ecotourism can go hand in hand with honey and wax product 
development. Our analysis shows that the honey value chain already  has a sizable production history in 
Rwanda. Various initiatives exist that have encouraged farmers to invest in modern hives. However, the 
current sector is constrained by a perception of limited profitability due to low prices, gender patriarchy due 
to male dominance, and limited market access. The honey (and various by -product) value chain shows a 
wide range of different consumer target groups, whereas honey is too often marketed as a generic product. 
This is a crucial bottleneck: while the value chain a ctors engage in the business, there needs to be more 
incentives to invest financial resources to improve production or quality, such as through modern beehive 
technology. It will be essential to link ecotourism destinations and agro -tourism to enhance the potential for 
an improved business case and help beekeeping cooperatives enhance their processing, quality 
management, and marketing processes with large scale buyers and exporters such as Api Business 
Development Company (ABDC) and create a sustainable an d expanded source of income especially for 
 
106  Karuiru, M., 2018. Value chain management and the performance of avocado fruit small scale farmers in Kanda ra 
sub county, murang'a County, Kenya.  International Journal of Physical and Social Sciences , 8(10), pp.24 -40. 
107 OECD - FAO Agricultural Outlook. https://www.fao.org/3/cb5332en/cb5332en.pdf  
108  Rwanda Development Board, 2020. Labour Market Trends Analysis Brief 2016 -2020. https://rdb.rw/wp -
content/uploads/2022/07/Labour -Market -Brief-2020.pdf  
109  Van Keulen, Rik, Rumenera, P., Banjara, G., Colantuoni, M. and Muthamia -Mwenda, J. 2022. Horticulture value  
chain analysis – Opportunities for youth employment in Rwanda. Rome, FAO. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb8266en


---
*Page 58*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 55 
 
 women.  Api Business Development Company has applied for EU certification in order to export honey to 
international markets. Nevertheless, the company –which has a capacity of handling 120 MT of honey per 
year–still faces the challenge of low production, inadequate even in meeting local demand.  
Rwanda has a well -established record of generating off -farm benefits from its protected area ecotourism 
programs. The Project will build on this by supporting sustainable to urism activities around and between the 
Gishwati and Mukura Forests, as outlined in the GMNP Tourism Master Plan.110 New trails and base camps 
outside of the parks will generate employment and income opportunities for rural women and youth, as well 
as attra ct tourism revenue to help support forest protection and management. In addition, this Project will 
initiate and train Community Freelance guides to mutually benefit the parks and local communities 
neighboring Mukura -Gishwati NPs. A freelance system suits the seasonality of tourism, and the demand and 
sourcing of guides from the local communities stimulates economic empowerment among the young and 
unemployed living in rural areas around protected areas. This initiative will enable community members to 
provi de a service and generate income, and benefit from the growing tourism industry in Rwanda, which in 
turn supports conservation over the long term.  
In collaboration with district authorities in the CND, who will provide a list of existing cooperatives, the  project 
will select cooperatives based on value chains, number of women and youth, number of members with 
vulnerabilities and membership size. Furthermore, we will assess selected cooperatives using the 
Cooperative Assessment Matrix tool (CAM) to identify  capacity gaps. Selected cooperatives, participating 
financial institutions (PFIs), and value chain actors/small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) (including 
seedling producers, aggregators, traders, etc.) will receive capacity -building to improve their busi ness skills 
and access to finance, and to strengthen value chains.  
Women play a crucial role in balancing household demands with market production. This is why it is so 
important to give women access to financial and value chains related services. The proj ect aims to reach at 
least 50% of the women beneficiaries in the project area.  In areas where women are under -represented in 
value chains, the project will identify and address gender -specific challenges and barriers related to the 
different value chains and promote increased female representation and active participation in Producer 
organizations by creating gender committees that will recruit more women, and support women to be part of 
the leadership committees.  
Key sub activities are:  
3.2.1.1 Identify and map of vulnerable groups of youth and women within the community  
3.2.1.2 Develop and implement strategies to ensure that women, youth, and other marginalized groups 
benefit from rural livelihoods and financial services.  
3.2.1.3 identify farmers and coo peratives involved in selected value chains in consultation with district/local 
authorities in CND.  
3.2.1.4 Assess capacity gaps of identified farmer organizations to strengthen their capacities  
3.2.1.5 Identify and develop Nature -based tourism value chain as a means to generate viable economic 
alternatives for local people living near areas of high biodiversity in the CND.  
RDB will co -finance sub -activity 3.2.1.5.  
 
110  Rwanda Development Board (RDB), Rwanda  Environmental Management Authority (REMA), 2018. Tourism 
Development Master Plan for Gishwati - Mukura National Park. Link.


---
*Page 59*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 56 
 
 Activity 3.2.2 Facilitate and s cale up climate -resilient value chain products  
The project will conduct deep analysis for identified value chains, namely macadamia, avocado, chili, and 
French beans. Such analysis will provide evidence of the opportunities and constraints in the selected value 
chains and will involve mapping out chain operators and service providers at each segment of the value 
chain to identify existing capacity gaps and orient overall value chain interventions in the project. 
Furthermore, value chain analysis wi ll enable the project to clearly understand the characteristics of the 
selected value chain with attention to smallholder farmers, women, youth and vulnerable groups.  
To build strong and sustainable value chains, the project will improve information flows within the chain, by 
strengthening coordination among value chain actors and supporters. This will involve creating value chain 
platforms in the CND region to increase transparency and fair business relations. The project will focus on 
activities that stre ngthen and scale up value chains: for example, by organizing business -to-business (B2B) 
events, establishing district value chain interprofessional/platforms, and promoting business development 
services such as swift, cost -effective, and accessible product  certification for agribusiness. The project will 
play an active role by introducing key supporting functions such as financing, value chain information, 
certification services, etc., and advocate for fair business relations to ensure farmers are active pl ayers in 
value chains and not passive beneficiaries. The project will help strengthen the capacity of producer 
organizations in selected value chains. Often farmers fail to participate and benefit in value chain activities 
due to weak and poor organization , resulting from poor managerial skills and weak internal financial 
management. The project will use different capacity assessment tools like CAM and Scope insight to identify 
capacity gaps and develop capacity -building plans to ensure that producer organi zations are strong and 
professional and capable of serving their members and building sustainable value chains.  The capacity -
building trajectory will also focus on encouraging participation by women, youth, and vulnerable groups and 
increase their access to services. Activities to strengthen farmers and producer organizations will be based 
on farming as a business (FAAB) concept to orient farmers toward business -oriented agriculture. Synergy 
will be built with projects such as KIIWP2  (Kayonza irrigation and integrated watershed management), a 
project funded by IFAD where this module is being applied.  
In the selected valu e chain quality standards are an integral element of the core interventions, due to export 
market requirements. The project will strengthen the capacity of farmers to increase production in terms of 
volume and quality but also adhere to market standards (f or example, global GAP, maximum residual limits 
(MRLs), etc.) Another challenge affecting the selected value chains in the CND region is access to inputs, 
especially seeds, and pesticides. This is exacerbated by the international market which requires cert ain seed 
varieties and types of pesticides. The project will strengthen the input supply system in collaboration by 
National Agricultural export board (NAEB) and selected off takers by establishing and supporting agro -
dealers and nursery production through  technical support and access to finance, to further access to input 
the project will also focus on building business models that help farmers access inputs via credit guarantee 
schemes. The project will create strong linkage and business relations between  input suppliers, 
farmers/producer organizations, and markets/buyers to enhance flow of information among value chain 
actors. Based on experience, the project will ensure that processors/buyers have a say or influence on type, 
variety, and quality of input s used by producers to ensure produce marketability. Furthermore, the project 
will collaborate with other projects like PSAC  (promoting smallholder agro -export competitiveness project) 
and NAEB (National agriculture export board) to further build a sustainable input supply system. Most value 
chains are not well developed or are still nascent in the CND region, based on our  experience with 
agroforestry value chains with the TREPA project for instance. In such situations, off -takers, processors, and 
traders are few and poorly organized, with minimal outreach to farmers. They normally experience 
challenges in understanding and  meeting market standards (i.e., sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) 
standards, Global GAP, hazard critical control point certification (HCCP), etc.) which limit their


---
*Page 60*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 57 
 
 competitiveness and market scope. The project will improve their capacity to meet these sta ndards, provide 
other support to access and integrate cold chains, especially for avocado and French beans, and build out 
grower schemes in which off takers/exporters play a vital role. For MSMEs and start -ups, the project will 
strengthen their managerial capability for running successful, efficient businesses. Through organizing value 
chain linkage events (B2B, market linkage sessions, etc.) the project will enhance buyers to reach more 
farmers and producer organizations.  
Addressing rural poverty and food insecurity using agriculture requires investments in off -farm agricultural 
activities to complement primary production.111 Synergies will be created to reinforce direct linkages of small 
producers to other value chain actors with inputs (seeds and seedlings , fertilizers) and outputs (processors, 
wholesalers, and retailers).  
The project will use the Market Systems Development (MSD) model to enhance value chain development. 
This will entail multi -stakeholder collaboration with business service providers, fina ncial institutions, 
community -based enterprises, value chain actors, and farmer cooperatives. In -depth target area 
assessments will be conducted to tailor business cases for the selected value chains, particularly focusing 
on identification and engagement of existing farmer organizations and cooperatives, youth and women -
owned businesses, and local small and medium enterprises (SMEs, value chain actors) with the capacity for 
production aggregation, value addition, and market potential to absorb production f rom smallholder farmers' 
cooperatives. This localized stakeholder and value chain exploration will serve as a basis for the organization 
of market linkages to help value chain actors better understand the market, challenges, and opportunities.  
Regarding ho ney value chains, the project will estimate the number of beekeeping cooperatives operating 
in the targeted region or its surroundings. Members of these cooperatives will be trained in improved honey 
production techniques and adding value through wax -based  products. This will involve establishing honey 
and wax storage stations and associated processing facilities. Cooperatives will also be an important vehicle 
for fostering tree growing for improved bee forage. The project will foster interactions between t he 
cooperatives and private companies through business roundtables, trade fairs, and similar events focused 
on honey and beeswax products and this activity will be co -financed by RDB.  
This activity includes in -depth target area assessments to tailor busine ss cases for the selected value chains, 
particularly focusing on identification and engagement of existing farmer organizations and cooperatives, 
youth and women -owned businesses and local small and medium enterprises (SMEs, value chain actors) 
with capaci ty for production aggregation, value addition, and market potential to absorb production from 
smallholder farmers' cooperatives. This localized stakeholder and value chain exploration will serve as a 
basis for organization of market linkages to help value chain actors better understand the market, challenges 
and opportunities.  Key sub -activities are:  
3.2.2.1 Analyze identified value chains and promote them among the CND stakeholder networks  
3.2.2.2 Strengthen the capacity of producer organizations to impro ve managerial capacities, farming 
practices, and gender inclusion in their organizations  
3.2.2.3: Establish and strengthen relevant value chain platforms in the CND area and promote business 
development services to enhance value chain coordination.  
 
111  Selasi, J., 2012. Making Small Scale Farming Work in Sub -Saharan Africa . In Global Forum on Food Security and 
Nutrition "FSN Forum", FAO.


---
*Page 61*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 58 
 
 3.2.2.4 : Build and strengthen the capacity of off -takers (MSMEs, SMEs, and off -takers aggregators) to 
increase their competitiveness and comply with various standards  
3.2.2.5: Facilitate and strengthen access to quality inputs for farmers and producer organizatio ns in the CND 
regions  
3.2.2.6: Establish “CND brand” for honey and wax products  
Activity 3.2.3 Facilitate access to output markets for vulnerable farmers  
Lack of access to the market is a challenge to smallholders: only  4.2% of agricultural households have  
access to contract farming ( Agric HH Survey, 2017 ). Limited access to markets for smallholder farmers is 
mainly attributed to lack of access to market information, failure to meet market requirements, or 
undeveloped value chains. Some of the challenges also stem from po or quality and poor produce 
aggregation. The project will strengthen the capacity of farmers and producer organizations to improve 
quality and aggregation capacity, and in creating market linkages with off -takers or buyers through market 
information. The p roject will promote contract farming and out -grower schemes, where farmers are required 
to practice market -oriented farming, with the main objective of establishing long -term business relationships 
with markets/buyers. A focus on financial literacy and com munity initiatives will also mobilize domestic 
investment and expertise, facilitate access to financing, incentivize the private sector to create innovative 
financial products, and support improved data collection and measurement of outcomes.  
Furthermore, through producer organizations, the project will develop an inclusive business model to 
improve produce aggregation and supply coordination and to increase farmers’ bargaining power and 
influence in formal value chains, particularly for remote/hard -to-reach women, youth, and vulnerable groups. 
To further strengthen market access, the project will develop innovative market access approaches such as 
“it takes two to trade”, which focuses on understanding the challenges and weaknesses that limit demand 
(trader s) and supply (farmers). The project will create interventions to eliminate challenges and improve 
weaknesses to build sustainable market access. The project will also build on the national digital agriculture 
strategy (NDAS) to introduce digital market ac cess, where farmers access market information through their 
mobile phones through USSD or IVR interactive voice response.  A similar intervention is currently being 
implemented in the Kayonza district through an IFAD -funded project: Strengthening Agricultu re Resilience 
through Learning and Innovation  (STARLIT ). This approach is particularly customized to poor, rural, and 
hard-to-reach farmers who  do not own smartphones.  
To implement this, the project will identify and select two buyers/off -takers for each selected value chain 
based on market needs and link them to farmers and farmer organizations. The eligibility criteria for 
buyers/off -takers wil l be developed by RFA in collaboration with CORDAID during the implementation. The 
project will organize periodic market linkage events and business -to-business (B2B) workshops through 
established value chain platforms. Additionally, the project will creat e a clear link between market access 
and other value chain supporting functions, such as value chain finance, to ensure that farmers have access 
to working capital for aggregation and marketing. Various models will be developed including tripartite 
agreeme nts (buyers, producer organizations, and financial institutions) to increase confidence among 
partners and financial flow.  
The activity will work to scale up the market system developed using the Output 3.2 inception report on 
beneficiary persona and stakeholder engagements to facilitate market system growth within the selected 
value chains, including bee products, and other w omen and youth -focused sectors. The activity will work to 
scale up the market system developed using the Output 3.2 inception report on beneficiary and stakeholder


---
*Page 62*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 59 
 
 engagements to facilitate market system growth within the selected value chains, including b ee products, 
and other women and youth -focused sectors such as adoption and sales of fuel -efficient cookstoves.  
The project will also build strong business relationships and linkages between input suppliers, markets, and 
farming cooperatives. This will bui ld common understanding and smoother flow of information to ensure that 
input suppliers and farming cooperatives respond swiftly to what markets need. The activity will train 
vulnerable groups and farming cooperatives on “farming as a business” concepts.  
Finally, trade agreements will be created between cooperatives and relevant national and regional 
companies that buy and sell such products. The Project will support and ensure protection of the interests 
of the cooperatives and their members while negotiat ing and signing relevant agreements for win -win 
situations.  
Key sub -activities:  
3.2.3.1 Develop an inclusive business model to Integrate vulnerable farmers into formal markets   
3.2.3.2 Organize microenterprise training and develop and implement green gran ts programs targeting 
landless youth and poor, as well as women who are unable to access direct benefits from land -based project 
activities.  
3.2.3.3 Facilitate market access for women, youth, and historically marginalized communities through market 
linkage  sessions  
3.2.3.4 Provide technical support on market standards, contract farming, and financial connectivity.  
3.2.3.5 Develop various market access channels including digital market access for rural farmers, especially 
women and marginalized groups  
 
Activ ity 3.2.4 Scale up use and sales of clean fuel -efficient cookstoves  
The project will actively promote the use of energy -efficient cookstoves to benefit the 90% of households in 
the CND that depend primarily on firewood to meet their cooking energy needs an d thus contributing to 
accelerated      forestry resources degradation while       causing profound health hazards to the already 
impoverished community.      .  
This intervention will reduce pressure on forests and farmland by raising household awareness of the 
differences between high and low efficiency stoves and by collaboration with the local TVETs institute to 
manufacture affordable efficient stoves that will  address       the limited availability of high -efficiency stoves in 
rural markets. Promoting the local fabrication will reduce dependency on cookstoves made outside the 
country and therefore make them affordable. Also, promoting locally made cookstov es designed to address 
local needs will lead to full adoption of improved cookstoves and will contribute to sustainable biomass 
resource use and prevent overexploitation of forest resources, thereby ensuring the success of the forest 
landscape restor ation activities described in Outputs 2.1, 2.2, and 3.2 above.  
The project will adopt a market -oriented approach to strengthen the cookstove supply chain in the CND and 
create strong linkages and business relationships with several ecosystem including the TVET center for 
training of youth and women SMEs on cookstove manufacturing  and repairing           , and microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) to ensure sustainable access and finance of cookstoves  business . 
As mentioned above,      to ensure  product quality and affordability to drive       uptake, scalability, and business 
growth and expansion      , the project will partner with integrated polytechnic regional colleges to develop a


---
*Page 63*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 60 
 
 Tier 2 (for emissions) prototype compatible with rur al settings and affordable to rural communities. Youth -
led SMEs will be trained on how to manufacture cookstoves and contracted to produce them  as well as 
operating sales points within the community       
The cookstove pricing and financing modality      will take into account      vulnerable groups, including 
historically marginalized groups mapped and selected in sub -activity 3.2.1.1 (social wealth categories c, d, 
e, and people with disabilities) .       F     or sustainability , the groups will be organized into saving groups and 
ensure they lend among themselves with the purpose of purchasing the cookstove            , the project       
subsidies may target      women -headed households  which has contributed over a percentage       of the total 
cost      . Additionally, the product design       will incorporate reducing health hazards      , such as reducing 
respiratory diseases risks and others linked to climate impact s     , contributing to reduction in morbidity and 
health treatment cost and enabling the vulnerable to have disposable income for investment into productive 
ventures and this will ensure       sustain ability       of impacts beyond the GCF fin ancing. Moreover, the project 
will target women -headed households, recognizing the significant role women and children play in firewood 
collection and cooking. The project will substantiate the time -saving benefits for fuel collection and links to 
women's decision -making and empowerment with clear indicators.  
Considering the lessons learnt from similar projects where hand -outs lead to poor sustainability, this pro ject      
will promote alternative income sources from fast -maturing crops such as chili and French beans which have 
ready market in Rwanda and externally. The members of the            saving groups will be able to use income 
generated from the sale of fast -maturing crops (chili and French beans) coupled with savings accumulated 
from th eir groups and save progressively to purchase the      cookstoves and replacement      . The project's 
technical support to MFIs will build their capacity      to develop       tailored financial products for cookstoves  
with affordable repa yment terms aligned to revenue streams from short -term crops and group savings , 
making it easier for farmers to access loans to buy cookstoves.  
GCF funds with co -financing from RDB will provide support for the development of ICS prototypes, youth -
led SME s engaged in cookstove production, subsidies for cookstoves, creation and support of savings 
groups, and technical support to MFIs to develop tailored financial products to facilitate access to ICS by 
local communities. The project will ensure that the coo kstoves are sustainably sourced and lead to minimal 
indoor air pollution and related respiratory conditions compared with the cooking methods presently in use 
both during production of the cookstoves and during usage by the individual households.  
Key sub -activities are:  
3.2.4.1. Promote local manufacturing through partnership with Integrated Polytechnic Regional Colleges 
(IPRCs) of Karongi and Musanze to help design  prototype Tier 2 ICS to address local constraints      . 
3.2.4.2. Build business and marketing capacity of the cooperatives and youth led SMEs to act as the 
marketing channels of      energy efficient cookstoves to CND community members based on wealth 
categories.  
3.2.4.3 Create a specialized small business development fund, to help local women and youth groups build 
innovative business models for accelerated distribution of ICS.  
3.2.4.4. Promote demand -through raising public awareness on the benefits of ICS by developing and 
disseminating messages on mass media  and in community meetings . 
Output 3.3 Financial services & private sector investment increased  
Financing challenges and needs are particularly high in clean cooking, mainly for two reasons: (1) due to 
lack of income, the upfront purchase of clean cooking equipment presents an affordability challenge to most


---
*Page 64*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 61 
 
 households, which adds to the monthly fuel expendit ures and (2) businesses operating in the sector are 
often unable to attract financ ing      for for investment in the value chain      . Serving low -income households 
also generally yields low returns  due to low customer base . 
With a particular f ocus on marginalized communities, and vulnerable groups of youth and women in the 
CND, the Project will deploy a FSG model to capacitate the communities' productivity and financial resilience. 
The project will address barriers to access to financial serv ices, specifically for women and youth by building 
the financial                      institutions to develop and financial products      that meet the  differentiated needs of 
vulnerable women and men  in the CND . The project Gender Exp ert, Youth Focal Point along with the 
Community Mobilization Specialist and Community Engagement Specialist will provide support to address 
barriers to access, ensure women’s financial skills are developed and there is community and financial 
institution a wareness and support to ensure marginalized groups, including women and youth can access 
financial services including credit  to invest in their businesses including purchase of the cookstoves . Besides 
this, to address the significant challenges facing MF Is and Participating Financial Institutes (PFI) such as 
limited understanding of forestry and agriculture sectors  investment and the corresponding risks            
associated with climate change  effects on credit repayment , this Project will      coach the participating  
financial service providers to enhance their       on assess ing the impact of climate change on their clientele 
and loan portfolio, and ensure equitable access to financial assets by women, youth, and historically 
marginalized communities. Furthermore, the Project will facilitate local and international impact investo rs 
and PFIs to engage in investment and credit provision for farmer cooperatives and SMEs in the selected 
value chains.  
In collaboration with TVET institutes/ICS youth producers and central (RFA, MININFRA) and local authorities 
(Districts), CND biomass and  micro -finance experts will refine and test, for each type of ICS/fuel to be 
promoted, the category/profile of households to be targeted and the related subsidy/microcredit schemes to 
be implemented to facilitate stove adoption with minimum concessionality . These schemes will be designed 
to align with the procedures and rules of identified local partner financial institutions . 
In addition, the financial products will be consistent with climate resilience and capacity -building for 
macadamia, avocado, vegetab les, honey and ecotourism value chain actors under Outputs 3.2.3 and 3.2.4. 
Techniques will be developed to analyze and score forestry and agroforestry value chains that are climate -
resilient.  
Activities and sub activities under this output will be execut ed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from WCS.  
Activity 3.3.1 Facilitate access to finance & private sector investments  
To de -risk the selected forestry and agroforestry -related value chains, the Project will organize sensi tization 
sessions for value chain actors and private financial institutions to build a common understanding with regard 
to the selected value chains. This will also include introduction of monitoring and measurement systems to 
support the risk and climate impact assessment on the value chains to be undertaken by the financial service 
providers.  
Communities involved in chosen forestry and agroforestry value chains in selected intervention sub -areas 
will be selected with a particular focus on landless people , historically marginalized communities, and 
vulnerable groups of youth and women in collaboration with local authorities (districts & sectors) and 
community representatives.   
Furthermore, the interventions will capitalize on the fast outreach of informal  saving groups. Saving groups 
are self -managed and self -capitalized entities that use members’ savings to facilitate lending within the


---
*Page 65*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 62 
 
 group. They set up clear rules and regulations which are known and adhered to by all group members. 
Groups consist of a limited number (10 -25) of people who have freely chosen to work together, and offer 
self-managed savings, insurance, and credit services in remote rural areas. Poorer segments of the 
community often do not have a regular source of income –however, within a savings group, people can save 
to purchase agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizer or equipment. Savings groups may also provide 
mutual assistance for group members, such as medical insurance or loans to members in need.  
Saving groups have transfor med marginalized communities by mobilizing local savings, which provide 
members  with a means to cope with emergencies, manage household cash -flow, build a capital base, and, 
crucially, re -build social networks, solidarity and trust. Savings group participa nts often do not have regular 
sources of income and commonly come from poorer segments of the community. Women are regularly 
involved in savings groups and have high participation rates. Saving group participants often come from the 
same socioeconomic back ground and know each other.   
Activities of saving groups include:  
● SAVING:  The group determines a fixed amount for a given period that each group member will bring 
to the savings account. The allocation and management of these savings can vary according to the 
needs of the members or is used to support group activities.  
● LENDING : The group can grant small internal credits to members. Loans are modest and repayable 
in the short term. Interest rate is fixed by members. At the request of the group, these credits are 
renewable almost automatically if there is no problem and if the am ounts are within a ceiling set by 
the group.   
● SOCIAL : The group not only improves the lives of its members financially but also socially as 
members are given the opportunity to socialize at each meeting and discuss other issues or 
concerns. The group furt her builds a small social fund to help group members in distress. Each 
group agrees on the amount to be saved, usually a smaller amount than the amount for regular 
savings, in every meeting for the social fund. This money is not loaned, but instead used to  pay 
group member expenses for things such as funeral costs or medical treatment and are only used if 
agreed on by all group members.  
In case of external loans from financial service providers, which most members can’t afford, group members 
agree to mutual ly guarantee each other (co -guarantee) when taking a loan. If a member does not pay, the 
group ensures repayment for him/her . The group uses moral pressure to force repayment and therefore 
there is no requirement for physical guarantees with third parties such as financial institutions. The internal 
character assessment for group members is important.  
The project will strengthen the capacity of saving groups and link them to more formalized financial 
institutions. The project will further enhance financial  education and client protection principles.   
This model is more convenient and more accepted by most women who cannot afford collateral loans. As 
such, this approach will attract more women and will facilitate their formal access to financing over time. 
Specific attention will also be paid to women’s participation in other project financial products that will be 
developed, such as asset finance in activity 3.3.2.  
The project will digitize saving groups, to reduce time and cost spent to access their saving s, thereby 
facilitating transactions with formal financial institutions. Solutions such as “push and pull technology” (i.e., 
payments using cell phones, commonly referred to as “mobile money”) have proven to be useful and 
convenient for savings groups to s end and receive money.


---
*Page 66*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 63 
 
 In activity 3.3.1, communities involved in chosen forestry and agroforestry value chains under this project in 
selected intervention sub -areas will be selected with a particular focus on landless people, historically 
marginalized com munities, and vulnerable groups of youth and women in collaboration with local authorities 
(districts & sectors) and community representatives.   
Sub-activities include:  
3.3.1.1 Develop tailored credit assessment tool for selected value chains, while integ rating climate impact 
data 
3.3.1.2 Facilitate access to finance for selected value chains of avocado, macadamia, vegetables and 
ecotourism that are relevant to build climate resilience  
3.3.1.3 Develop tailored financial products to meet the needs of women and youth  
Activity 3.3.2 Set up and support savings & loan groups, enhance asset -building  
To strengthen the capacity of local smallholder farmers in financial literacy and access to finance, farmers’ 
cooperatives will be assisted and supported in setting up saving groups. Savings groups are a proven and 
effective approach to the financial inclusion of the most vulnerable and are increasingly recognized as one 
of the strongest forms of community organization available due to the high levels of socia l capital generated 
from its savings approach. Saving groups create a platform for linkage with financial institutions and other 
business development services. Further, savings groups are recognized for enabling high levels of female 
inclusion. As groups m embers co -guarantee each other for accessing a loan and groups are strong, it forms 
low lending risks for MFIs since members mutually reinforce each other’s repayments.  
Once grouped, small savings group members, especially women, grow from accessing internal group loans 
to accessing formal financial institution loans. As members' bankability and trustworthiness increases, 
members are able to start accessing individual loa ns, gradually building to larger loans and are able to open 
individual savings accounts at financial institutions.  
Members of a saving group will be self -selected and the saving group will be managed by its members. 
Self-selection will be based on the fol lowing:  
● Knowledge of one another and similar economic background   
● Close proximity to where the meetings will be held   
● Reputation for honesty and reliability   
● Ability to attend all meetings on time and follow rules  
● Have a cooperative personality  
● Be able  to buy at least one share each week (or time set by the group)  
● Be able to repay loans on time   
Most saving groups are informal but transparent, democratic, and structured groups that have constitutions 
and clear rules. Members do not enter into contractu al arrangements for their membership. Record -
keeping is based on simple passbooks in which each member’s savings and loans are recorded; all 
transactions are done in front of the members during group meetings.  
Farmer savings groups (FSGs) will be created within cooperatives and farmers will decide which group to 
join. Groups will set up governing rules and conditions (savings amount, meetings, etc.), and criteria for new 
members who want to join. Particular attention will be given to social inclusion (incl uding vulnerable 
communities and landless people).


---
*Page 67*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 64 
 
 Youth and women -owned businesses selected for activity 3.2.2 will be linked to targeted FSG beneficiaries 
for supplying inputs (modern beehives, seedlings, etc.) and energy -efficient cook -stoves. Further more, 
intensive capacity -building and technical support will be delivered to all groups with emphasis on financial 
literacy, entrepreneurship, and gender mainstreaming. The activity will also help link savings groups to PFIs.  
For Activity 3.3.2, in collabo ration with local authorities, the project will target existing or potential youth and 
women -owned businesses that can intervene at any level of selected value chains in activity 3.3.1. The 
project will ensure the integration of vulnerable and landless peo ple. 
Key sub -activity:  
3.3.2.1 Establish/form saving groups for access to finance  
3.3.2.2 Provide organizational, technical, and financial capacity -building to women, youth, and CSOs (such 
as cooperatives or VSLA) with focus on financial literacy and provide long -term coaching to beneficiaries  
3.3.2.3 Support women, youth, and other marginalized groups to strengthen savings and loan groups and 
register for MFI accounts  
 
Activity 3.3.3 Build the capacity of financial institutions to serve targeted value  chains and communities  
Many financial institutions demonstrate little knowledge about the science of agriculture, forestry, climate 
change and associated risks. A study by the International Food Policy and Research Institute (IFPRI)112, 
noted that many agr icultural activities are located in remote, widely dispersed regions and that financial 
institutions find it impossible to provide cost -effective and affordable services in this context. Hence for this 
specific activity, PFIs will be supported to access an d adopt a digitalized forestry and agri -loan assessment 
tool, and to understand climate impacts on their portfolio to actively integrate and promote climate relevant 
financial products in their product offer.  
The Project will work with these institutions b y developing and refining appropriate financial products and 
financing operations that are better understood and user -friendly for smallholder farmers and vulnerable 
groups. The Project will also collaborate with selected PFIs to build their awareness of p rospective farmer 
and low -income group clients and their exposure to climate impacts.  
Key sub -activity:  
3.3.3.1 Capacity -building of PFIs  
Activity 3.3.4 Facilitate learning & knowledge sharing  
To deliver an adaptive program that cooperates with market ac tors on inclusive and sustainable business 
models that have a positive impact on smallholder farmers, while generating and sharing lessons on which 
business models work and which do not, the project will adopt the program -embedded reflection and learning 
(PERL) model for facilitating learning and knowledge sharing to popularize the CND unique approaches to 
restoration and environment management.  
By proving,  we seek to know and show what works and what does not work by demonstrating results at all 
levels, g enerating deeper insights into farmer benefits and the effects on the wider ecosystem, and building 
business model sustainability.  
 
112  Kloeppinger -Todd, R. and Sharma, M. eds., 2010.  Innovations in rural and agriculture finance  (Vol. 18). Intl Food 
Policy Res Inst.


---
*Page 68*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 65 
 
 By improving, we learn by doing to enhance project adaptation and improvement, build a learning culture 
through discussion an d reflection, generate knowledge to support project effectiveness, make comparisons 
over time, and enhance data quality procedures.  
Through sharing,  we disseminate high -level results and learnings to relevant audiences, contribute to 
visibility and commun ication, showcase successful, sustainable and scalable business models, and generate 
best practices.  
Under this activity we will go through the following actions to prove, improve and share:  
Capture  - We will establish a KML framework and support case studies and discussion by project staff; 
improve data collection; collect insights from field visits; write human interest stories; hold quarterly program 
reviews; measure client satisfaction; and colle ct information on business models, market uptake, and 
ecosystem changes.  
Synthesize  - We will organize discussions and quarterly program reviews with program staff and 
stakeholders for assessment, interpretation, reflection, and learning from results. Outp uts will include 
reports, briefs, and articles.  
Disseminate  - We will contribute to and support the project, presenting its achievements in newsletters, 
conferences, webinars, blogs, publications, media events, partner workshops and sector network 
presenta tions.  
Take action  - We will have regular discussions and reviews in which we revisit the work plan and processes 
in light of results and insights (e.g., based on outreach data, field visits, case studies, partner feedback, 
quarterly reports, changes in the ecosystem, etc.) , and adapt operational planning when needed (within and 
outside of the normal project planning and reporting cycle).  
Refine agenda  - We will help to align the project intervention strategy with a shared vision for success.      
      
The table below summ arizes the project activities to be implemented in Congo Nile Divide .


---
*Page 69*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 66 
 
  
Table 4:  Summary of project activities (place based and non -place based) to be implemented across the Congo Nile Divide.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
The proposed project will be implemented in five years, from 202 4–2029. The Ministry of Environment (MoE) 
is the Accredited Entity (AE) for the GCF and MoE will enter into a funded activity agreement with the GCF 
once the project is approved by the Board.


---
*Page 70*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 67 
 
  
The governance arrangements for the project at the national level are designed to build upon the  
institutional structure of MOE (the accredited entity) and RFA (the Executing Entity).  
Accredited Entity:   The MoE on behalf of the Government of Rwanda is a Direc t Access Entity of the GCF 
and will assume the oversight role on implementation, management, monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
on the CND Program elaborated in the FAA. The MoE will enter into a subsidiary agreement with the 
Executing Entity (EE) with c lear roles and responsibilities for each party. Under the Ministry of Environment 
there is a Single Project Implementation Unit that has a number of staff charged with resource mobilization 
and providing oversight over different projects implemented throug h the Ministry of Environment. The 
MoE/SPIU has a track record of experience in project oversight, management, monitoring and evaluation of 
projects and programs including the GCF funded FP073 that is currently at the mid -term level of 
implementation with over USD 32.8 million, managed over USD 3.8 million for the GCF funded PPFs, 
overseen the implementation of USD 10 million from Adaptation Fund. The MoE is currently managing the 
World Bank Funded project preparation advance of USD 6 million and has been i mplementing since 2018 a 
program funded by the UNDP focused on Strengthening Capacities of Environment and Natural Resources 
Sector for a Green Economy Transformation of over USD 6 million. Additionally MoE assumes its oversight 
role through chairing of th e Project Steering Committee for different projects implemented under the 
Environment and Natural Resources Sector as a whole namely TREPA, a GCF -funded project, Rwanda 
Urban Development Project Two funded by the World Bank and NDF,   an Early Warning Syste m project


---
*Page 71*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 68 
 
 (funded by LDCF), the Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and Conservation (LAFREC) programme 
(funded by GEF/World Bank), Green Amayaga Project (funded by the GEF) and the “Building resilience of 
communities living in degraded forests, savan nahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem 
management approach” programme (funded by LDCF). A coordination platform between approved GCF 
projects will be established to identify, maximize linkages and ensure complementarity through learning and 
shari ng best practices and failures arising from the implementation of existing GCF projects. Quarterly 
meetings will be organized under the supervision of the MoE between project directors and staff responsible 
for monitoring and evaluation to share lessons le arned.  
Project Financial Flow and AE Roles  
Funds from GCF will be provided to the MoE GCF account (as the AE), under the terms of the FAA. MoE 
will be responsible for financial management and accountable for the use of GCF resources. Financial 
transactions  will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally certified auditors. In addition, as 
the AE, MoE will: i) ensure that the project is executed in accordance with GCF standards; ii) supervise, 
oversee and manage the implementation of project i nterventions; iii) report on Project progress; and iv) 
ensure that Project activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries' national priorities. MoE will 
provide oversight to the project consisting of a) entering into subsidiary agreement with t he EE; b) managing 
and disbursing GCF funds to EE on the approved work plans and budgets; c) reviewing financial 
expenditures and progress reports; d) overseeing Project implementation in accordance with the Project 
document and Annual Work Plans and Budge ts, agreements with co -financiers and  executing entity rules 
and procedures; e) providing technical guidance to ensure that the appropriate technical quality is applied 
to all Project activities; f) providing financial reports to the GCF for Project funds  received; g) ensuring that 
the project complies with the terms agreed in the Project’s respective FAA as well as the AMA signed 
between MoE and the GCF; and h) undertaking regular annual supervision missions according to the MoE’s 
guidelines and convene   Project   Steering Committee (PSC) meeting twice a year   aimed to review progress 
and approve   work plans.   The PMU hosted under the Single Project Implementation Unit of the Ministry of 
Environment will manage, monitor and report on day -to-day implementati on of the Project activities by the 
EE. The EE will   execute the tasks within the overall project management structure: a) implementing day -to-
day activities as per the project work plan and budget, including the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan; b ) undertaking procurement activities as per the agreement signed by GCF and AE as well as the sub -
agreement signed by the AE and EE; c) managing contracts of suppliers and services providers; d) hiring 
and managing project staff relevant to the EE -managed project areas; e) implementing activities as per the 
project work plan; and f) carrying out financial and technical monitoring of activities, including the 
achievement of outputs and outcomes the EE is  in charge of. EE will enter into Memorandum of 
Unders tanding with different implementing partner agencies that will provide technical know -how to the 
implementation of the project activities. The implementing partners including but not limited to RWB, WCS, 
NLA, RDB, CORDAID and Districts will provide technic al and operation services articulated and agreed in 
respective MoUs. For the Implementing partners RFA will be paying service compensations and at District 
Level community approach will be used. Procured service providers will be contracted in accordance w ith 
MoE rules and regulations of procuring goods and services.   
Project Steering Committee (PSC):  An inter -ministerial Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary will be established by MOE to serve as the project’s coordination and  decision -making 
body. The PSC will ensure the project delivers its outputs and achieves its outcomes. The Committee will 
meet on a semi -annual basis to review project progress and evaluations, facilitate implementation (ensuring 
the necessary resources an d support are provided in a timely manner) and provide guidance to the PMU 
and EE/PIU. The Steering Committee will also facilitate effective coordination between the key stakeholders 
at the national and district levels and ensure the project aligns with Go vernment strategies and programs.


---
*Page 72*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 69 
 
 The PSC will reflect the multi -sectoral nature of the project and will include senior -level representatives from 
GoR and other relevant Stakeholders. The PSC will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, MOE or any 
Senior Ma nager from MoE delegated by the Permanent Secretary with representatives from: MINAGRI, 
MINECOFIN, MININFRA - MINALOC, RDB, REG, REMA, RWB, RFA, RAB, NAEB, WCS, RCA, NLA, UR, 
Provinces ESs, Districts’ Vice Mayors of Economic Affairs and representatives of C ivil Society Organizations.  
Project Management Unit:  It is under the MoE/SPIU that a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) of 
the CND program to supplement the existing MoE/SPIU structure for this complex program will be 
established for day -to-day manage ment of the program interventions. The Project Management Unit (PMU) 
will be headed by the Project Coordinator who will serve as the secretary and the rapporteur of the PSC. 
The Project Coordinator and other PMU staff will be recruited  as per the MoE/GoR r ecruitment practices. 
The Project Coordinator is responsible for the day -to-day operations of the PMU within approved project 
funded activity agreement and any other guidance provided by the AE and PSC including the tasks of 
managing and monitoring project  risks initially identified and submitting new risks to the AE and PSC for 
consideration and decision -making on follow -up actions and updating the status of risks in the project risk 
log. The PMU Project Coordinator will report to the overall MoE/SPIU - Coordinator as the immediate 
supervisor and to the Permanent Secretary as the secondary supervisor.  
The PMU will provide to the MoE/SPIU coordination and to the Chair of PSC with quarterly progress reports 
and close its operations when the final project evalu ation report and other documentation required by the 
GCF have been completed and submitted to MoE. The PMU will be staffed with required professional and 
technically qualified personnel selected and recruited following the MoE/GoR procedures. In all, the P MU 
will strive to maintain a lean management structure. It will comprise a Project Coordinator, Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, E&S Specialist, Procurement Specialist, Gender Specialist, Financial 
Management Specialist, Communication and Outreach  Specialist, Office Manager, and Driver as a 
dedicated team to manage the EE for the whole program.   
Executing Entity:  RFA will serve as the EE for the Project through a subsidiary agreement (SA)  signed with 
MoE. The SA will establish clear roles and respo nsibilities for both parties for the delivery of the project 
activities, the schedule and conditions for installments, the determination of the prevailing fiduciary standards 
and the terms and conditions for arbitrations and termination of contract. The SA  will include specific 
obligations for the EE on project execution, financial management, personnel administration and reporting, 
as well as on arbitration and liability terms.   
Rwanda Forest Authority:  RFA was established by the Government of Rwanda by the law No 72/2019 of 
29/01/2020 with the mission of ensuring the growth of forest resources, their management and protection 
for sustainable development purposes. RFA is an affiliated agency under the Mo E with a separate legal 
personality and a budget entity of the Government of Rwanda.   RFA is currently implementing   TREPA;   a 
GCF funded project as one of the executing entities, COMBIO Project funded by the Swedish government, 
executed Forest Management and Biomass Energy project (FMBE) implemented in the Northern province; 
Sustainable forestry, agroforestry and biomass energy management for climate resilience in Gatsibo and 
Gicumbi districts; and Improving the Efficiency and Sustainability of Charcoal an d Wood Fuel Value Chains 
in the North -western part of Rwanda supported by the Nordic Development Fund. RFA has three main 
divisions namely Forest Research Division, Forest Management, Administration and Finance and an 
established Single Project Implementat ion Unit (SPIU), composed of staff with the required financial 
management skills where the CND Staff will be hosted. The Director General of RFA as the Chief Budget 
Manager, the  RFA SPIU Coordinator together with Program Manager and a Financial Management 
Specialist will be responsible for the day -to-day financial management of the Project.   RFA SPIU will open a 
separate account at the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR), from which payments of the Project activities will


---
*Page 73*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 70 
 
 be made from. RFA follows the same financ ial and procurement policy as the one of the Ministry of 
Environment.   
WCS Technical Assistance (TA) Services:  As one of the project implementation partners,  WCS will 
provide technical assistan ce to the EE (RFA) through a n MOU  signed with RFA. The MOU  will detail all the 
activities that WCS will be directly supporting during the implementation of this project. The TA services will 
include advising RFA/SPIU, procuring and supervising international experts and consultants, and procuring 
materials to support t he execution activities. Relevant technical expert s from WCS will be embedded within 
RFA to advise SPIU on day -to-day project management to support the implementation of activities under 
outputs 1.2, 2.1, and 2.2. These experts will support RFA’s technical  teams and strengthen their capacities 
in different aspects of the project implementation. Furthermore, WCS technical assistance services will 
include supporting the development of ToRs and reviewing works of international consultants to ensure high 
qualit y deliverables.  
CORDAID Technical Assistance Services : CORDAID will provide technical assistance to RFA mainly on 
output 3.2 and 3.3 through  an MOU signed with RFA.  
Other Government of Rwanda implementing partners will provide implementation support and RFA will enter 
into specific M OUs with these partners  based on the type of support t hey will provide.   
Table 5:  Summary of project outputs. The EE will be responsible for all activities and sub -activities of the 
project, rec eiving support from technical implementation partners .  
Outputs  Executing 
Entity per 
output  Technical 
Implementation 
Partners  
Output 1.1. Landscape -wide land -use plan 
developed for climate -resilient livelihoods & 
forest ecosystems, integrating district 
development strategies (DDS)  RFA 
  WCS and NLA  
Output 1.2. Local & national institutional 
capacities strengthened to integrate biodiversity 
& climate risks into land use planning & 
management  RFA WCS and NLA  
Output 2.1. Protected areas management 
effectiveness improved to address climate risks 
and adaptation  RFA WCS and RDB  
Output 2.2. Natural forest cover restored; 
biodiversity  connections established  RFA WCS  
Output 3.1. Farming methods enhance 
productivity, reduce erosion & flooding risks, 
contribute to ecosystem services, and support 
connectivity  RFA RWB


---
*Page 74*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 71 
 
 Output 3.2. Rural livelihoods generate 
alternative incomes and reduce pressure on 
forests  RFA CORDAID  
Output 3.3. Financial services & private sector 
investment engagement  RFA CORDAID  
Monitoring and Evaluation  PMU   
 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)  will be responsible for ensuring technical guidance to both the 
project execution team and the PSC. The TAC will have technical representatives from all project 
stakeholders including MINAGRI, MINECOFIN, MININFRA, MINALOC, RDB, REG, REMA, RWB, RFA, 
RAB, N AEB, WCS, RCA, NLA, UR, Districts representatives and representatives of Civil Society 
Organizations. The TAC will be engaged in providing technical support and quality assurance of the project 
implemented activities as well as facilitating effective imple mentation and mainstreaming of project 
interventions beyond the life of the project. The institutional stakeholders will nominate relevant technical 
experts to the TAC, thus bringing expertise from their respective institutions to make technical contributi ons 
to the project implementation based on the integrated nature of the project.  
The project will use the GoR fund management modalities based on an annual work plan developed by the 
PMU together with EE and subsequently approved by the PSC. The Annual Work Plan (AWP) indicates 
which activities should be covered at PMU and EE levels as per the allocated respective budgets. The EE, 
together with support from implementing partners, will establish Local Project Implementation Committees 
(LPICs)specif ic to the zones of intervention in the Western and Southern Provinces of Rwanda. Two LPICs 
will be established; one for the Southern province and another one for the Western province for the 
coordination of activities in Western (GMNP) and southern (NNP) R wanda to ensure synergies and 
complementarity between partners. These teams will work closely with the Joint Action Development Forums 
(DJAF) based in each district located in these respective zones. LPIC will be composed of representatives 
of districts in  charge of natural resources management, RDB, CSOs, and conservation organizations, 
women and youth councils and JADF.   This arrangement will ensure that a) project delivery can proceed 
securely and efficiently despite the complex governance framework; and  c) government partners play a 
leading role in project delivery and capacity development. PSC will provide policy direction and guidance to 
improve the coherence and efficiency of this innovative approach to be developed as an up -scalable model. 
At the loc al level, the EE and its service providers will coordinate closely with districts to ensure smooth local 
level coordination in project implementation, provide ownership and ensure sustainability. The District 
Executive Directors (DEDs) are expected to play  an active role in project implementation, facilitation and 
monitoring and play a key role in the grievance redress mechanisms, as described in the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan of the project.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request  
Rwanda has achieved remarkable social, political, and economic progress over the past two decades. The 
Rwandan economy has grown well above average compared to its peers and the rest of the world, achieving 
growth rates of more than 8% regularly, with a 9. 4% growth rate in 2019113. However, the economy which is 
 
113  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2020.


---
*Page 75*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 72 
 
 dependent on nature -based tourism and agriculture is extremely vulnerable to external shocks, including 
climate change.  
Climate change is likely to increase variability in crop yields and agricultura l production, cause severe flood 
damage to physical infrastructure, reduce labor productivity, and impact demand for tourism114. The recent 
Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) estimates that if these risks materialize, Rwanda’s GDP 
levels can drop  by 5–7% below baseline in multiple years by 2050115, with negative impacts on private 
consumption, exports, and government revenues. By strengthening resilience to climate change, Rwanda 
can better prepare to manage the adverse impacts of climate change. I mplementing the commitments 
articulated in the NDC is estimated to require new investments of US$11 billion, of which close to US$7 
billion is conditional on new financing.  
Rwanda is classified by the U.N. as a Least Developed Country (LDC)116 and lacks su fficient public financial 
resources to implement its climate change and resilient green development objectives. The implications of 
climate impact for Rwanda demands concerted action and support both locally and internationally to enable 
the mainstreaming of climate resilience into public, private and community sectors at the pace and scale 
required. This Project will allow Rwanda to implement its NDC commitments and pursue its aspirations under 
its National Forest Policy and Climate Resilient Green Economy  plans for reversing trends of high 
deforestation, allowing for demonstration of sustainable reforestation models and reductions in demand for 
wood fuel. Rwanda has made an impressive commitment to using forests and forest protection as part of its 
strateg y to mitigate the impacts from climate change, and to provide benefits of biodiversity conservation 
and livelihood improvements.   
Yet, vulnerable citizens' needs, coupled with fragile landscape and forest restoration, will not be met solely 
with national resources in the rapid timeframe needed to arrest loss of economic assets for households and 
prevent further degradation of landscapes. Specific investments in awareness and forest governance, 
training at scale required to increase the resilience of CND co mmunities to the impacts of climate change, 
and alignment and coordination of support on undertaking climate resilient restoration activities are not 
currently being developed by the GoR. The GoR does not have the financial means to implement all project 
activities identified to improve climate resilience and requires technical assistance and support. While project 
partners are contributing co -finance for this project implementation, this represents only a fraction of the 
resources required for implementati on. The GCF grant investment can help initiate, expedite, and catalyze 
these critical interventions and assist with alignment of future climate resilience efforts. MoE is requesting 
grant funding for this Project due to Rwanda’s status as an LDC, insuffici ent alternative finance options, and 
because the proposed activities will provide a public good on which the livelihoods of many of Rwanda’s 
rural poor depend. The high levels of poverty among project beneficiaries in the CND as identified in the 
Feasibili ty Report necessitate the use of grant funds rather than a reimbursable financial option. While the 
GoR will contribute resources for the implementation and sustaining climate resilience efforts beyond the 5 -
year Project, this represents only a partial sha re of implementation resources. The GCF funding will crowd 
in additional private sector capital, such as efficient cookstoves and forest plantations, and will allow the 
government to cost -efficiently implement the adaptation capacity -building training and practices to ensure 
that CND landscape is restored, and climate resilient landscapes maintained.  
 
114  “World Bank Group. 2019.  Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.  World Bank, Washington, DC. World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32113   License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”  
115  World Bank Group. 2022. Rwanda Country Climate and Development Report . CCDR Series;. World Bank, 
Washin gton, DC. World Bank Group . https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/38067   License: CC BY -NC-ND 
3.0 IGO.   
116   United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2021. Least Developed Country Category: Rwanda 
Profile.


---
*Page 76*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 73 
 
 The lack of private capital structure, prevalence of subsistence farming, and inadequate market for 
agriculture and forested products, is the primary cause of the request for grants, not loans as little surplus 
products are produced and traded, and thus wi ll be inadequate to secure or service any loans.The prevailing 
market conditions necessitate GCF grant finance, rather than loans, to raise the capacity and bridge the 
financial and technical gaps until the restoration and value chain models are brought to  financially viability 
that can be sustained by private sector. Furthermore, our Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) shows 
that the direct returns on investment in landscape restoration activities are too low to make them financially 
attractive or feasib le for farmers, even if they had access to credit. Without GCF support, lack of private 
financing, large payback period, uncertainty and transaction cost of getting the loan, and upfront cost and 
benefits realized over a longer period of time reduces the f inancial attractiveness of climate resilience 
investments. It is unlikely that there will be a financial return on investment within the Project time frame to 
repay loans. The issue of societal benefit investment is accentuated by the fact that there canno t be direct 
uptake of benefits to communities from restoration within National Parks.  
Serving low -income households yields low returns and the community lacks financial education and capacity 
to link them to formal private institutions. Most formal financ ial institutions view these as high risk and high 
cost, as the transactions are often small and the clients usually have neither physical collateral nor the 
education needed to organize their finances. Without the value chain development for potential reve nue 
generating streams such as honey, tea plantation tourism, and efficient cookstoves, the private sector 
investments are not occurring. Henceforth, these potential revenue generating streams proposed in the 
project are not sustainable on their own and th e GCF grant will not only provide financing support but will be 
critical in creating enabling opportunities for market development beyond the project to catalyze private 
investments. The full concessionality funded by GCF grants is requested so that an ena bling environment 
can be created, and the project can overcome affordability challenges through developing a system of 
community co -guarantee. This will also go beyond the neoclassical economics model and focus on shifts in 
social dynamics that move the co mmunity as a whole to escape the poverty trap and increase financial 
resilience. The full concessionality for potential revenue generating streams will be passed on to end 
beneficiaries in the CND and the project will strengthen the capacity of community o rganizations on quality 
improvement and aggregation capacity, create market linkage with off -takers or buyers, and attract finance 
for development, marketing, and distribution.  
Planting indigenous species, well -suited to the climatic conditions of the CND,  is likely to increase the health 
and resilience of forest plantations and thus the erosion control benefits that these forests provide. However, 
when establishing protective forests, most existing projects in the CND use exotic species because they are 
fast growing, widely available, and low cost117. GCF grant resources are required to support restoration to 
help build natural capital (restored forest) which can be used sustainably and provide larger ecosystem 
benefits in the future.  
The financial Net Present Value (NPV) of $34.48 million for agroforestry, $2.98 million for protective forests, 
and $0.31 million for silvopasture intervention and economic NPV of $ 58.93       million for agroforestry, 
$30.22 million for protective for ests, $ 0.97       million for silvopasture, and $ 10.59       million for energy 
efficient cookstoves interventions for 20 -year analysis period when GCF support for the Project is 
considered118. These results are indicative of the investment in time and resources required to increase 
climate resilience, associated benefits, and restoration of landscape and forest productivity. Furthermore, 
 
117  Mukuralinda, A., et al, 2016. Taking to Scale Tree -Based Systems in  Rwanda to Enhance Food Security, Restore 
Degraded Land, Improve Resilience to Climate Change and Sequester Carbon.  PROFOR, Washington D.C.  
118 The provision of energy efficient cookstoves is a non -income generating intervention and is expected to have no 
financial cash inflows and no income generating opportunities, then no financial analyses is needed. The cookstoves 
analyses was pursued only at the economic analysis level.


---
*Page 77*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 74 
 
 agroforestry, restoration, and forest management require up -front investments that take 10 -30 years to 
mature ful ly. However, these future benefits are depressed by the use of a high discount rate that downplays 
the importance of long -term investments. The discount rate considered in our economic analysis is 13%, 
which is Rwanda Central Bank’s yield for a 20 -year tre asury bond, as issued in August 2021. This is the rate 
at which the government can borrow to fund equivalent investments in the absence of grant financing. For 
financial analysis, we used the discount rate of 15.44%, which is Rwanda Central Bank’s lending rate for 
July 2021. Consequently, the GoR seeks maximum concessionality from the GCF for the urgent adaptation 
actions proposed under this Project. Without GCF funding, under a business as usual (BAU) scenario, 
inadequate technical and financial capacity a t the national and local level will continue to hinder the efforts 
of rural communities in the CND to adapt their livelihoods. Consequently, the vicious negative cycle of 
unsustainable forest use and ecosystem degradation will persist, reducing the supply of goods and services 
which buffer impacts of climate change on rural communities, compounding their vulnerability. GCF funding 
is therefore vital to initiate progress towards a complete paradigm shift in GoR’s approach to adapting the 
livelihoods of rural  Rwandans to climate change.  
The Project cost per direct beneficiary of $31 ($39.86 with co -funding) and 20 -year economic rate of return 
of project interventions for agroforestry (       49%), protective forests (72%), and silvopasture (       51%) 
highlights its viability. The Economic rate of return for energy efficient cookstoves could not be estimated as 
there is no change in the sign in the net cash or resource flows from positive to negative over the analytical 
period; and the economic NPV of $ 10,585.675       for this intervention highlights its feasibility.  The cost of 
restoring natural forest for providing both adaptation and mitigation benefits is significantly greater than the 
cost of simply planting trees for mitigation. Restoration o f natural forest in Rwanda is essential for sustaining 
the critical ecosystem services on which vulnerable rural communities and the national economy depend . 
The capital market in the country is weak and provides limited opportunities. It has low levels of  direct 
investment which further limits the opportunity for financing. The country's capital markets currently are not 
able to serve the needs of rural and resource limited beneficiaries. The project addresses market failures 
and minimizes the risk of disr upting or unduly distorting markets or crowding out private finance, including 
new entrants, as well as other public investments. Taking the above -mentioned points into account the 
concessionality that the GCF provides is justified.  
B.6. Exit strategy  
The Project will establish a new inter -agency and local -to-national -scale spatial planning framework and 
capacity for an integrated approach to multi -sector analysis and planning. This will enable the analysis of 
land-use trade -offs that explicitly conside r the value of ecosystem services, climate risks and risks of 
ecosystem degradation. This represents a radical shift away from business -as-usual and will have long -term, 
far-reaching implications for policy and financial planning in Rwanda. It will provide  a spatially explicit 
framework for mainstreaming climate risk considerations across all sectors while also providing a 
mechanism for quantifying harmful financial flows to biodiversity from multiple sectors.  
In addition, the multi -scale spatial planning system will be able to strengthen a nd link directly to the system 
under development by Rwanda’s Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) for policy 
coordination to integrate climate risks into fiscal planning, with support from the IM F Resilience and 
Sustainability Trust. Further, it will support the ability of both national and local governments to plan and 
implement the new disaster risk reduction strategy in a spatially explicit way, which previously has not been 
possible.  
Mainstrea ming climate change adaptation metrics . The Project will integrate climate resilience metrics into 
land use planning, district development strategies and annual performance contracts and harmonize cross -


---
*Page 78*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 75 
 
 sectoral monitoring and reporting mechanisms. This wi ll lead to a systematic consideration of climate change 
risks and adaptation in policy planning that will be sustained beyond the Project. An MoU between key 
government agencies will operationalize the cross -sectoral planning task force, which will be supp orted by 
a ministerial order, giving it the mandate and financial support to operate beyond the life of the Project.  
Rwanda has adopted a private -public partnership (PPP) business model to make its national parks 
operations financially viable. However, in Rwanda, as in the rest of the world, national parks and the 
biodiversity they are intended to protect are threatened by climate change and by the interaction of climate 
change with other direct anthropogenic threats. By “climate proofing” its national park s–i.e., by establishing 
a technical unit within RDB, by explicitly incorporating climate change considerations into the management 
plans of national parks, including climate -wise functional linkages, such as the one this project will create in 
the CND, and  by training rangers and other park personnel to proactively manage climate -change -related 
threats –Rwanda will ensure that the ecosystem service benefits of the country’s biodiversity, including its 
national parks, will be sustained beyond the life of the Project. Specific finance instruments –such as payment 
for ecosystem services (PES) and structured impact conservat ion bonds to ensure ongoing revenues and 
benefit -sharing with surrounding communities –will be identified and implemented before the end of the  
project, in a manner consistent with the Biodiversity Finance Plan that the GoR has recently developed with 
support from BIOFIN. The Project through RFA will hire a Technical Advisor  , to work with RDB, MoE, 
REMA, FONERWA and MINECOFIN to ensure that a p ortfolio of sustainable finance mechanisms is 
designed and implemented before the end of the project period to ensure the long -term sustainability of the 
Project outputs.   
Strategies for Long -term Financial Sustainability.  Two specific examples of the Gove rnment of Rwanda’s 
commitment and approaches to financial sustainability that will be key parts of the Exit Strategy are the 
Tourism Revenue Sharing Program (TRSP) of RDB and the Community Adaptation Fund of FONERWA, the 
Rwanda Green Fund.  
Tourism Revenue Sharing Program.  The long -term success of the three protected areas in the CND 
depends, to a substantial extent, on the support of communities living around protected areas.  In recognition 
of this, in 2005 Rwanda established a Tourism Revenue Sharing Prog ram, allocating 5% of gross tourism 
revenue to local communities.  Currently Rwanda and Uganda are the only two African countries with formal 
tourism benefit sharing programs. RDB recently completed a 15 -year review of its Tourism Revenue Sharing 
Program ( Snyman et al. 2023) and it has increased the revenue sharing allocation from 5% to 10%.  
The primary challenges identified in the 15 -year review are increasing the effectiveness of community 
engagement, reaching the most vulnerable community members, and en suring that the TRSP meets 
community needs.  The GoR is interested in adapting the TRS Policy to more effectively engage the 
communities living around the PAs in the TRSP and to allocate more funding to directly enhance the lives of 
Rwandan citizens living  around PAs. In this regard the Project will work with RDB and district governments, 
to increase transparency in the Program, ensure that the most vulnerable community members benefit from 
the TRSP and to link the cooperatives and youth -led SMEs to the Pro gram. This will include working with 
RDB to use the insights from this project to revise the TRSP revenue allocation model and eligibility to create 
greater resilience among communities.  The 15 -year review recommended that the following percentages 
be use d for the revenue allocation going forward: 70% for livelihood projects; 25% for infrastructure support; 
and 5% in an emergency fund. However, there is a need for input from this Project to ensure that the specific 
types of projects to be supported most ef fectively increase community resilience.  This will ensure long -term 
benefits to communities.  
The Community Adaptation Facility (CAF) within FONERWA  was developed as part of Rwanda’s NDC Deep 
Dive:  Advancing Financial Innovation to Scale Up Climate Action .  The aim of the CAF is to provide grant


---
*Page 79*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 76 
 
 funding for community projects that scale up climate resilience. In this regard, the Project will support the 
cooperatives and youth -led SMEs engaged in Component 3 to prepare business plans and link them to 
innova tive financing for community projects with the CAF. In line with the CAF priorities, the business plans 
will focus on the investment priorities of the Rwanda Green Fund (FONERWA) targeting conservation and 
sustainable management of natural resources especi ally ecosystem rehabilitation, sustainable land 
management, sustainable forest management and promotion and protection of biodiversity.  The Project 
Technical Assistance will work with FONERWA to design specific long -term funding opportunities for 
communit ies in the CND to the CAF.  
Additionally, t he Project will enhance the environmental, social and economic resilience of communities in 
the CND by enhancing financial and accounting literacy, marketing and entrepreneurship, and vocational 
skills of community  members (e.g., in native tree propagation, forest restoration, and fuel -efficient stove 
production). This will mean the Project will invest in businesses that restore or indirectly halt the degradation 
and loss of native forests by reducing or eliminating  local stressors. These businesses and projects are 
expected to live beyond the lifetime of the project. The value chains, once organized profitably, can continue 
to grow without further support, while the financial service providers will continue to servi ce savings groups 
and farmers and SMEs in the value chain with sustainable financial services also after the project ends. By 
raising the productivity from selected crops, diversifying agriculture towards high -value agriproducts, and 
strengthening their va lue chains through trainings in marketing, processing and business, the project will 
attract investments from the private sector in sustainable agriculture and agroforestry. All economic and 
environmental benefits from the project will be rigorously monito red, captured, compiled and disseminated 
as knowledge products, packaged for various stakeholders including investors and MFI, with which the 
project will engage to secure microcredits to beneficiary farmers.


---
*Page 80*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
(c) FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  Total amount  Currency  
39,056,421  USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
Grants  39,056,421  - - - 
(b) Co-financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
10,943,579  USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Rwanda 
Development 
Board  Grant  5,000,000  USD ($)  - - - 
Rwanda Forestry 
Authority  Grant  831,307  USD ($)  - - - 
Rwanda Water 
Resources Board  Grant  5,000,000  USD ($)  - - - 
Ministry of 
Environment  In-kind 112,272  USD ($)  - - - 
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
50,000,000  USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions   
The Government of Rwanda is providing grant financing via the Rwanda Forest Authority 
(RFA), Rwanda Water Board (RWB), and Rwanda Development Board (RDB) to support 
activities in component 3. In addition  to their contributions, AE will cover office costs in 
the form of an in -kind contribution equivalent to $112,271 for the Project Management 
Unit which will be hosted within AE premises . The co -financiers have been identified 
based on their existing mandat es and activities they implement in the CND region hence 
this was the only assessment done and they have been able to commit their involvement 
in the project implementation. The provided co -financing commitments will serve as a 
basis of MoE engagement duri ng the project implementation. During implementation of 
the project, annual work plans will be adjusted together with the executing entity and all 
the co -financiers to align with everyone’s activities.  MoE/AE under its oversight role will 
ensure that all these stakeholders commit during planning on their co -financing and 
report on it during Annual Performance Reports submitted to GCF.


---
*Page 81*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1:  
Mainstreaming 
Climate 
adaptation into 
integrated land 
use planning  
 1.1 Landscape -
wide land -use plan 
developed for 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods & forest 
ecosystems, 
integrating district 
strategies  1,729,172  1,729,172  
 Grant     
 1.2 Local & national 
institutional 
capacities 
strengthened to 
integrate 
biodiversity & 
climate risks into 
land use planning & 
management  1,195,652  1,195,652  Grant     
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 2:  
Forest and 
landscape 
management and 
restoration  2.1 PA 
management 
effectiveness 
improved re climate 
risks & adaptation  2,051,778  2,051,778  Grant     
2.2 Natural forest 
cover restored, 
biodiversity 
connections 
established  16,917,145  14,271,796  Grant  2,645,349   Rwanda 
Water Board  
Component 3: 
Enhancing 
climate 
adaptation 
through 
promotion of 
resilient 
livelihoods and 
climate -smart 
farming methods  3.1 Farming 
methods enhance 
productivity, reduce 
erosion & flooding 
risks, contribute to 
ecosystem 
services, and 
support connectivity  13,451,014  10,856,387  Grant  478,071  
 
 
 
2,116,556  Grant  
 
 
 
Grant  Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
 
Rwanda 
Water Board  
3.2 Rural 
livelihoods 
generate alternative 
incomes & reduce 
pressure on forests  8,612,188  3,850,283  Grant  4,761,905  Grant  Rwanda 
Development 
Board  
3.3 Financial 
services & private 
sector investment 
engage  559,890  559,890  Grant


---
*Page 82*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 79 
  
 Monitoring & 
Evaluation  
 4.1 - Performance 
monitoring plan 
developed  555,475  555,475  Grant     
4.2 - Project 
monitored and 
evaluated; lessons 
learnt integrated 
into adaptive 
management 
processes  645,390  645,390  Grant     
Project 
Management 
Costs  5.1 Project 
managed efficiently 
to achieve its goal 
to build resilience to 
climate change in 
CND  1,901,344  1,480,769  Grant  106,925  
 
 
 
313,650  
 
 In-Kind 
 
 
 
Grant  Ministry of 
Environment 
(AE) 
 
Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
5% Contingency   2,380,952  1,859,830  Grant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 39,586  
 
 
 
 
238,095  
 
 
 
 
238,095  
 
 
 
5,346  
 Grant  
 
 
 
 
Grant  
 
 
 
 
Grant  
 
 
 
In-Kind 
 Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
 
 
Rwanda 
Water Board  
 
 
 
Rwanda 
development 
Board  
 
 
Accredited 
Entity  
 
Indicative total 
cost  (USD)  50,000,000              
39,056,421                        
10,943,579      
    
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
This project will build knowledge among land -use planning actors on the value of forests for climate 
resilience, and institutionalizing cross -sectoral meetings to encourage synergies and avoid overlapping


---
*Page 83*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 80 
  
 mandates and redundancy in different climate resili ence interventions  to ensure climate adaptation and 
climate resilience are explicitly incorporated into land -use planning processes in the CND, such that trade -
offs between different sectors can be resolved while balancing the climate resilience of nature  and people. 
Local land -use planning experts and community members will be trained and engaged to review and interpret 
the National Land Use and Development Master Plan, to ensure the plan accounts for current and future 
climate risks, and that these risks  are also considered in district level planning schemes. The knowledge and 
insights gained from these activities will be synthesized and used to inform the design of an Integrated Land -
use Plan for Resilient Livelihoods and Ecosystems, which will reconcile  the cross -sectoral (e.g., tourism, 
environment, forestry, food production, cash crops for export) trade -offs necessary to sustain forest 
ecosystem functions, deliver critical ecosystem services and improve community livelihoods. An innovative 
scientifical ly credible system for monitoring trends in natural forest cover and forest types will also be 
established, and a comprehensive capacity building programme will improve use of remote sensing, 
ecosystem service modelling and spatial planning tools to inform  decision making. Budget: $2,000,754  
To enhance forest resilience across the CND, through a combination of increased forest cover, improved 
forest condition, and improved management to reduce degradation and pressure on forests, the project will 
increase the extent and condition of natural fo rest within the CND’s national parks, by facilitating regeneration 
of large areas previously degraded by fires, securing key remaining natural areas outside PAs and 
developing a financial sustainability plan for the CND. The project will invest in the capa city of government 
agencies, districts, and communities to manage forest fires. Community members will be trained in and 
provided technical assistance and equipment for restoration techniques, establishment, and management of 
indigenous tree nurseries.  Management plans for the CND’s national parks will also be updated and park 
staff trained to explicitly consider climate adaptation and gender issues and manage  the parks as part of the 
larger  CND landscape.  The project will also develop the capacity of key G overnment ministries and agencies 
on sustainable conservation finance. Budget: 5,420,837  
Additionally, this project will strengthen the livelihoods of landless and or the most vulnerable households, 
who are often most at risk of unsustainable use of their farmlands, protected areas and resources within 
protective forests. Erosion control measu res and on -farm tree cover will be increased across the CND, 
helping reduce the risk of crop failure from extreme events like landslides, reduce land and water degradation 
caused by soil erosion, and increase provision of valuable products like wood fuel. To decrease pressure on 
forests for resource extraction, existing successful programs distributing improved cookstoves will be 
dramatically scaled up. Community members will be trained in and provided technical assistance for SLM 
practices, establishment, and management protective forests. Both cooperatives, individuals, participating 
financial institutions (PFIs), and value chain actors/small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) will benefit from 
capacity -building to improve their business skills and access to finance, and to strengthen value chains 
(including beekeeping, ecotourism, agri value chains, and cookstoves), including the construction of 
processing facilities and marketing materials. Vocational training schools and local youth cooperatives will 
be sup ported to produce, test, and distribute Tier 2 cookstoves.  Budget: 13,893,987


---
*Page 84*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
(d) EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential  
Adaptation Impact – This Project is designed to restore, sustain and expand critical forest ecosystem 
functions in the CND. More specifically, the project will protect, restore and expand natural forest in and 
around the core national parks; consolidate and expand some smalle r but critical "stepping stones" of 
remaining natural habitat between these national parks (mainly small forest patches and wetlands/ riparian 
areas); improve the landscape linkage function of key high altitude between the protected areas, while at 
the sam e time securing ecosystem services through afforestation and improved native species mix for 
plantation forests on steep slopes; silvopastoral interventions on cultivated pasture; and agroforestry 
interventions in regenerative agricultural areas. These int erventions will reduce erosion, decrease loss of 
soil organic matter, and thus increase the water infiltration rate, which increases water recharge which will 
enhance the resilience of forest ecosystems and smallholder farmers to climate change. The establ ishment 
of ecological connectivity between fragmented forests will promote landscape heterogeneity and support 
species migration to more favorable conditions within this human modified landscape and as a result help 
build the resilience of biodiversity to climate impacts. Increasing the capacity for species movement across 
these islands of forest habitat, will improve the adaptive capacity of multiple species that serve as important 
seed dispersers and insure the long -term viability of forests.  
Project interventions will include 10,000 ha of land (including both forest and silvopastoral sites) under 
improved, climate -resilient management; and improve agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of on -farm 
plantations, directly benefiting 1,254,242 people ( 654,404 women) with more climate resilient livelihoods 
from reduced exposure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and more knowledge on climate risks, value of 
forests and forests ecosystems, climate adaptation options, access to indigenous and agrofores try quality 
materials and improved ecosystem services.  
The Project will provide direct benefits to increase the climate resilience of more than 1.5 million of the most 
vulnerable residents of the CND, including increased adaptive capacity through redu ced exposure to flash 
floods, landslides, and soil erosion which will also increase their crop productivity and livelihoods (direct 
beneficiaries 52.2% female). Indirectly, 2,464,097 beneficiaries in the CND will receive co -benefits from 
improved and more sustained ecosystem services, including decreased sedimentation leading to improved 
water quality downstream and increased hydropower generation. This helps Rwanda produce cleaner 
hydropower energy at a lower cost, making it preferable to other more detrim ental energy sources. The 
project will also indirectly benefit 9,260,745 people and create approximately 24,212 job opportunities in 
forest -dependent communities.  
The Project will contribute altogether to the restoration of 5,000 ha of intact forest, 2 ,500 ha of protective 
forests and 3,346 ha of smallholder farmland, 1000 ha of pastures and 1,500 ha of riparian linkages. Overall, 
275,617 ha of the landscape could potentially be positively impacted by the project as land use planning, 
improved natural f orest management, improved buffer management and a stronger agroforestry sector 
would all contribute to improved outcomes beyond the specific areas directly targeted for restoration or 
improved management by the project. In particular, stronger capacity fo r land use planning across the CND 
and hence improved protection of key areas (e.g. steep slopes, riparian areas and protected area buffers) 
has strong potential to deliver significant mitigation benefits at a landscape rather than a site level. Although 
the project is focused on the priority landscapes covering 275,617 ha, it is likely that benefits due to increased 
adaptive capacity (achieved through improved land use planning and management of key features through


---
*Page 85*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 82 
  
 reduced exposure to flash floods, landsl ides, and soil erosion) could feasibly extend across the full 700,000 
ha CND.  
Additional adaptation benefits will include the training of 52,589 community members in forest management 
and restoration for climate resilience, which will be linked with on going restoration employment opportunities 
through other GoR and private sector projects; the strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems to 
promote climate resilience; and targeted capacity building for certain government institutions and minist ries 
in forest monitoring, remote sensing, spatial planning, and analysis. These beneficiaries will include MoE, 
REMA, RDB, MINAGRI, and the University of Rwanda.  
Complementary activities will address key drivers of deforestation while creating alterna tive livelihood 
pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and income -generating, climate -resilient crops, as well 
as strengthening supportive financial services.  
     Mitigation Impact – The Project will generate mitigation benefits by delivering sequestration of 
approximately       224,871  t CO 2-eq during the 5 -year Project period, which is about       0.8% of the 28.2M t 
CO 2 reduction targeted by Rwanda’s vision 2050.  
● 5,000 ha of critical intact natural forests will be under impr oved management for climate resilience, 
accounting for an estimated total of      596,116 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 1,000 ha of pasture  lands with increased coverage of native trees to secure reasonable landscape 
connectivity for forest species, accounti ng for an estimated total of      4,543 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 1,500 ha of riparian lands will be afforested which will contribute significantly to overall landscape 
connectivity, sequestering 110,138  t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 2,500 ha of protective fore sts and plantations will be established on slopes >55%, focusing on areas 
not currently planted in crops, accounting for an estimated total of 193,472  t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● Erosion control and agroforestry practices will be implemented over 3,346  ha of smallholder 
farmland, sequestering      129,006 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● Improved energy efficient stoves will be adopted by 8,500 households, securing       51,017 t CO 2-eq 
of avoided emissions over 20 years.  
Overall, there is potential for a significant contribution to GCF1 Core Indicator 4, hectares of natural resource 
areas brought under low emission or climate resilient practices. Conservatively, an area of 275,617 ha of 
the landscape could potentially be positively impacted by the project as land use planning, improved natural 
forest management, improved buffer management and a stronger agroforestry sector would all contribute 
to improved outcomes beyond the specific areas directly targeted for restoration or improved management 
by the proj ect. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
As described in Section B1, the Project provides a profound opportunity to implement new mechanisms of 
land-use planning and management that are based on consideration of the CND as a landscape, consisting 
of an inter-dependent mosaic of forests and farms, the management of each determining the health of the 
whole. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination across both geographic and sectoral boundaries, 
while mainstreaming climate risks into management plan ning represents a fundamental paradigm shift for 
land-use planning and management in Rwan da. This approach to land -use planning and management is 
entirely new for Rwanda and is intended to maintain and recover the ecosystem services that are essential 
to the resilience of smallholder farming communities within the region and to the globally significant and


---
*Page 86*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 83 
  
 unique biodiversity in this part of Rwanda. This represents a reversal of the previous negative feedback loop 
of ecosystem degradation to a more positive , climate -resilient system.  
Potential for scaling -up spatial planning and replication. Spatial planning is recognized by the IPCC, 
the EU and others as playing a key role in climate change adaptation and climate resilient development, but 
to date development planning in Rwanda has largely been based on tabular data, rather than on spatial 
planning. Adoption of spatial planning across ministries and on national regional and local levels, represents 
a significant paradigm shift for Rwanda. Piecemeal decisions and an ad hoc assemblage of isolated sector -
by-sector projects will be replaced with a holistic, climate -smart, evidence -based approach to planning and 
development – enabling systematic, ecosystem -based, multi -sector analysis of land use tradeoff s. The 
Project will therefore establish a new inter -agency and local -national model and capacities for holistic 
planning and implementation – one that can be scaled up for use elsewhere in Rwanda and beyond. This 
will enable better -informed planning decisi ons, the identification and valuation of nature -based solutions to 
climate adaptation and mitigation, and overall will foster climate resilient development pathways in the CND 
and nationwide. Communication and collaboration with complementary GCF and other  projects in Rwanda 
will accelerate this process.  
Potential for knowledge and learning. Component 1 will invest in new technologies and climate -smart 
knowledge to improve national and district planning, scenario analysis and monitoring capacities. In doing 
so, new mechanisms of coordination and collaboration will be established, and shared ac ross agencies. 
Component 2 will invest in best practices in forest management and restoration – some of which will require 
learning beyond the existing science of indigenous tree propagation and restoration (particularly in re -
establishing rain forest habi tat, establishing protective forests on slopes of >55%, and enriching farms with 
indigenous tree species). Component 3 will focus on processes to identify and pilot value -chain products 
(on-farm and off -farm) not yet in practice. All approaches will includ e the participation of local farmers, 
women, and youth to contribute to collective learning processes involving national and local government 
and vulnerable communities. Knowledge generated – and the processes by which it is generated – will be 
shared acro ss the region. The project is based on collective learning, knowledge generation and 
dissemination at community, landscape and national levels. A focus on knowledge management through 
demonstrations, monitoring, and evaluation across the project activities  will inform the implementation of 
current and future adaptation efforts.   
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment. Strengthening the Task Force in Component 
1 will ensure a single, first point of contact for all sectors’ planning developm ent and investments in the CND 
and will ensure that planning for climate resilience is addressed. By establishing a mechanism for 
coordination and harmonization, it will radically improve current conditions for public and private 
interventions and will est ablish partnerships and collaborations that live beyond this Project. Also 
importantly, promotion of sustainable financing for each component will help to assure that initiatives will 
either be self -sustaining or have solid plans for continued financial su pport.  
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies. The Project will finance the development of the 
Integrated Land -use Plan  which will be adopted by all ten CND districts as a framework for seeking 
synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity protections, reconciling land use conflicts 
that arise, and guiding development decisions and climate change adaptation. It will update the National 
Land Use Master Plan, ensuring it incorporates climate resiliency, and is accurate and rel evant to local 
contexts. As development of an Integrated Land -use Planning approach helps better reconcile cross -
sectoral tradeoffs and improve climate adaptation planning in the CND, this approach will prove a successful 
model for application to other reg ions of Rwanda and to other forest/farming landscapes beyond. In addition,


---
*Page 87*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 84 
  
 revising 2 NP management plans to include climate concerns will serve as a model for the remaining parks 
of Rwanda, as well as for the East African region.  
D.3. Sustainable develop ment (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed Project is aligned with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
including SDGs 5, 13 and 15 and will contribute to the achievement of the SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10. The 
Project will promote an ecosystem -based approach to forest protection, restoration, and rehabilitation that 
includes:  
● Reduction of erosion, sedimentation, and landslide risk as a result of restoration of degraded lands;  
● Increased number of native trees on farms with improved agroforestry systems, improving biological 
connectivity;  
● Increased carbon sequestration potential of plants and soils. While the primary objective of the 
Project is adaptation, the Project will also produce mitigation benefits of      204,079 t CO 2-eq during 
the 5 -year implementation period, and      1,033,275 t CO 2-eq over the 20 -year Project lifetime.  
● Reduced GHG emissions through more fuel efficient cookstove technologies, yielding cumulative 
savings of approximately      51,017 t CO 2-eq during the 20 -year Project lifetime.  
The Project will enable the transition to more climate resilient and product ive livelihood models and empower 
the rural poor, significantly reducing impacts from extreme weather events and increasing their potential for 
improved wellbeing. Social benefits will include:  
● Raised awareness about climate change effects and adaptation i n 1,253,252  people living in the 
CND (at least 52.2% representing women).  
● Capacity building of ~52,589 people (at least 50% women), in a wide range of topics aimed at 
increasing ecosystem and social resilience.  
● Create significant social capital through co -designing and co -managing a range of adaptation 
strategies, indirectly promoting social cohesiveness among CND villages through joint saving and 
lending systems.  
● Reduced inequality and poverty through increased financial inclusion and improved e conomic 
opportunities — especially for women, youth and historically marginalized groups.  
● Forest and landscape restoration in the CND will have several economic co -benefits for vulnerable 
communities, including:  
● Soil erosion control measures, protective f orests on public lands and agroforestry on private lands, 
will increase agricultural productivity and associated income.  
● The Project will create direct and indirect employment opportunities, benefiting approximately 24,212 
households and stimulate the loca l economy.  
● Leveraging private capital to invest in the value chains including cookstoves in the CND. The project 
will create important social and environmental benefits. However, the project will also have removed 
a number of risks (notably carbon risk) th at worry more traditional (social -impact or sustainability) 
investors. As a result, the venture becomes an attractive investment for private capital interested in 
a “triple bottom line”, allowing the business to develop sustainably and scale to more CND ar eas. 
During project implementation we will therefore produce a bankable business plan that details the 
activities and resources required for expanding further.


---
*Page 88*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 85 
  
 The Project will result in positive outcomes around access to resources, improved livelihoods, a nd income 
generation opportunity and capacity for women. With support from a dedicated Gender Specialist, the Project 
will engage women in project planning, investment and decision making. With opportunities to generate 
additional income, women, who tradit ionally are already further vested in investing in their families, will be 
more able to respond to incentives that address their families’ basic needs, such as better health and 
nutrition, linking to agriculture and food security improvements. The project will also get support from NGOs 
that engage men in programming and discussions to increase their participation in household and parental 
responsibilities and gain greater awareness of the importance of women’s fair access and control of 
resources, includin g income. Women will benefit from training and educational activities, leadership, 
entrepreneurship and decision making. Annex 8, which will be further elaborated on at project onset, 
provides more information on gender -sensitive impacts.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  
Despite Rwanda’s solid economic progress since 2000, poverty remains widespread and pervasive. Overall, 
38.2% of the population lives in poverty and 16% in extreme poverty119. Women are more affected by poverty 
than men, with 47% of female -headed households living in poverty compared with 44.9% of all households. 
Rural households are more than twice as likely to be in poverty/extreme poverty than urban households. 
Districts of  the Western and Southern Provinces in the CND region have the highest rates of poverty and 
extreme poverty in the country.  
Most rural households are smallholder subsistence farmers and, because of high population density, high 
relief terrain and dependen ce on rain fed agriculture, the residents of the CND are highly vulnerable to 
climate change. These risks include exposure to flash floods120, landslides121 and soil erosion122. During 
stakeholder consultations, communities indicated several socio -economic ch anges stemming from changing 
climate conditions. Notably, the longer dry season and unpredictable rains123 have reduced agricultural yield 
significantly, leading to more widespread malnutrition and extreme poverty, and farmers can barely meet 
their own fami lies’ needs124. In particular, women, youth, and historically marginalized people are feeling the 
impacts. As arable land is increasingly constrained, youth and historically marginalized people have few 
opportunities and are more focused on survival and sho rt-term gains at the expense of education and 
sustainable livelihood development (see Annexes 6 and 8 for more detail).  
As a result, the GoR has invested significantly in developing an enabling policy and institutional framework 
for a more climate -resilien t development pathway. Yet, while adaptation is a top priority, Rwanda is classified 
by the U.N. as a LDC and lacks sufficient public financial resources to implement its climate change and 
resilient green development objectives.  Currently there are no alt ernative funding options of the scale needed 
to secure Rwanda’s priority forests to reduce vulnerability of rural communities to climate risks. The GoR 
also recognises that a piecemeal approach to decision making has exacerbated competition over scarce 
land resources and reduced the adaptive capacity of both ecosystems and rural populations. However, many 
 
119  World Bank, 2020. Poverty and Equity Brief: Rwanda.  
120  Karamage, F., et al., 2017 . Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water 2017, 9(2), 14.  
121  Uwihirwe, J., et al., 2020 . Landslide precipitation thresholds in Rwanda . Landslides.  
122  World Bank, 2019.  Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.  
123  World Bank; CIAT. 2015. Climate -Smart Agriculture in Rwanda.  CSA Country Profiles for Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America and the Caribbean Series. Washington D.C.: The World Bank Group.  
124  Clay N., King B., 2019. Smal lholders' uneven capacities to adapt to climate change amid Africa's 'green 
revolution': Case study of Rwanda's crop intensification program . World Dev.


---
*Page 89*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 86 
  
 agencies operate within siloed environments, focusing on limited scopes framed by individual performance 
plans, and close coordination is often cited as a  key recommendation toward strengthening climate change 
adaptation measures125.  
Additionally, district government staff and community members have limited technical understanding or 
awareness of the complex interactions between forest structure and functions, climate change, and the 
provision of ecosystem services. Accurate measurement of forest cover and forest type is notoriously difficult 
in high relief terrain, such as in the CND126. Lack of access to and capacity to apply new methods for 
classify ing and monitoring forest change has limited forest monitoring in Rwanda127. Consequently, 
government forest data has historically been limited in scope and infrequently updated, and regional/global 
maps are too inaccurate to be of use. Capacity building ar ound the technologies and processes to make 
landscape -scale planning decisions is crucial to the success of Rwanda’s climate -resilient development 
pathway.  
D.5. Country ownership  
The proposed Project is closely aligned with the NAP’s adaptation priorities: 1) promotion of non -agricultural 
income generating activities, 2) introduction of species resistant to environmental conditions, and 3) 
development of firewood alternative source s of energy. It is also aligned with several priorities identified in 
the 2020 NDC: promotion of afforestation/reforestation, improvement of forest management, integrated 
approach to planning and monitoring for sustainable land management, development of a  harmonized and 
integrated spatial data management system for sustainable land use management. The Project will support 
implementation of the Green Growth and Climate Resilient Strategy and the Rwanda National Strategy for 
Transformation –NST1 (2017 -2022) a nd is aligned with the goals of the Rwanda National Forestry Policy 
2018, the Forest Sector Strategic Plan 2017 -2022, the Strategic Plan for the Environment and Natural 
Resources Sector (2018 -2024), and National Forest Management Plan 2017 -2026, reflecting  the 
government’s intentions to address climate change impacts and mitigation targets by improving forest 
management. It is also aligned with the national Biomass Energy Strategy (BEST) 2020 which aims to 
ensure a more sustainable biomass supply and combus tion technologies for homes and small enterprises. 
This Project aligns with the forthcoming GCF country program which prioritizes forest management through 
restoration and protection of natural forests, afforestation and agroforestry, as well as distributi on of high -
quality forestation inputs and capacity development.  
While this Project proposal to GCF focuses on a different geographic area - with specific adaptation needs 
through land restoration, development of markets and finance mechanism, as well as s upport to 
mainstreaming climate change into land use planning - the early and ongoing lessons from the experiences 
from existing GCF -funded projects, “Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern 
Rwanda''128 and “Transforming Eastern Pr ovince through adaptation” (TREPA)129 will be applied during the 
 
125   Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows a nd 
potential supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.  
126  Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change in Western Rwanda during periods of wars and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).  
127  Hero ld, M., Schiller, F., 2009. An assessment of national forest monitoring capabilities in tropical non -Annex I 
countries: Recommendations for capacity building. Global Observation of Forest and Land Cover Dynamics Land Cover 
Project Office.  
128  Rwanda Ministr y of Environment, 2018. FP073: Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in 
Northern Rwanda . Green Climate Fund.  
129  International Union for Conservation of Nature, 2021. FP167: Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation.  
Green Climate Fu nd.


---
*Page 90*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 87 
  
 implementation of this Project in the Congo Nile Divide Landscape.  
MoE is responsible for ensuring sustainable management of natural resources and for the development of 
policies, strategies,  regulations, and mobilizing resources for the development of the sector. The MoE 
managed USD 10 million from the Adaptation Fund to implement the Reducing Vulnerability to Climate 
Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based Adaptation Programme130 and has overseen a 
number of other climate projects including: an early warning system project (funded by LDCF), the 
Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and Conservation (LAFREC), and the “Building resilience of 
communities living in degraded forests,  savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem 
management approach” programme (funded by LDCF)131. The OECD rated Rwanda as one of the countries 
that uses aid most effectively132, and Rwanda is on course to achieve the SDGs. The GoR has demonstrated 
comprehensive country ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project. The national designated 
authority (NDA) is the core interface between a country and the GCF and is mandated to align GCF -
supported activities with strategic national objective s and priorities. The NDA coordinates with AEs on 
proposal development and completes a no -objection letter after it is determined that the proposal is aligned 
with the national priorities. This Project was initiated by the MoE and supported by the NDA, Rwa nda 
Environment Management Authority, due to the high climate sensitivity of the CND.  
Government agencies such as Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA), Rwanda Development Board (RDB), 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) and National Land Use Authorit y (NLA) will maintain 
strong ownership and support activities under component 1 and 2 as aligned with their mandates and the 
aforementioned plans and strategies.   
To better understand the interests of stakeholders and potential impacts of the Project, and  as preparation 
to design future engagement strategies, a comprehensive, gender -responsive, culturally sensitive, non -
discriminatory, and inclusive stakeholder analysis was undertaken and is incorporated into the Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (Annex 7).  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
Financing and concessional: The financial instrument chosen for this Project is grant financing of USD 
39.06 million which constitutes roughly 78% of the total Project’s estimated cost. The relatively high level of 
conce ssionality reflects the public good character of the investm ents to be made by the Project, Rwanda’s 
status as an LDC133 and its high vulnerability to climate change134. Furthermore, it must be highlighted that 
most project expenditures relate to creating pu blic goods through forest and landscape restoration or 
capacity -building of public institutions. These interventions are primarily non -income -generating; hence very 
hard to attract private sector investment. Attracting the private sector for public goods i nvestments remains 
challenging in the context of many countries worldwide, including Rwanda.  
Addressing low private sector investment in the forestry sector . One of the major reasons for lack of 
private -sector investment in Rwanda’s Forestry Sector is tha t most stands are too small to sustain an 
 
130  Adaptation Fund, 2014. Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community 
Based Adaptation. Link. 
131  UNEP, 2016. Building resilience of communities living in degraded forests, savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda 
through an ecosystem management approach . 
132 Newfarmer , R., et al., 2013. Managing Aid for Trade and Development Results: Rwanda Case Study . OECD.  
133  United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2021. Least Developed Country Category: Rwanda 
Profile.  
134  World Bank, 2021. Rwanda . Climate Change Kn owledge Portal.


---
*Page 91*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 88 
  
 economically viable operation (see the Forest Sector Strategic Plan). By restoring smallholder protective 
forest plantations and organizing them into Private Forest Management Units (PFMUs), this Project will 
assis t with creation of units that are economically attractive to private investors, helping to facilitate future 
private investment if landowners desire it. However, no private investors will be subsidized by the Project, 
and ownership of PFMUs will remain wit h the state/district governments and smallholders’ cooperatives who 
own forest plantations. RFA in collaboration with RCA and the district government directly implement 
organization of the cooperatives and conflicts in the cooperatives are managed in accor dance with internal 
rules and regulation governing each cooperative overseen by the Rwanda Cooperative Agency in case of 
escalated conflicts but specifically in the cooperatives that will be benefiting under this project, RFA and 
District government will a lso intervene in conflict settlement.  
No excess subsidy will be provided to the private sector, and no private sector investors will be crowded out 
by these investments. Wherever these are required for institutional and capacity support for market 
development and crowding in for private invest ments these are undertaken with concessionality to 
community in mind. For example, the subsidy/microcredit schemes to facilitate the adoption of efficient 
cookstoves are undertaken with minimum concessionality. The value chain development for other poten tial 
revenue generating streams such as honey undertaken under output 3.2 requires institutional and capacity 
support funded by GCF grant. In the case of ecotourism for tea plantations, no project concessionally  is 
planned and complete crowding in from the  private sector is envisaged. The value chain development of 
beekeeping is 100% funded by GCF grants so that an enabling environment can be created, and the project 
can overcome affordability challenges through developing a system such as community co -guarantee, 
overcome lack of private capital structure and insufficient markets.  Because of above mentioned reasons 
no private sector investors are expected to be crowded out by project investments.  
GCF grant as a suitable financing instrument. The GCF grant c an help create the enabling environment 
for the future engagement of the private sector in similar projects. The showcasing of potential revenue -
generating ways, thanks to the concessional GCF financing, may help invigorate the potential for future 
investm ents in this sector, which in turn might result in a multiplier effect leading to a higher degree of 
development impact.  
Results of the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA). Following the GCF guidelines for developing the 
Annex 3 package, the EFA was prep ared to assess the economic rationale for the proposed interventions. 
Consequently, four representative interventions were appraised in the EFA: (i). agroforestry, (ii). protective 
forests (iii). fuel -efficient cookstoves, (iv). silvo -pastoralism. Best pra ctices in appraisal for public sector 
projects have been followed. T he financial analysis for each intervention was calculated from the private 
perspective using a discount rate of 15.44% which was the lending rate of Rwanda Central Bank. For the 
three mod eled interventions (see table below) the financial NPV is positive and financial IRR is higher than 
discount rate signifying that project activities are profitable. The GCF support will result in a positive financial 
return for farmers or farmers and priva te actors over a 20 -year period and will help overcome high up -front 
investment costs during the project duration.  
Financial analysis (US$)  Agroforestry  Protective Forest  Silvopasture  
FNPV  $34,483,676  $2,980,381  $310,901  
FIRR  42% 25% 35% 
Aggregate financial analysis of with project (WP) interventions


---
*Page 92*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 89 
  
  
 
The obtained ex -ante aggregate economic net present values (ENPVs) for these interventions over the 20 
years’ timeframe and at a 13% economic discount rate range between USD      0.97million and USD      78.93 
million, with economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) between      49% and 72% (see table below).  
Economic 
analysis (US$)  Agroforestry  Protective Forest  Energy efficient 
cookstoves  Silvopasture  
ENPV  $58,934,340  
      $30,218,468  $10,585,674.50  
      $966,331  
      
EIRR  49     % 72% N/A 51     % 
Aggregate financial analysis of with project (WP) interventions135 
The sensitivity analysis that was carried out suggests that obtained results are relatively insensitive to 
increases in costs or decreases in benefits offering the robustness of obtained results. Therefore, the 
economic sustainability of the Project is likely, and the Project shows the economic rationale for 
implem entation as benefits are likely to outweigh the costs.   
Best Practices Forest Restoration/Tree Planting : The Project will use Rwanda’s best practice guidelines for 
tree nursery establishment, tree planting and tree management136. For assisted natural regeneration, 
methods developed and proven through multi -year research in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura National 
Parks will be used137. Forest Monitoring: The Project will utilize multiple contemporary methods for monitoring 
the success  of project interventions and forest health. Forest plantations will be mapped and monitored using 
the Rwandan government's newly developed Forest Monitoring and Evaluation Software (FMES)138, 
specifically developed for this purpose. The Project will develo p a modern indigenous forest monitoring 
system, utilize the most high -resolution datasets currently available (<3m) and take advantage of modern 
remote -sensing advances including cloud computing and machine learning. Cost effective replication for 
forest r estoration and climate resilience throughout Africa and beyond can be anticipated.  
 
 
135 No financial analyses for cookstoves intervention was warranted as energy efficient cookstoves are non -
income generating intervention with expectation of no financial cash inflows. Only economic analyses was 
conducted for cookstoves.  
136  Unique Ltd. & RNRA. 2015. Tree plantation establishment and management manual for Rwanda. Kigali, Rwanda 
137  Masozera, A.B., 2004. Regeneration of Burned Forested Areas With Periodic Removal of Pteridium aquilinum. 
Wildlife Conservation Society Rwanda.  
138  Rwanda Forest Authority, Enabel, 2021. Technical guidelines on the use of the Forest Monitoring & Evaluation 
System - FMES. Kigali.


---
*Page 93*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
  
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Scale  Rwanda's natural forests are 
extremely depleted and degraded. 
While overall forest cover has 
increased since the 1980s, this is 
primarily made up of exotic 
monocultures, which have very low 
potential to provide ecosystem 
services and adaptation benefits. 
There are small -scale efforts to 
establish/restore native forests and 
increase overall forest resilience, 
but scaling these efforts is 
hampered by a limited supply of 
indigenous seedlings.  Low Paradigm shift would involve a move away from widespread 
planting of exotic species for fuelwood, as well as improved 
erosion control measures on farmland and use of improved 
cookstoves, both of which will reduce pressure on Rwanda’s 
forests. As the be nefits of planting indigenous trees become 
more widely known, behavior changes in non -targeted 
communities are likely to be catalyzed.  The project is expected to bring 144,058 ha 
of land under climate -resilient 
management. This would represent a 
substantial step towards paradigm shift on 
increased resilience of forests and 
vulnerable communities, even before any 
replication effects, which  will likely be 
catalyzed by project activities focusing on 
training, capacity building, and peer - to-
peer knowledge exchange. The project will 
also deliver direct carbon reductions of  
1,204,448 t CO 2-eq over 20 years, and 
potentially more through increas ed 
institutional capacity to mainstream climate 
adaptation and improve land -use planning.  
Replicability  There are a small number of 
interventions occurring across 
Rwanda focused on improving 
resilience of vulnerable 
communities through forest 
restoration, agroforestry, livelihood 
diversification and clean cooking 
technologies. However, many 
interventions foc us on exotic 
species which have very low 
potential to provide ecosystem 
services and adaptation benefits.  Medium  If increasing the extent and integrity of natural forests and 
improving capacity for climate -responsive land management can 
increase climate r esilience of vulnerable communities in the 
CND, then the solution could be replicated throughout Rwanda 
and across East Africa. Further, if incorporating indigenous 
species into forest restoration and agroforestry can provide a 
similar/greater range of ada ptation benefits compared to exotic 
species, and also avoid the drawbacks of exotic monocultures, 
then the solution could be expanded nationally. If development of 
an Integrated land use planning approach helps better reconcile 
cross -sectoral tradeoffs and  improve climate adaptation planning The project will invest in strengthening 
institutional capacity to promote climate 
resilience, directly increase the resilience of 
ecosystems and co mmunity livelihoods, 
and identify options for use of indigenous 
species in forest restoration and 
agroforestry, in order to better contribute to 
climate -resilient livelihoods. These topics 
have received little attention to date in 
Rwanda, and lessons learn ed will inform 
efforts to improve climate resilience across 
Rwanda and East Africa.


---
*Page 94*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 in the CND, this approach could be applied to other regions of 
Rwanda.  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Sustainability  The GoR has invested in 
developing policies and institutional 
frameworks for a more climate -
resilient development pathway. 
However, domestic funding to 
implement these policies remains 
lacking, and as yet they have not 
translated to wide -scale 
improvements to climate resilience. 
Changes in behavioral norms have 
been limited, and overall uptake of 
climate adaptation solutions is poor.  Low Paradigm shift would see Rwanda demonstrate that pursuing 
development goals need not come at the cost of extensive 
environmental degradation. Climate -responsive Forest and 
landscape management will be standard, and government 
programmes will focus on incre asing the resilience of forest 
ecosystems and enhancing their ecosystem services. Behavior 
change across the CND would support this, as communities 
recognise, value, and protect the benefits provided by forests.  The project will work closely with 
governme nt and communities to build 
capacity to mainstream climate adaptation 
into forest and land -use planning and 
management. The project will facilitate and 
demonstrate the benefits of climate -resilient 
agricultural practices, forest management, 
and alternative  livelihoods, raising 
awareness within and outside target 
communities.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Mitigation Results 
Area 4: Forests and 
land use  
 Core Indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or removed/ 
sequestered  Greenhouse gas emission 
assessment  0 tonnes of CO 2      107,686 
tCO 2-eq       
224,871 tCO 2-eq 
(5-year 
implementation 
period)  
 
      
1,084,291 tCO 2-
eq 
(20-year lifespan 
period)  Government priorities 
remain supportive of long -
term forest restoration and 
afforestation plans.  
Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires and landslides in target  
areas  
The economic, social and 
political context in the 
country and project areas 
remain stable.


---
*Page 95*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Adaptation Results 
Area 1: Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Core Indicator 2: Direct 
and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Annual Agricultural 
Survey139 
National census  
Project Baseline and 
Completion Reports, 
including documentation of 
workers contracted for 
reforestation/afforestation 
work, farmers adopting 
agroforestry activities, good 
silvo-pastoral practices, 
restoration of riparian 
linkages, signed MoUs for 
Private Forest Management 
Units, and households 
receiving improved 
cookstoves  Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0 Direct 
beneficiaries: 
95,873 (50,046) 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  Direct 
beneficiaries:  
108,277 (56,5 21 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  
2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  Government priorities 
remain focused on long term 
forest restoration and 
afforestation plans  
Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires and landslides in target 
areas  
Rural l andowners agree to 
adoption of agroforestry and 
reforestation activities  
Adaptation Results 
Area 1: Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Supplementary Indicator 
2.1: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood 
options  Project Baseline and 
Completion Reports, 
including documentation of 
beekeepers  using modern 
hives, farmers at different 
levels of value chains, 
people employed in 
ecotourism, have access to Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0 Direct 
beneficiaries:  
26,160 (13,656 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  Direct 
beneficiaries:  
52,319 (27,311 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:   
 
 
 
139  The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda conducts the Agricultural Survey yearly. Available at:  
https://www.stati stics.gov.rw/statistical -publications/subject/agriculture -and-environment


---
*Page 96*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 finance for other climate -
resilient livelihood options  2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  
 
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Adaptation Results 
Area 4: Ecosystems 
and ecosystem services  Core Indicator 4:  Hectares 
of natural resource areas 
brought under improved 
low emission and/or 
climate -resilient 
management practices  Updated National Park 
Management Plans 
complete (ha per park)  
Forest cover statistics from 
Forest Monitoring and 
Evaluation System (FMES)  
GIS Data/Remote Sensing  
Ranger Based Monitoring 
data from PAs  
Vigilance Committees 
monitoring data  No increase in 
climate -resilient 
management 
practices (o)   42,558 ha of 
land brought 
under climate -
resilient 
management  130,104 140      
ha of land 
brought under 
climate -resilient 
management  Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires in target areas  
 
 
Adaptation Results 
Area 2:  Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary Indicator 
2.2: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security   Annual Agricultural Survey  
Gender responsive 
Comprehensive Food 
Security and Vulnerability 
and Nutrition Analysis 
Survey (CFSVA)141 TBD Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0  Direct 
beneficiaries : 
1,598,536 
(52.2% female)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
2,464,097 
(52.2% female)  Absence of extreme natural 
disasters and economic 
shocks affecting yields and 
household economy; 
migration patterns do not 
significantly affect the 
number and status of 
households.  
 
 
140 130,104 ha refer to 121,758 ha of all core PAs and 8,346 ha restored areas outside PAs  
141 The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda conducts the CFSVA every 3 years.


---
*Page 97*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 The level of beneficiary of this project are individual households, - who can be in a cooperative or a business community group - who will 
participate directly in the project, and thus benefit from its implementation. Beneficiaries include all people who own the l and where activities will 
take place and/or those who will be employed by the project (except EE staff, consultants and implementat ion and contractual organizations). 
Dependents of household that directly benefit from the project are also considered as direct beneficiaries and were calculate d based on 4.2 
average household size142 and 0.37143 average land size in the CNDL.  
Adaptation R esults Area 1, Core Indicator 2 direct beneficiaries are beneficiaries of activities 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 3.1.1, 1.1.2.  
Adaptation Results Area 1, Supplementary Indicator 2.1 direct beneficiaries of activity 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.4 (excluding 8, 500  beneficiaries of  
cookstoves) and 3.3.2  
Adaptation Results Area 2 Supplementary Indicator 2.2 direct beneficiaries are the total population in landscape implementati on sectors of this 
project.  
Indirect beneficiaries broadly refer to all other human populations living with in the CNDL districts. More details on calculations are provided in 
annex 23.  
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Core 
Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 
5: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory 
frameworks for 
low-emission 
and climate -The GoR is committed to developing an 
enabling policy and institutional 
framework for a more climate -resilient 
development pathway, as evidenced by 
the large number of government policies 
and strategies focus ed on improving 
climate mitigation and adaptation. 
However, climate change is not being 
comprehensively considered by all 
sectors, cross -sectoral planning is rare, 
and new institutions are needed to low An integrated planning approach 
is used to reconcile cross -sectoral 
tradeoffs while explicitly 
considering climate resilience 
actions. New institutions have 
permanent capacity in place to 
ensure that spatial data on 
climate, forests and ecosystem 
services is i ncorporated into land 
planning and management.  The project will facilitate development of an 
integrated land use plan for the CND which 
will reconcile the cross -sectoral (e.g., tourism, 
environment, forestry, food production, cash 
crops for export) trade -offs necessary to 
sustain forest ecosystem functions, deliver 
critical ecosystem services and improve 
community livelihoods.  
 National 
level (one 
country)  
 
142  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR); The Fifth Rwanda Population and Housing Census, Main Indicators Report, Februa ry 2023  
143  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Agricultural Household Survey 2020 report, December 2021


---
*Page 98*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 resilient 
development 
pathways in a 
country -driven 
manner  provide relevant spatial data to inform 
planning  The project will facilitate the development and 
adoption of an integrated landscape level 
planning taskforce, in line with t he JADF to 
bring the relevant stakeholders (ministries 
and their agencies, districts, private sector 
and civil society organizations) on board, to 
strengthen inter -sectoral collaboration on the 
planning and implementation of the FLR 
plans. The project will  also support capacity 
development of relevant technical staff 
working on FLR and land use planning (from 
central government agencies, district 
government, and NGOs) and will assist the 
GoR in developing a dedicated SPU within an 
appropriate ministry to  provide the technical 
expertise needed to process and integrate 
spatial planning into decision -making within 
and across sectors.  
 
 
Core 
Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 
6: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or 
transfer, and 
innovation  Climate -resilient development in 
Rwanda is hampered by a lack of 
modern technological advances, both in 
terms of generating information required 
for land -use management and decision 
making, and in deploying climate -
resilient practices and technology. 
Rwand a has only recently developed a 
system to monitor plantation forests and 
lacks a robust system to monitor 
indigenous forests. Similarly, agricultural 
and forest management techniques are 
generally rudimentary, and most rural low The GoR has an innovative, 
scientifically credible system for 
monitoring indigenous forest 
cover and condition, as well as 
the technical capacity for 
incorporating spatial data into 
land-use management. Improved 
agricul tural practices (e.g. 
terracing, modern beehives) are 
widespread, and locally produced 
improved cookstoves are in use 
by most households.  The project will design and finance the 
establishment of a new indigenous forest 
monitoring system for Rwanda. The project 
will also establish improved agricultural 
practices across 3,346 ha, as well as 
increasing use of modern beehives to reduce 
forest fi re risk. Finally, the project will upskill 
technical colleges to enable local production 
and distribution of improved cookstoves to 
8,500 households.  National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 99*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 communities in the CND do not u se 
modern cooking technologies.  
Core Indicator 
8: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
effective 
knowledge 
generation and 
learning 
processes, and 
use of good 
practices, 
methodologies 
and standards.  While GoR recognizes the need for 
developing an enabling policy and 
institutional framework for a more 
climate -resilient development pathway, 
the value of forests and ecosystem 
services for climate adaptation is poorly 
understood, both in government and by 
communities. There is no system to 
regularly produce data on indigenous 
forest cover and condition, and no 
specialized government unit dedicated  to 
producing spatial data on climate 
change, forests or ecosystem services. 
Agricultural and forest management 
practices are generally rudimentary.  low Rwanda has an innovative, 
scientifically credible system for 
generating and sharing 
information on nat ural forest 
cover and condition, and a 
government unit dedicated to 
ensuring spatial planning 
knowledge is incorporated into 
land-use management. Improved 
agricultural practices (e.g. 
terracing, modern beehives) are 
widespread, and degraded forest 
plantati ons are restored and 
managed according to 
government best -practices.  The project will design and finance the 
establishment of a new indigenous forest 
monitoring system for Rwanda, as well as 
establish a spatial planning unit within 
government that has the capacity to generate 
and integrate spatial planning knowledge into 
decision making. Project activities will also 
establish best -practice agricultural and forest 
management practices across 144,058 ha of 
land, and create community structures (e.g. 
farme r cooperatives) which facilitate 
knowledge and information sharing among 
community members.    National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 100*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1: Landscape planning, policies & management effective & coordinated across sectors and scales to address climate risks & adaptation benefits  
Output 1.1.  Landscape -
wide land -use plan 
developed for climate -
resilient livelihoods and 
forest ecosystems, 
integrating district 
strategies.  Operationalization of an 
Integrated Land -use Plan 
for Resilient Livelihoods 
and Ecosystems in the 
CND  
Climate change and 
biodiversity reflected in 
District Development 
Strategies (DDS)   Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Performance 
evaluations of the 
districts  0 integrated plans for 
the CND  
 
 
 
 
Climate change and 
biodiversity Indicators 
and targets not 
included in 
evaluations  1 draft integrated 
land use plan 
developed  
 
 
 
Climate change 
and biodiversity 
Indicators and 
targets fully 
integrated in 
evaluations  1 final integrated 
land use plan 
develop ed, 
approved and 
used  
 
Climate change 
and biodiversity 
Indicators and 
targets fully 
integrated in 
evaluations.  
 
 District land -use plans are 
updated within project 
timeframe  
Key stakeholders are 
supportive of cross sector 
collaboration.  
Sectoral ministries  
incorporate biodiversity 
and climate change into 
sectoral plans and 
programmes.  
Output 1.2. Local and 
national institutional 
capacities strengthened to 
integrate biodiversity and 
climate risks into land use 
planning and management  District planners, staff 
within REMA, RDB, NLA, 
RDB with the skills and 
capacities to use spatial 
planning tools, generate 
data necessary for 
mainstreaming climate 
change, understand 
gender barriers and how to 
mainstream gender 
equality principles into 
planning, including 
supporting women, youth Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Pre/post training 
assessments of unit 
members  
  0 units with capacity  
 
 
0 staff reporting 
improved awareness 
and capacity.  
  Draft structure & 
function of spatial 
planning unit 
developed.  
Training materials 
in development  
  Spatial planning 
unit formally 
established.  
 
36 Staff reporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (18 
Female, 18 
Male)  Lack of leadership of the 
hosting institution/ 
government agency could 
delay the establishment of 
the unit.  
RFA is committed to lead 
and invest in the capacity of 
its staff to implement the 
monitoring system.


---
*Page 101*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
and marginalized groups 
participation in meetings  Capacity building programs 
can overcome the effects of 
high staff turn -over and 
frequent re -arrangement of 
the institutions of natural 
resources management 
(transfer of departments, 
merging and creation of 
new Ministries)  
UR GIS center with the 
capacity and skills to train 
students and staff from 
government agencies on 
spatial planning and 
climate modeling  
  Pre/post capacity 
assessment of the 
UR GIS Center  Staff with knowledge 
in spatial analysis and 
climate modeling but 
without quantitative 
skills to use new 
technologies/software 
to generate data for 
decision making  Training modules 
developed and 
staff to be trained 
identified  10 lectures and 
assistant 
lectures 
reporting 
improved skills, 
20 students 
trained each year 
from year 3.  
A system for monitoring 
forest  trends is 
established and in use by 
the GOR  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  0 systems in place  Operational 
structure & function 
of forest monitoring 
system developed  Forest 
monitoring 
system in 
operation


---
*Page 102*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Rural people, specifically 
women and youth, are 
trained and participate in 
land use planning 
processes at district level  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  0 3 women per 
district 3 youth  
per district  30 youth  
30 women  Rural women and youth 
groups in targeted districts 
are motivated to invest time 
and ef forts in the activities.  
Outcome 2: Natural forests protected, connected, more resilient to climate impacts & risks  
Output 2.1.  Protected Area 
management effectiveness 
improved re climate risks 
and adaptation  Climate adaptation 
reflected in the new 
general park management 
plans  
  
  Progress report, mid -
term evaluation and 
final evaluation  0 plans currently 
contain climate 
adaptation plans  3 General 
management plans 
updated and 
approved by key 
stakeholders  Updated general 
management 
plans guiding 
RDB 
management 
decisions  General Park management 
plans are in the process of 
revision during the project 
intervention


---
*Page 103*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
RDB has adopted a 
landscape approach to 
conservation.  
 
New iterations of park 
management plans 
reference integrated CND 
land use plan  
A framework for 
conservation planning at 
landscape level is 
operational, and RDB 
planning and monitoring 
dept at each park is 
actively engaging 
stakeholders  Progress report, mid -
term and final 
evaluations  0 park management 
plans reference CND 
land use plan  1 new park 
management plan 
referencing CND 
land use plan  
RDB proactively 
engaging 
stakeholders in the 
land use planning 
process of the CND  3 new park 
management 
plans referencing 
CND land use 
plan Limited engagement of 
RDB beyond parks’ 
boundaries could delay the 
operationalization of the 
planning framework


---
*Page 104*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
 Number of RDB, RFA, 
districts staff and local 
communities trained in fire 
forecasting, detection and 
management  Post-training 
assessments of 
change in capacity of 
trained park staff in 
designated positions 
on 1) fire detection, 
early warning 
methods and fire 
danger rating system 
and 2) management 
of climate 
information and its 
relevance for park 
management  
Post-training 
assessments of 
change in capacity of 
trained individuals in 
designat ed positions  0 staff reporting 
improved awareness 
and capacity  
0 staff reporting 
improved capacity for 
fire management  15 Staff reporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (8 
Female, 7 Male)  
15 staff reporting 
improved capacity 
for fire 
management  15 Staff r eporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (8 
Female, 7 Male)  
30 staff reporting 
improved 
capacity for fire 
management  Capacity building programs 
can overcome the effects of 
high staff turn -over and 
frequent re -arrangement of 
the institutions of natural 
resources management 
(transfer of departments, 
merging and creation of 
new Ministries)  
All stakeholders embrace 
the concept of information 
sharing and learning 
willingly and 
enthusiastically.  
  
Financial instruments to 
generate revenues post 
GCF identified and piloted  Interim and final 
evaluation reports  
Technical reports  0 financial 
instruments  1 financial 
instrument 
identified  3 financial 
instruments 
identified and 1 
instrument 
piloted  GoR commitment to 
enactment of policies 
conducive to att racting 
investment in emerging 
financing solutions


---
*Page 105*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 2.2. Natural forest 
cover restored, biodiversity 
connections established  Area (# ha) of degraded 
natural forest restored in 
national parks  
  GIS mapping of 
cleared areas using 
field GPS data  
  0 ha restored  4,500 ha initially 
cleared  4,500 ha cleared 
at least four 
times, ensuring 
natural 
regeneration can 
take place in 
Nyungwe NP  Major fire outbreaks during 
project implementation 
may prevent reaching the 
targets  
0 ha restored  500 ha under 
restoration in 
GMNP  500 ha restored 
in GMNP  The park is well managed 
and there are no major 
illegal activities  
Area (#ha) of riparian 
lands restored with 
indigenous species in the 
CND  GIS mapping of 
restored areas using 
field GPS data  0 ha restored  500 ha  1500 ha restored  District officials are 
committed to protect and 
create 10 m buffer around 
streams/rivers as per land 
use policy  
Area of remnant natural 
forest loss avoided  Interim and final 
evaluation   TBA Draft strategy and 
action for the 
protection and 
conservation of 
remnant forests   Strategy and 
action plan 
developed and 
implemented for 
the conservation 
of remnant 
natural forests  RDB, REMA and District 
officials are committed to 
protect remnant natural 
forests


---
*Page 106*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
 Area (ha) of pastoral lands 
brought under climate 
resilient silvopastoral 
packages in GMNP  
Average tree density/ha in 
restored silvopastoral 
lands  
  GIS mapping  
Bi-annual technical 
report  
Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Annual forest 
inventory  TBA 
  
TBA 
  
TBA 500 ha  
  
Density: 50 tree/ha  
  
 1000 ha  
  
Density: 50 
tree/ha  
 Farmers are willing to 
integrate trees on their 
pasture lands  
Outcome 3:  Vulnerable rural livelihoods more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable & nature -positive  
Output 3.1 Farming 
methods enhance 
productivity, reduce 
erosion and flooding risks, 
contribute to ecosystem 
services, and support 
connectivity.  
  Area (# ha) of forest 
restored on  slopes >55%  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
 
Annual forest cover 
report144 
  
Catalogue of geo -
referenced area 
under restoration  
 0 hectares  2,500 ha under 
restoration on 
slopes >55% 
planted with 
seedlings.  
 2,500 public and 
private hectares 
restored and 
maintained.  
 
density: 1,200 
trees/ha  Farmers, women, and 
youth groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
 
144  The Annual  Forest Report is prepared by Rwanda Forest Authority. The Monitoring system for the preparation of these reports has been dev eloped.


---
*Page 107*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
% of tree species diversity 
in restored areas on 
slopes >50%  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Annual forest 
inventory  0 30% indigenous 
species and 70% 
exotic species on 
private land  
 
70% indigenous 
species and 30% 
exotic species on 
public land  30% indigenous 
species and 70% 
exotic species on 
private land  
70% indigenous 
species and 30% 
exotic species on 
public land  
Number of target 
beneficiaries (households) 
in target sites who have 
adopted agroforestry 
measures (and report 
improvements in soil and 
water management  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
 
Household surveys  0 5,405 households 
(of which 50% are 
women headed 
households) 
adopted 
agroforestry 
measures  5,405 
households 
beneficiaries (of 
which 50% are 
female).   
Average tree density/ha in 
restored agroforestry 
lands  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Household surveys  
Catalogue of geo -
referenced area 
under restoration   
Annual forest 
inventory  0 
  
  
 TBA   
  
  
 100 trees/ha  3,346 ha of 
agroforestry 
established.  
  
100 trees/ha


---
*Page 108*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 3.2. Rural 
livelihoods generate 
alternative incomes & 
reduce pressure on forests  Number of value chain 
products that are viable 
and marketed (Honey, 
Avocado, macadamia, 
horticulture)  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Annual sales reports  0 3 products 
developed  5 products 
developed  Stakeholders in the value 
chains are collaborative  
Number of 
businesses/cooperatives 
with viable business plans 
established and 
operational for climate 
resilient value chains  Bi-annual technical 
report Interim 
Evaluation and Final 
Evaluation Report  37 beekeeping 
cooperatives with 
1,965 members (32% 
women, 16% youth)  
0 seed enterprise, 
nurseries farmer’s 
cooperatives  
  
0 cooperative of 
tourism guides  15 new 
cooperatives (40% 
women, 50% 
youth)  
5 seed and nursery 
enterprises owned 
by y outh and 
women.  
 2 cooperatives  20 new 
cooperatives 
(40% 
women,50% 
youth)  
 
10 seed and 
nursery 
enterprises 
owned by youth 
and women.  
 3 cooperatives  Willingness of farmers’ 
representatives of and 
Rwanda Cooperative 
Agency (RCA) to 
participate in the project  
Increase in household 
income within community 
associations/cooperatives 
engaged in the project 
(disaggregated by gender 
and social category)  Household surveys  TBA in year 1  20% additional 
income in 
participating 
households in new 
income generating 
activities.  
 
Targets for health 
benefits, and time 
and firewood 
savings TBD  An additional 
10% Successful rolled out of 
capacity building and 
linkage to outside (input -
output) market


---
*Page 109*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
# of target beneficiary 
households adopting 
cookstoves  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Household surveys  0 target households 
using Tier 2 
cookstoves  4000 target 
households of 
which 50% are 
women -headed 
households  8,500 target 
households 
using Tier 2 
cookstoves    
Number of employments 
generated from the 
selected value chains  
 Interim and final 
evaluations  
 
Annual reports on 
employees hired per 
value chain  TBA in year 1  # women:600  
# young:400  # women:900  
# young:600  No outbreak of a new 
pandemic  
 
Farmers, women and youth 
groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
Output 3.3. Financial  
services & private sector  
investment engage  Agriculture Credit 
assessment tool upgraded 
to include forestry  Loan approval 
reports generated by 
the tool  
 
Interim and final 
evaluation  0 3 MFIs and PFIs 
are using the tool to 
provide loans to 
smallholder 
farmers  
 
70% of the 
smallholder 
farmers and 
gradually grow  5 MFIs and PFIs 
are using the tool 
to provide loans 
to smallholder 
farmers  MFIs and PFIs are willing to 
participate in this project  
Number of financial 
products refined, 
contextualized ,  and rolled 
out to improve access to 
finance for agriproducts for 
1) vulnerable groups/ 
smallholders and 2) 
horticulture, bee products, Bi-annual  technical 
report  
 
Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  TBA 4 financial products 
refined and rolled 
out . At least 1 for 
each value chain (4 
total)  6 financial 
products already 
deployed by PFIs 
are refined, 
contextualized  
and at least 5 
rolled out by PFIs 
for financing MFIs are willing to 
contribute in terms of staff 
and resources


---
*Page 110*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
energy efficient 
cookstoves and 
ecotourism value chains  selected value 
chains.  
10 approved 
loans’ 
applications  
Number of people 
including women and 
youth with organizational, 
technical and financial 
improved capacity  Interim and Final 
Evaluations  0 7,800 (40% youth, 
50% women)  
 12,445 (40% 
youth, 50% 
women)  Farmers, women and 
youth groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
 
Number of men, women 
and youth who have 
access to thriving financial 
services  Interim and Final 
Evaluations  0  3,000  (40% youth, 
50% women)  
 8,500  (40% 
youth, 50% 
women)  
 Men, women and youth 
are open to access 
financial services  
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Synthesize & disseminate 
information on value of natural forests & 
ecosystem services  Ensure that the value of natural forests 
and ecosystem services for supporting 
climate change resilient livelihoods is fully 
appreciated by all sectors involved in land 
use decision making  1.1.1.1: Map the sectors involved in land -
use planning in the CND and review how 
forests, ecosystem services and  climate 
resilience is incorporated into each 
sector’s planning process.  
1.1.1.2: Conduct comprehensive 
literature review & stakeholder 
consultation to collect & synthesize 
information on climate risks for various A map of the sectors involved in the land -
use planning in the CND  
Information package on climate risks, 
value of forests for increasing resilienc e of 
local communities, adaptation options 
developed and disseminated to 
ministries, local government and local 
NGOs


---
*Page 111*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
sectors (e.g. agriculture, forestry), the 
value of forests for increasing resilience of 
local communities, and highlight 
adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral 
implications  
1.1.1.3: Host workshops & presentations 
with key ministries, government 
organizations, NGOs and community 
organizations to disseminate high -level 
knowledge on value of forests for 
increasing resilience of local communities  
1.1.1.4: Develop guidelines for integrating 
climate risk into land use planning and 
cross sectoral planning  
1.1.1.5: Develop outreach materials on 
climate r isk in the CND and the value of 
forest ecosystems for increasing 
resilience  
1.1.1.6: Implement outreach program 
tailored to different stakeholders (local 
government, civil society, communities) to 
enhance capacities for land -use planning, 
funding mobilizat ion, and delivery of 
climate adaptation actions  
1.1.1.7 Conduct climate literacy courses 
for local government and civil society 
organizations, aimed at increasing 
women and youth participation  
1.1.1.8 Provide financial and logistical 
support to trained organizations in 
grassroots mobilization to increase Guidelines for integrating climate risk into 
land use planning and cross sectoral plan 
developed  
104 episodes of radio drama to educate 
communities on climate change and 
gender issues, climate risks, value of 
forests and forests ecosystems, climate 
adaptation options developed  
Broadcast of 104 radio program episodes 
on a popular national radio station


---
*Page 112*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
women and youth participation in climate 
adaptation planning  
1.1.1.9 Introduce social safeguards at a 
high level at each meeting, including the  
GRM, FPIC, and Access Restrictions 
Mitigations as safeguards to be in place 
for work with local communities  
Activity 1.1.2 Develop climate -resilient 
landscape land -use plan  Ensure that climate change adaptation 
requirements are fully integrated into 
planning processes at local, district and 
national scales.  1.1.2.1: Engage district officials, JADF, 
and community members in the CND 
(especially women) in reviewing and 
interpreting the NLUDMP, to ensure the 
plan accounts for current and future 
climate risks, while building local support 
for climate sensitive planning.  
1.1.2.2: Conduct participatory land -use 
planning process in communitie s from 
village to district level to support 
integrated climate resilient land use 
planning  
1.1.2.3: Develop Integrated Land -use 
Plan that supports Resilient Livelihoods 
and Ecosystems in the CND, ensuring 
alignment with National Land Use and 
Development M aster Plan and ensuring 
the CND plan guides the district plan  
1.1.2.4: Develop and rollout a series of 
trainings (virtual sessions and online 
modules) on gender sensitivity and 
mainstreaming women and youth into 
planning  A summary of the current NLUDMP  and 
its recommendations relating to forestry, 
agricul ture and climate adaptation.  
Reviewed/updated district level planning 
schemes to ensure they account for 
current and future climate risks (e.g. 
DFMPs, District Development Strategies)  
 
A community natural resources mapping 
manual to outline main steps in 
community land -use planning process  
A comprehensive review of national and 
district development plans/strategies, 
guidelines and projects to understand 
planned future land -use & climate 
adaptation projects in the CND and 
identify synergies and conflicts be tween 
land-use & climate adaptation plans from 
different sectors  
Integrated Land Use Plan developed


---
*Page 113*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1.2.5: Assess specific climate i mpacts 
on historically marginalized and Category 
c,d,e populations through a participatory 
NR process to ensure the component 
projects address their needs for 
adaptation   
Activity 1.2.1: Create interagency 
taskforce institutionalizing integrated 
landscape planning & policy  Collaborative integrated landscape 
planning suppo rted, which secures 
climate resilience undertaken with 
appropriate social safeguards. This 
activity aims to strengthen collaborative 
efforts, in particular between institutions 
(from local to national level) in charge of 
natural resources management to 
encourage synergies and avoid 
overlapping mandates and redundancy in 
different climate resilience interventions.  1.2.1.1: Review & strengthen 
operationalization of the current cross -
sectoral task force  
1.2.1.2: Hold quarterly sectoral planning 
meetings with both national and district 
administrations in CND  
1.2.1.3: Facilitate discussions and provide 
technical support (e.g., policy briefs) in 
decision -making for cross -sectoral 
actions around climate adaptation and 
forest resilience in the CND  
1.2.1.4: Continue to introduce social 
safeguards at each meeting including the 
GRM, FPIC, and Access Restriction 
Mitigations as safeguards to be in place 
for work with local communities. For those 
at the district or community level, provide 
options for feedb ack on the process and 
best ways of communication with local 
partners  A cross -sectoral planning task force 
operational as recognized by a ministerial 
order  
Activity 1.2.2: Build capacity for spatial 
planning in national agencies re climate 
change  Capacity  for integrated land use planning 
which supports climate change resilience 
and delivery of ecosystem services is 
improved. This activity aims to build the 
technical capacity of staff in the Ministry 1.2.2.1: Recruit spatial planning expert to 
support spatial planning unit  Spatial Planning Unit Operational  
Capacity needs assessment completed


---
*Page 114*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
of Environment and University of Rwanda 
to generate and u se the data on forest 
cover and ecosystem service values 
necessary for mainstreaming climate 
adaptation and forest resilience into land -
use planning..  1.2.2.2: Assess and identify th e 
institutional home and operationalize the 
spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.3: Conduct a capacity needs 
assessment and identify the appropriate 
tools for spatial planning to fit the 
Rwandan context and conduct 
familiarization  
1.2.2.4: Led by the spatial planning unit, 
develop capacity within the University of 
Rwanda and the  MoE to use remote 
sensing, climate change modeling and 
spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, 
InVEST, RIOS, SWAT) to incorporate 
climate risks into land use planning 
processes  
1.2.2.5: Deliver training workshops on 
utilization of earth system models for la nd 
use planning purposes, utilization of 
remote sensing resources (lightning, 
satellite radiances) for hazards detection 
and climate monitoring and on regional 
climate monitoring and applications  Capacity for forest mapping, climate 
change modeling and spatial analysis 
built within UoR and MoE  
Activity 1.2.3: Develop an effective forest 
monitoring system to underpin forest 
management decisions  An effective forest, climate change and 
land use monitoring system is established 
to support climate resilient forest 
management decisions.  1.2.3.1: Recruit Forest ecologist or 
remote sensing expert to support the 
design and implementation of indigenous 
forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.2: Review existing forest mapping 
data and monitoring software, and assess 
utility for generating quantitative A report on the status of existing forest 
mapping data and monitoring software  
A design of the structure and operation of 
forest monitoring  
Two weather sta tions installed and 
operational  
Forest monitoring system operationalized


---
*Page 115*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
assessments of indigenous forest cover 
from local to national scales  
1.2.3.3: In collaboration with REMA, 
MINAGRI, RAB, RDB, RISA, MoE and 
affiliated agencies and University of 
Rwanda, design structure and operation 
of forest monitoring system, including 
required inputs (data, computing, 
personnel), desired outputs, and 
operational structure (e.g. location, 
reporting structure, funding)  
1.2.3 .4: Purchase and install 2 new 
weather automatic stations in the CND  
1.2.3.5: Establish & operationalize forest 
monitoring system  
1.2.3.6: Generate updated maps & 
statistics for indigenous forest cover, 
forest type etc. using forest monitoring 
system  
1.2.3.7: Develop capacity within hosting 
institution for continued operation of forest 
monitoring system  Updated maps and statistics for 
indigenous/natural forest cover and type 
generated  
Trainings delivered to develop the 
capacity of staff within hosting institution 
in forest monitoring  
Activity 2.1.1: Facilitate revision of PA 
management plans to address climate 
risks Park planning process expanded to 
ensure full incorporation of buffer zone 
and landscape linkage requirements, and 
ability to engage with the larger CND and 
district landscape management planning 
processes.  2.1.1.1 Review and update existing 
national park management plans to 
ensure climate and related landscape 
changes risks, impacts and required 
management responses are integrated  
2.1.1.2 Provide technical and financial 
support to planning, research and 
monitoring as well as community based 
conservation units within RDB in General management plans for NNP, 
GMNP and VNP updated


---
*Page 116*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
managing the parks as part of larger CND 
landscapes  
2.1.1.3 Train PA staff to integrate gender 
and social inclu sion into programming  
2.1.1.4 Train PA staff on integrating needs 
of women, youth, historically marginalized 
and Ubudehe Categories c,d,e 
populations into climate adaptation risks 
and responses  
2.1.1.5 Train PA staff on SEAH, GRM, 
FPIC, and Access Restric tion Mitigation 
Processes to ensure NP climate change 
responses are undertaken in a way which 
supports social inclusion and equity  
Activity 2.1.2 Establish long -term plans for 
CND financial sustainability post -GCF Identify financial instruments that could be 
employed for revenue generation post 
GCF as part of a broad and 
comprehensive RDB business planning 
effort for the sustainable management of 
the CND landscape  2.1.2.1 RFA to Recruit a Tec hnical 
Advisor to guide RDB, MoE, REMA, 
FONERWA and MINECOFIN on 
sustainable conservation finance.  Technical Advisor recruited  
 
CND long term financial sustainability 
developed  
 
 
Activity 2.1.3 New fire management 
curriculum developed and operationalized 
in PAs  Capacity increased for improved fire 
management in core PAs and adjacent 
landscapes. A collaborative effort in fire 
management planning and 
implementation in CND districts will be 
carried out and facilitated.  2.1.3.1 Develop a curriculum tailored to 
needs and capacities of different 
stakeholders  
2.1.3.2 Build the capacity of RDB to 
manage fire in National Parks  
2.1.3.3 Build the capacity of RFA, local 
authorities and commun ities to 
collaboratively manage fire in forests 
outside PAs  A fire training program that addresses 
local needs and skills gaps developed  
Train the trainer process completed for 25 
RDB staff allowing them to instruct future 
classes without assistance  
Fire detection, early warning, and fire 
danger ranger system is established and 
operationalized


---
*Page 117*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
2.1.3.4 Implement a “fire wise” outreach 
and awareness program for communities 
and local government (district, sector, 
cell), as well as Rwanda Forest Authority, 
surrounding natural forests to red uce the 
incidence of human -caused fires  200 community facilitators (youth) trained 
to raise awareness on fires in 
communities surrounding natural forests 
and forests plantations  
10,000 community members reached 
through soc ial marketing events  
Activity 2.2.1 Secure key remaining 
natural areas outside PAs  Remaining priority natural forests and 
other ecosystems required for climate 
change resilience secured through 
appropriate land use planning processes  2.2.1.1 Raise awarene ss on remaining 
protected natural forests in CNDL to 
secure their protection  
2.2.1.2 In collaboration with RFA, REMA, 
districts identify and implement actions 
that support conservation and 
management of remnant protected 
natural forests in CNDL  Action plan for the conservation of 
remnant natural forests developed 
and implemented  
Activity 2.2.2 Restore natural forest cover 
in & outside PAs including riparian 
linkages  Support natural forest restoration 
processes in PAs through improved 
management of alien and invasive 
species; and actively restore nature forest 
in priority areas next to core PAs and 
protected forests to expand the natural 
forest estate  2.2.2.1 Review mapping of degraded 
natural forest areas in core NPs, stepping 
stones a nd unprotected riparian lands 
using updated imagery and ground 
truthing  
2.2.2.2 Identify parcels for restoration in 
core PAs, stepping stones and riparian 
lands using desktop and field -based 
assessment  
2.2.2.3 Establish indigenous tree seed 
nurseries in th e CND to serve core PAs, 
stepping stones, riparian land restoration 
and promotion of indigenous trees on 
farms and in protective forests  
2.2.2.4 Recruit, train in forest restoration 
methods and equip community workers to Indigenous tree seed nurseries 
established and operational  
4,500 ha of indigenous forest in NNP 
restored  
500 ha restored in Gishwati Mukura NP  
1,500 ha of riparian lands restored


---
*Page 118*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
be involved in core PAs restoration  and 
riparian linkages  
2.2.2.5 Restore 4500 ha of indigenous 
forest in NNP  
2.2.2.6 Restore 500 ha Gishwati Mukura 
National Park  
2.2.2.7 Restore 1,500 ha of riparian lands  
2.2.2.8 Using permanent plots sampling, 
collect field monitoring data on tree 
species recruitment and growth for 
estimation of biomass, species richness 
etc. in restored parcels in Nyungwe and 
Gishwati -Mukura National Parks in 
restored parcels in Nyungwe a nd 
Gishwati -Mukura National Parks as well 
as on riparian lands to assess success of 
initiatives, then replicate or adapt as 
needed  
2.2.2.9 Perform Environmental and Social 
Screening on all positions being created 
by the project  
2.2.2.10 Establish a grievan ce process for 
laborers  
2.2.2.11 Update emergency and 
preparedness plan including risk 
mitigation guidance to local conditions at 
restoration sites  
 2.2.2.12 Train all workers on their rights 
and how to access the GRM


---
*Page 119*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
2.2.2.13 Provide code of conduct and 
emergency preparedness and safety 
training for all laborers  
2.2.2.14 Hire and train labor and safety 
leads at each site to provide guidance to 
staff, be available for grievance issues, 
and monitor health and safety con ditions 
for workers  
2.2.2.15 Develop and implement strategy 
(including social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth participate and benefit 
from forest restoration projects  
Activity 2.2.3 Promote silvopastoralism 
with indigenous trees in Gishwati Pasture 
areas  Existing pasture lands will be 
characterized and livestock farmers 
clustered according to the size of their 
grazing lands. Tree species that exist on 
their grazing land  will be identified and 
grouped according to the level of their 
resilience to climate change. A 
participatory approach will be used to 
assess livestock owners' preferences for 
indigenous species on their farms. Sites 
will be identified for indigenous tree 
nursery establishment and nurseries will 
be established in project sites and 
managed by the livestock communities.  
 2.2.3.1 Assess the status of pasture lands 
in Gishwati area and identify key areas for 
restoration and the potential to introduce 
indigenou s species  
2.2.3.2 In collaboration with landowners, 
identify suitable indigenous species for 
fodder trees, shrubs, grasses, and 
herbaceous legumes that have potential 
to improve pasturelands and increase 
their climate adaptive capacity  
2.2.3.3 Produce and disseminate fodder 
trees, shrubs, grasses, and herbaceous 
legumes to project beneficiaries  
2.2.3.4 Train beneficiaries on improved 
livestock and pasture management  1,000 ha of pasture land in Gishwati 
grazing area restored with indigenous 
tree species


---
*Page 120*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 3.1.1 Restore high slope areas 
(>55%) as protective forests  Promotion of protective forest and 
agroforestry practices to improve 
landscape connectivity and ability to 
deliver ecosystem services  3.1.1.1 Introduce and raise awareness of 
indigenous s pecies to target stakeholders 
in CND  
3.1.1.2 In consultation with RFA, National 
Land Authority, districts and communities, 
determine fragile areas (steep slopes > 
55%) to be allocated for protective forests 
and their ownership  
3.1.1.3 Assess the current st atus of the 
indigenous tree species in selected areas 
for protective forests and select 
indigenous tree species appropriate to 
CNDL  
3.1.1.4 Develop restoration plan for 
protective forests  
3.1.1.5 Build capacity of local 
stakeholders (men and women) on PFMU 
approach and methods  
3.1.1.6 Design and approve SFMPs of 
private FMUs  
3.1.1.7 Ensure consent of smallholders 
prior to planting trees (SS)  
3.1.1.8 In collaboration with smallholders 
reforest/restore 2,500 ha of public or 
private land with slopes >55%  and 
ensure sustainable management under 
private FMUs according to approved 
SFMPs  
3.1.1.9 Support monitoring and evaluation 
of restored private FMUs  2,500 ha of protective forests on high 
slope areas restored


---
*Page 121*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 118 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
3.1.1.10 Assess impacts of exotics on 
neighboring lands and mitigate their 
negative impacts (SS)  
3.1.1.11 De velop and implement strategy 
(including social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth participate and benefit 
from forest restoration projects (G)  
3.1.1.12 Assess the benefits and costs of 
each proposed tree and plant species and 
how those benefits affe ct different 
population segments (SS)


---
*Page 122*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 119 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 3.1.2 Develop on -farm 
agroforestry for high caloric and 
indigenous tree species  Implement agroforestry/sustainable land 
management (SLM) over 3,346 ha of 
smallholder farmland  
 3.1.2.1 Identify sub -areas of intervention 
for agroforestry dissemination in the CND  
3.1.2.2 Introduce and raise awareness of 
agroforestry in target communities  
3.1.2.3 Develop the capacity of extension 
agents at district/ sector level and NGOs 
to support adoption of agroforestry 
technologies  
3.1.2.4 Establish agroforestry/fruit tree 
nurseries to facilitate access to quality 
planting material  
3.1.2.5 Promote sustainable land 
management practices by stabilizing 
existing terraces, and plant high calorific 
agroforestry species to provide a 
sustainable source of fuelwood for energy 
efficient cookstoves to protect sloping 
land against severe soil erosion  
3.1.2.6  Train RFA, extension agents, 
Project participants and community 
members on specific techniques for 
identification of and management of 
invasive pests and pathogens (SS)  SLM/agroforestry established on 3,346 ha 
of smallholder land


---
*Page 123*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 120 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
● Activity 3.2.1 Develop forestry 
and agroforestry -related value 
chains for marke t access  Vulnerable groups of youth and women 
identified and their capacity for production 
(quality and quantity) enhanced in sync 
with particular niche markets demands  3.2.1.1 Identification and mapping of 
vulnerable groups of youth and women 
within the CND  
3.2.1.2 Capacity building for farmers' 
cooperatives/unions on good agricultural 
practices (GAP) for market standards in 
the selected agroforestry -related tree 
fruits and horticulture  
3.2.1.3 Development of Global GAP 
standards modules and market ac cess 
linkage for the selected value chains  
3.2.1.4 CND Honey value chain capacity 
production, market, and financial 
development  
3.2.1.5. Tourism value chain development  Vulnerable groups of youth and women 
within the CND identified and grouped 
into coopera tives 
5 Value chains identified and 
beneficiaries selected  
GAP training for 900 people from targeted 
cooperatives and unions completed  
Train of trainers completed for 30 
cooperative members  
New tourism trails and base camps 
outside of Gishwati -Mukura NP 
developed and operational  
Community freelance tour guides trained 
and operational  
● Activity 3.2.2 Facilitate and scale 
up climate -resilient value chain 
products  This activity aims to build the capacity of 
smallholder farmers in producing, 
processing and marketing quality 
products that meet national and 
international standards to be competitive 
on the market  3.2.2.1 Value chain contextualization in 
focus areas in the CND  
3.2.2.2 Facilitating market accessibility  25 youth and women 
cooperatives/enterprises with the 
capacity to deliver quality products and 
services  
● Activity 3.2.3 Facilitate access to 
markets for vulnerable farmers  This activity will focus on enhancing 
productivity (quantity, quality, and 
sustainability at the farm le vel) and 
exploring the market linkages model 
between farmers, suppliers, and buyers.  3.2.3.1 Development of farmer -inclusive 
business models  
 900 cooperative members are linked to 
the market from farming inputs suppliers 
and production aggregators through 
inclusive farming -as-a-business.


---
*Page 124*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 121 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
● Activity 3.2.4 Scale up 
production, use and sales of 
fuel-efficient cook -stoves  Evaluate and promote financing models 
that sustainably foster energy efficient 
cook -stove access to historically 
marginalized communities and other 
vulnerable groups of the CND  3.2.4.1. Identification and production of 
Energy Efficient Cooking -Stoves  
3.2.4.2. Energy efficient cook -stoves 
distributed to CND community members 
and categorization based on UBUDEHE 
Categories  8500 households have access to EES  
● Activity 3.3.1 Facilitate access to 
finance & private sector 
investments  Build common understanding between 
value chain actors and private financial 
institutions towards selected value chains  3.3.1.1 Tailoring credit assessment tool 
for selected value chains, while 
integrating climate impact data  
3.3.1.2 Facilitate access to finance for 
selected value chains  Agriculture Credit assessment tool 
upgraded and adopted by PFIs  
 
At least 15 projects of the 5 selected value 
chains funded by PFIs  
● Activity 3.3.2 Set up & support 
savings & loan groups, enhance 
asset -building  Strengthen the capacity of local 
smallholders’ farmers in financial literacy 
and access to finance  3.3.2.1 Establish/form saving groups for 
access to finance  
 Cooperative members are linked to PFIs 
and at least 70% have accessed to 
financial service and loan  
● Activity 3.3.3 Build capacity of 
financial institutions to serve 
targeted value chains and 
communities  Undertake a climate screening of financial 
service providers using the green index 
tool and support PFIs to access and adopt 
a digitalized forestry and a gri-loan 
assessment tool  3.3.3.1 Capacity -building of PFIs  
 PFIs have developed an environmental 
policy and strategy for their organization 
including staff awareness training and 
integration of climate and livelihood 
impact measurement systems  
 
 
● Activity 3.3.4 Facilitate learning 
& knowledge sharing  Produce and share lessons learned 
during the implementation of this project  3.3.4.1 Programme -embedded learning 
and reflection  ESMP


---
*Page 125*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 122 
 
 
  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements  
The Project’s logical framework outlines the expected results, indicators, means of verification, baseline values and target values at mid -term and 
end-term. The Project Coordinator will be responsible for the overall  monitoring of Project progress and reporting to the PSC. A national M&E Specialist 
hosted under the PMU, supported by EE -based Specialists, will be employed to develop practical guidelines for — and operationalize — a 
performance monitoring framework to t rack the Project's progress towards achieving its targets. The national M&E Specialist will be responsible for: 
i) establishing a performance monitoring framework to define biannual targets; ii) measuring the indicators at least 1 –2 times per year to evalu ate the 
progress of the Project; iii) reporting to the Project Coordinator and PSC; and iv) participating in the production of report s. RFA M&E Specialist will 
support the National M&E Specialist by: i) following guidelines developed by the national M&E sp ecialist to conduct performance monitoring; ii) 
measuring the program indicators at least 1 –2 times per year; iii) ensuring all activities comply with the Project’s ESMF process and procedures; iv) 
supporting environmental screening and helping to follow t he Environmental Management Plans; and v) participating in production of reports. The 
M&E Specialists will be supported by a Gender Specialist to oversee and monitor the application of gender disaggregated indic ators. The M&E 
Specialist and Gender Speciali st will perform regular visits (at least once/year), randomly selecting villages to monitor implementation. They will use 
these visits to cross -check the information provided by EE and beneficiaries in monitoring reports. During each visit, the team will c ollect qualitative 
data on implementation outcomes and difficulties through focus group discussions with beneficiaries and interviews with key s takeholders. The 
national M&E Specialist, supported by the EE M&E Specialist will then compile quarterly Project  reports outlining progress in each site, allowing for 
feedback and support from the PMU and PSC in case of delays or challenges. MoE, as the AE, will perform supervision missions from year two 
onwards, selecting sites to visit each year and assessing the status of implementation. In addition, the MoE procurement office — which oversees 
the destination and use of funds disbursed to the EE — will monitor the Project's compliance with policies and procedures, as well as alignment 
between implementation and ob jectives. The annual performance reports will include a narrative report (with supporting data) on implementation 
progress based on the logical framework in the Project, including a report on ESMS as well as gender. The report will be alig ned with the moda lities 
set out in the GCF results management framework and its performance measurement frameworks.  
As per the AMA, an independent consultant will be contracted to conduct an Interim Evaluation and Final Evaluation. Both will  comply with GCF 
evaluation policy and international standards and make use of qualitative and quantitative data analyses, including interview s with relevant 
stakeholders, data provided by the Project, EE M&E Specialists and Gender Specialist, and participative workshops a nd focus groups with 
beneficiaries. The MTE will analyze whether the Project is on track, any problems, and challenges, and required corrective ac tions. The PSC and 
PMU will develop a management response to the recommendations along with an implementation plan, and the PMU will monitor implementation of 
the recommendations. The Final Evaluation will be an independent assessment of Project performance against its contributions to a paradigm shift 
and enabling environment.


---
*Page 126*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 123 
  
  
● (f)  RISK ASSESSME NT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1 - Lack of coordination, institutional resistance, and regulatory barriers to mainstreaming 
climate change into land use planning  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Macroeconomic/Political  Low High  
Description  
Despite its progressive policies, Rwanda has historically had limited capacity for mainstreaming climate 
change into government/institutional practices and given the pervasive ways in which the impacts of climate 
change impact across numerous sectors, mini stries and government agencies will need to work across any 
perceived or real institutional barriers to align and mainstream climate change in land use planning. For 
example, the Rwanda Development Board has historically not worked beyond Park boundaries, and this will 
be integral for institutionalizing the climate change adaptation processes across the Congo Nile Divide as a 
large interconnected landscape. Additionally, insufficient coordination, collaboration and information -sharing 
between relevant gover nment departments, and research institutions may hinder or limit participation of 
relevant institutions and agencies, reducing the timely delivery and effectiveness of the Project, especially 
the aspects related to mainstreaming climate change in land use planning and other components of the 
Project as well. Furthermore, the perception of an uneven playing field, with larger or more well -connected 
institutions and companies able to evade the payment of environmental fees and fines under existing 
legislation , may undermine the uptake of the other options for financial sustainability of improved PA and 
forest ecosystem management.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Project is part of a larger suite of efforts supported by the multi -agency Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) to create a spirit of cooperation among the various agencies and institutions charged with addressing 
climate -related issues. The PSC demonstrat es Rwanda’s commitment to fulfilling mainstreaming of climate 
adaptation into regular government processes and procedures. As such numerous government agencies 
have already had the opportunity to work together on a variety of climate -related issues, align institutional 
policies and reduce any potential regulatory barriers to ensure successful implementation of projects related 
to climate change. The PSC will directly oversee the Project Management Unit, and with this larger guidance 
structure, the EE will c ommunicate to the PMU and the PSC on a regular basis to prompt collaboration and 
address any unforeseen institutional or regulatory barriers encountered during the life of the Project for 
immediate attention and remediation. PSC will address the risk of ev ading the payment of environmental 
fees by facilitating buy -in from stakeholders such as RDB and MINECOFIN into compliance with 
environmental laws through greater emphasis on the links to climate resilience and NDC objectives . These 
measures will reduce th e impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 - Extreme weather/climatic events hinder the ability to deliver Project objectives   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description


---
*Page 127*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 124 
  
 The activities that will deliver overall Project success involve dependencies on weather conditions for 
successful implementation of the projects that rely on accessing steep slopes, planting trees, and establishing 
beekeeping operations. Extreme events su ch as heavy rainfall or prolonged drought could severely limit the 
success of these endeavors making sites inaccessible, creating unfavorable conditions for seedling survival, 
and decreasing the potential success of new beekeeping operations. This region, given its topography and 
the expected climatic variability, is likely to experience these types of disruptions. Severe disruptions may 
impede implementation, including potential implementation delays and fall under GCF's policy on 
restructuring and cancell ation. That said, it is unlikely these extreme conditions will present themselves in 
the next 5 years for the duration of the project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As weather is unpredictable, any mitigation measures will not change the probability nor address the impact 
in the short term. As the entire project is envisioned to improve the resiliency of this landscape to climate 
variability and promote adaptation, th e specific activities will be able to mitigate, and in some cases prevent, 
longer -term impacts. As our implementation arrangements involve bolstering the climate adaptation capacity 
of the government and the communities in the CND, the entire project itsel f will serve as mitigation to this 
unlikely outcome.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 - Project staffing and capacity  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Implementation of the Project hinges on staffing of the Project Management Unit, hiring additional staff within 
the EE and recruiting thousands of additional laborers in the form of community engagement specialists, 
contractors for building terraces, individuals to remove ferns, contracts to construct and deliver stove s, 
consultants to contribute expertise on behavior change, invasive species/pest management, and gender 
sensitization. Many factors could intervene to slow or thwart hiring progress including the high turnover of 
staff in the implementing institutions as f requent changes in government bodies could result in a disruption 
and/or delays in implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Rwanda has a successful track record of implementing large scale projects through government ministries. 
Competent staff will be avai lable for project implementation, and their abilities will be enhanced through the 
commitment to training individuals involved in the program. This risk, if realized, may impede 
implementation including potential implementation delays and fall under GCF's policy on 
restructuring and cancellation. Therefore, the Project will invest heavily in strengthening institutional 
capacity to promote climate resilience and apply actions that directly increase the resilience of ecosystems 
and community livelihoods. The Project will also document decisions, best practices and lessons learned to 
support the institutional memory to sustain Project activities in case of high staff turnover. Labor and safety 
as well as community security plans to be establish ed as part of the ESAP (Annex 6) will make the Project 
a desirable place to work. Mitigation measures reduce impact to LOW.


---
*Page 128*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 125 
  
  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 - Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) 
considerations into the implementation of the proposed Project activities as well as its management structures and 
systems  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Should ESS be inadequately considered in the Project or in the management and governance structures, 
there could be social and environmental implications. To start there may be a disproportionate distribution of 
benefits to certain segments of society. Although the Project’s primary beneficiaries inc lude women and other 
most vulnerable people, there is a risk that the Project implementation will experience preferential treatment 
at sites that favor certain groups over others. For example, despite tremendous policy and legal efforts, a 
patriarchal cult ure and persistent disparities in education, employment, land ownership and other factors 
characterize gender relations in Rwanda and could cloud implementation efforts. Likewise, some vulnerable 
groups may be unable to benefit from the efforts, such as la ndless people unable to benefit from trees or 
having a safe place for a new cookstove. One serious risk afflicting major projects such as that proposed, if 
not properly addressed, includes sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment (SEAH) whi ch 
may be prevalent if preferential treatment occurs (e.g., interfamily SEAH in retaliation for benefits received 
by women rather than men) or there may be power dynamics with hired staff who work with communities 
and withhold Project benefits within a SEA H conflicts (e.g. requesting sex for an opportunity to participate in 
the project, harassment if potential beneficiary refuses).  On the environmental side, several environmental 
risks detailed in Section F and Annex 6 could undermine the success of the Pr oject including topsoil loss 
and possible collapse of the terraces, unsustainable practices for sourcing clay for the cookstoves, and 
inadvertent introduction of invasive species, pests or pathogens from the nurseries to the field sites.  
Mitigation Measur e(s) 
The Project anticipates these challenges and has envisioned multiple participatory aspects to the Project 
that are guided by the gender action plan and the ESAP. To mitigate social risks, local community 
engagement will be facilitated by the EE in co operation with local community organizations through the 
integrated landscape delivery teams (ILDT) and the Joint Action Development Forums (DJAF). Safeguards 
in place to support Labor and Community Health & Safety will require training/sensitization to SE AH and the 
repercussions for those who engage in such activities (i.e., termination of employment). In the hiring process, 
staff will be screened for prior infractions. Hired staff will be trained in survivor -centered and gender -
responsive approaches to su pport any victims of SEAH in association with the Project activities.  To minimize 
environmental risk, the PMU and the EE will adhere to the environmental action plan and oversee the hiring 
of contractors to perform the activities. Multiple consultants or specialists, if not part of subcontracts, will be 
recruited to train project participants on mitigating measures to reduce these risks. If the proposed ESAP is 
followed properly the impacts will be LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 - Lack of adoption among target populations for livelihoods activities  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Medium  High


---
*Page 129*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 126 
  
 Description  
The success of the Project depends upon the integration of activities such as beekeeping, improved 
cookstoves, planting of fruit trees and terrace construction on private lands by the project beneficiaries. If 
planned and executed incorrectly a myriad of issues could prevent beneficiaries from adopting the activities 
beyond the life of the Project. This includes but is not lim ited to overlapping or misalignment between the 
proposed Project activities and those being implemented by other government departments or non -
government organizations in the Project area.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Numerous international development projects  have experienced mixed results upon completion regarding 
the uptake of promoted activities into daily lives. This Project has a strong behavior change component based 
on current best practices in identifying the barriers to behavior change, removing those  barriers, and 
changing norms thus ensuring, through adequate participation and training, that the activities will be adopted 
and maintained over time. The work plan involves ample collaboration with women and youth groups through 
the ILDTs to build long -term community ownership for the Project. Further, if there are activities being 
promoted by the government or other NGOs that either overlap with the proposed activities or contravene 
with the Project activities, adoption by intended beneficiaries may be d isrupted. As such the NSC will serve 
as the overarching body to ensure such projects within similar geographic regions remain aligned. These 
mitigation measures reduce the impact to MEDIUM.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 - Unforeseen disruptions due to another COVID variant  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description  
As demonstrated during the recent years of the COVID pandemic, variants may cause unforeseen 
disruptions to travel and Project implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Project will likely start well after COVID has run its course; however, in the event  of new variants the 
PMU and EE will be ready to implement necessary COVID -safety practices such as masking, social 
distancing and reducing travel to areas with low health care options. Mitigation will reduce impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 - Prohibited practices including money laundering and terrorist financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited Activities  Low Medium  
Description  
The Project involves a large number of actors for successful implementation including ministries, government 
agencies, NGOs, sub -grantees, vendors, service providers, community members and beneficiaries. 
Specifically, there is an intention to distribute or  disperse to beneficiaries both directly and indirectly 
commodities and other items of value such as the distribution of seedlings for trees that will produce fruits or 
contribute to enhancing biodiversity of farming systems, access to improved cook stoves  as well as the


---
*Page 130*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 127 
  
 possibility for distribution of bees to start honey operations. As with any project infusing large sums of money 
directly or indirectly with multiple actors, corruption could occur.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Since the 1990s Rwanda has set a s ocial foundation for anti -corruption efforts by establishing policies and 
procedures to prevent corruption/reduce vulnerability to corruption and sanctioning misbehavior through 
prosecutions. Specifically, a reduction in administrative corruption is of not e for a large project such as the 
one proposed. The systems in place will reduce the potential for prohibited activities. Additionally, 
commitment to campaigns for individuals to report corruption has created a societal norm for intolerance. As 
a result, R wanda moved from a state of high corruption 20 years ago to a level on par with middle income 
countries. The International Monetary Fund published an assessment of Anti Money Laundering and 
Combating Financing of Terrorism in 2015 indicating that while the  risk of AML/CFT is low, at that time more 
could be done to bolster the systems in place to address the issue. At present, the GoR has robust measures 
to fight money laundering and terrorist financing. This was done first by enacting the law N° 001/FIC/202 2 of 
16/02/2022 on Regulations relating to anti -money laundering, combating the financing of terrorism. The 
Rwanda government has also put in place a special agency for this purpose named Financial Intelligence 
Center (FIC) with a clear mission to promote financial system integrity by conducting effective financial 
intelligence to counter money laundering, the financing of terrorism and related financial crimes in 
governmental institutions, projects, and parastatal agencies under the supervision of the Mini stry of Finance 
and economic planning. MoE and the GCF Project under its supervision will also comply with FIC regulations. 
The MoE also has an Internal Audit function as well as regular audit conducted by the Office of the Auditor 
General to carry out the  efficiency and effectiveness of internal controls.  
Regarding higher level security threats, at present, there are no UN Security Council Sanctions against 
Rwanda, though it is noted that there are sanctions in Democratic Republic of Congo, close to the Congo 
Nile Divide. The UN Security Council Consolidated Sanctions list indicates approximately 20 individuals with 
ties to Rwanda, a small percentage of whom may live in the country. This list has been circulated to the AEs 
and will be cross checked when h iring for the project and once project sites are selected to ensure these 
individuals will not be involved in any manner with the Project or its activities, either as a counterparty, 
implementer, or beneficiary.  
To report and remedy any risks that may occu r, the MoE will maintain a Project level grievance redress 
mechanism to which anyone can report on the occurrence of prohibited activities. All complaints will be 
investigated following the process identified in Annex 6. Any complaints believed to contribu te to prohibited 
activities will be referred to the appropriate authorities in Rwanda.  
Assuming all staff will be made aware of the prohibited activities, all subcontractors/counterparties will be 
screened for engagement of activities and made aware of th eir obligations to alert the PMU and/or submit 
grievances related to such activities occurring as part of the Project, the overall impact of the money 
laundering and financing of terrorism risk on the Project will be LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 - Politica l Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Low 
Description


---
*Page 131*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 128 
  
 Political risk is in part driven by long -standing frictions with neighboring countries and the potential for 
domestic instability in these countries to spill over into Rwanda. These geopolitical challenges constrain 
Rwanda’s longer -term development as a se rvices hub. Although the government of Rwanda has been 
effective in its pursuit of social stability through targeted transfers and support and improving accountability 
at all levels from Villages and to national levels through village councils, JADF and Um ushyikirano (National 
Dialogue Council - an annual forum that brings together leaders and citizens to reflect on the country’s 
progress and share ideas to solve ongoing challenges, this political risk may impede implementation 
including potential implement ation delays and fall under GCF's policy on restructuring and cancellation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Much of the work of the project will be taking place within a Ministry and through work at the community level. 
Oftentimes, regardless of political instabil ities, communities with devolved decision -making structures and 
local capacity will have a greater chance to withstand that instability and continue to operate.  For this project, 
much of the work will be turned over to the local community leaders and the laborers hired locally who will 
be trained and will then own the capacity to do this work in the long -term, regardless of what national 
leadership is in place. The structures resulting from this workplace citizens participation in decision making 
which wil l constitute a buffer against potential domestic instability. Mitigation will reduce impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 9 - Expansion of tea plantations  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Macroeconomic/Political  Low High 
Description  
Projected climate changes predict significant elevation rises in CND agro ecological zones, including the 
potential for tea cultivation at much higher elevations than at present. This is unlikely to threaten Rwanda’s 
existing montane forest protected areas, as forei gn revenues from tourism in these reserves far surpass 
those from tea. However, tea remains a significant source of foreign revenue and a government target for 
expansion. Any increased tea production in the CND would therefore most likely affect lands outs ide of 
parks: smallholder, cooperative, and district holdings, many of which might also be targets for reforestation, 
agroforestry, and biodiversity stepping stone initiatives under this Project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The integrated land use planning inc luded in this Project design, will bring together tea industry, agriculture, 
forestry, biodiversity, and tourism interests to identify and reduce such potential conflicts over use of the 
CND’s limited land resource base. Through this integrated land use pl anning we aim to establish a formal 
public -private sector forum at the landscape level to help improve communication across sectors, 
appreciation of environmental issues, and increase synergies between interventions to avoid conflicting 
targets and indicat ors between sectors and advocate for mainstreaming biodiversity and climate change in 
different economic sectors.  
Selected Risk Factor 10 - Timely provision of Co -financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Low


---
*Page 132*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 129 
  
 Description  
The Project co -financiers may delay providing their co -financing commitment which can jeopardize 
implementation and hence project intended objectives could not be met.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Accredited Entity has already requested for commitments of co-financing from all the project co -
financiers which are already Government of Rwanda institutions, and all the committed co -financing are 
already part of the Institutions Day  to day mandates hence there is anticipated low impact on the project 
implementa tion  
 
 
 
(e) GCF  POLICIES  AND  STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  
As proposed, the environmental and social risk category for the Project is Category B or ‘moderate risk” 
according to GCF classification. The project was  partially screened for potential social and environmental 
risks, following GCF requirements (Annex 6). All preliminary potential negative impacts for activities and sub -
activities were determined to be minimal, reversible and readily mitigated through gen erally accepted 
mitigation measures and standard international practices, thus in the low to moderate categories. While the 
impacts will occur within the Congo Nile Divide Project area boundary and implementation zone, the specific 
locations and communitie s affected by Project activities will be determined in Project implementation thus 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework has been developed for a more thorough screening 
of all activities by the AE/EE.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measu re and Management 
Strategies


---
*Page 133*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 130 
  
 Environmental and social risks: For all Project 
components, disproportionate benefit distribution to 
some groups and not others including women, youth, 
historically marginalized people and Rwanda’s poverty 
categories ( Ubudehe) C, D, and E is a risk. Such power 
differentials could exacerbate exposure to sexual 
abuse, exploitation and harassment, a risk that may 
affect all Project components if unmitigated. The 
Project may cause social risks including loss of access 
to la nds due to new land classifications or stricter 
implementation of land use and park laws, 
displacement of informal land occupants due to 
afforestation/reforestation, and loss of access to land 
for food production. The potential for invasive species 
spread in the reforestation/afforestation components, 
water usage during increased seedling production at 
nurseries, terrace stabilization for planting, loss of 
topsoil to erosion during planting, disturbance to wildlife 
during afforestation or reforestation, mod ification of 
water flow and topsoil that could increase exposure to 
disease, increased human -wildlife interactions with 
increased tree cover and fruit trees, air quality impacts 
from cookstove production at scale, and supply chain 
impacts for livelihoods i nterventions all have associated 
environmental and social risks to be thoroughly vetted 
as specific sites and beneficiaries are identified.  The PMU will hire an Environmental and Social 
Safeguards (ESS) Specialist to oversee the application 
of the ESMF for  a more thorough assessment of impacts 
by specific activities during Project implementation. The 
ESS Specialist will also oversee stakeholder 
engagement, sensitize all relevant staff on social 
safeguards and community engagement including SEAH 
training, an d ensure Project activities target vulnerable 
groups to build resilient livelihoods. Consent processes 
will be established with communities. The Project will 
have a Project -level grievance redress process available 
to address complaints that aligns and com plements the 
grievance redress used by the MoE. The PMU will also 
hire an Environmental Management Specialist (EMS) 
who will work with the ESS on environmental 
assessment and implementing proper mitigation 
processes as required.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measure and Management 
Strategies  
Labor and working conditions: The dangers involve 
the potential for sexual abuse, exploitation and 
harassment (SEAH) in the hiring process or while 
working, forced labor, child labor, and exposure to 
occupational health and safety risks. These risks 
include safety of laborers removing ferns and planting 
trees on steep slopes, exposure to potential disease 
vectors in standing water or soil and large scale 
fabrication of stoves, risks using the machinery in the 
production of stoves, exposure to bees in honey 
production as well as other si milar risks.  The ESS will coordinate with AE/EE human resources 
staff to conduct a Labor and Working Conditions Risk 
Assessment that will inform the development of a Labor 
and Working Conditions Risk Management Plan. The 
ESS and HR staff will appoint fiel d safety leads within 
each sector. These individuals will receive training on 
National Laws governing labor and working conditions, 
SEAH, and other risks relevant to the activities that 
involve the hiring of laborers during the course of the 
Project.


---
*Page 134*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 131 
  
 Resource efficiency and pollution prevention: The 
stabilization of terraces risks topsoil loss and terrace 
collapse due to deteriorating conditions and improper 
long-term maintenance and extreme weather events. 
Pollution/waste may be created across the sup ply 
chains for stove production and distribution. Pesticides 
and fertilizers may be used for seedling production. 
Water usage in nurseries could divert resources for 
others. The release of CO2 emissions in the sourcing 
and distribution of materials in 
reforestation/afforestation as well as the livelihood 
enhancement activities could also pose a risk.  The ESS, EMS, and a Procurement Specialist will 
conduct activity -specific assessment for resource 
efficiency and pollution control. During implementation 
they will oversee subcontracts for 
reforestation/afforestation and all livelihoods 
enhancement projects. For stabilization of terraces, the 
subcontractor will have an engineer oversee the 
technical components of stabilization to ensure best 
practices and reduct ion of risks.  For livelihoods 
enhancement projects the ESS and Procurement 
Specialist will ensure environmentally sourced materials 
and establish measures to minimize production waste 
and maximize distribution efficiency of stoves. The EMS 
will work with nurseries on plans for mitigating pesticides, 
fertilizers and water use.  
Community safety and security: Increased risk of  
forest fires due to increasing tree coverages, increased 
exposure to vector -borne diseases, human wildlife 
conflicts associated with reforestation/afforestation and 
the influx of international funding that shifts power 
dynamics and creates environments prone to increased 
incidents of SEAH. With expected changes in land 
classifications, interactions among law enforcement 
and informal land owners or communities who use the 
resources could become more prevalent and increase 
risks of harm if law enforcement lacks proper training 
for working with communities. Work on steep slippery 
slopes, working with bees, use of new cook st oves and 
work in remote locations (e.g., fern removal) will require 
safety considerations for participating community 
members. Extreme weather or global events (e.g. 
pandemic) may disrupt safety and security.  The ESS will screen each activity for communit y, safety 
and security risks. The EE will have at a minimum, an 
Emergency Response and Preparedness Plan to 
address specific local hazards and response at each site; 
all staff will be trained on the plan as well as on disease 
prevention and hygiene, SEAH p revention, and 
addressing human -wildlife conflicts. The PMU will need 
to address at a high level across the GoR the potential 
for escalating conflicts among landowners and law 
enforcement as land classifications change in the course 
of the Project.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measure and Management 
Strategies  
Resource access/restrictions: Land classification 
processes could result in changes that affect resource 
access due to existing land use, occupancy, and land 
tenure in the CND especially among farmers, settlers, 
and traditional uses of the land and forest. At a smaller 
scale with less risk, as tree planting and transitions to 
native or value -added species (e.g. fruit trees) 
commence, access to tree resources may be 
diminished un til trees grow larger and become usable.  The ESS will screen all Project activities for the potential 
to cause displacement, namely access restrictions to 
resources. The Project is committed to stakeholder 
engagement and will mitigate access restrictions r isks 
through a process framework and mitigation hierarchy. 
The AE grievance redress process will manage access 
complaints.


---
*Page 135*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 132 
  
 Biodiversity conservation: The inadvertent 
introduction of non -native/invasive pest 
species/diseases during forestry/agroforestry related 
activities could negatively impact production and forest 
health. Wildlife may be disturbed in the course of fern 
removal and/or tree planting as well as other potential 
livelihood activities that will be implemented. Human -
wildlife interactions may increase as a result of 
increased forest cover and fruit trees being available in 
the CND. This could cause landowners to retaliate 
against wildlife.  The ESS will screen all Project activities for biodiversity 
and conservation risks/impacts. Mitigation measures will 
be put in place to ensure tree planting, nursery 
management, and seedling distribution incorporate 
training by consultants on invasive speci es recognition 
and management and that options for managing human -
wildlife conflicts are able should issues arise.  
Historically marginalized peoples:  
Rwanda is a nation with a single/common culture, 
tribe, language and with a national constitution that 
recognizes all Rwandans are born and remain equal 
in rights and freedom (article 16 of Rwandan 
Constitution, 2015).  That said, there are historically 
marginalized groups as well as categories c,d, e, 
groups in the areas of the project activities.  The risks 
are that the impacts of project activities on these 
groups are not adequately considered and analyzed 
and further that the intended benefits for these  groups 
do not materialize given a lack of attention to their 
particular needs and vulnerabilities. Should this occur, 
the overall intent of the project could be in jeopardy 
given the focus on making such communities more 
resilient in light of climate chan ge uncertainties.  As the project focuses on providing benefits, in particular 
increased resilience to climate change for vulnerable 
communities, the ESS will pay particular attention to the 
screening for activity level impacts on historically 
marginalized and categories c,d ,e. Thus far, 24 focus 
groups with 4 exclusively historically marginalized, 5 
exclusively women and 3 exclusively youth participants 
informed the project design and provided insights on 
impacts and improved ways of benefiting individuals in 
these groups (s ee Annex 6, section 4). A detailed plan 
for engaging with women, youth, those below the poverty 
line and landless groups will be prepared by project staff 
in collaboration with district, sector, and local ngo leaders 
in the project implementation phase as specific projects 
and locations are determined . In addition,  all interactions 
with these groups will include processes for obtaining 
consent as well as clarity regarding access to the 
grievance redress process should complaints arise 
during the project.  
 
Risk details and screening assessment to be conducted in Project implementation are described in the 
Partial Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (Annex 6). Positive project impacts include a focus on  improving resilience of the most vulnerable 
communities, communities stewarding/ harnessing the carbon cycle and reducing greenhouse gasses by 
sequestering carbon (i.e., through conserving indigenous trees, increasing soil organic carbon, and 
practicing r egenerative agriculture); and utilizing efficient cook stoves. The PMU/ESS will be responsible for 
conducting screenings, including screenings for project -level impacts on historically marginalized groups of 
each Project activity as specific locations and beneficiaries are determined and with implementing mitigation 
measures aligned with Rwanda National Laws and GCF policies and practices. These measures include a 
commitment to training in all relevant EE staff on stakeholder and community engagement; conse nt with 
local communities; access restrictions mitigations; SEAH and adhering to the labor and safety laws that meet 
international best practices. The full Stakeholder Engagement Plan can be found in Annex 7. The EE and 
the AE will develop a compliance mon itoring, supervision and reporting schedule that meets requirements 
in the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy. The AE will establish a


---
*Page 136*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 133 
  
 Program -level grievance redress mechanism that includes a process of public notificati on, documentation, 
investigation and resolution. This GRM will complement the MoE GRM.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan  
Women, youth and marginalized groups in the CND are key stakeholders in the Project and its primary 
beneficiaries. The Project will be implemented across various sectors along the CND, where natural forests 
are particularly vulnerable due to high populatio n, increasing dependence upon fuelwood, and illegal use of 
forests to improve income streams. The Gender Assessment uses a range of primary (24 focus groups and 
18 key informant interviews) and secondary (published reports, policies and academic literature ) sources to 
triangulate our understanding of gender in climate resilience and Project design. The Gender Analysis 
identified and analyzed gender risks and impacts of the program and climate change through four steps: 
scoping; legislative and policy review ; stakeholder consultation and analysis; and baseline analysis. The 
Action Plan operationalizes the findings from the Assessment, the ESIA, and youth -based information 
collected during the feasibility studies and stakeholder consultation.  Despite tremendo us policy and legal 
efforts, a patriarchal culture and persistent disparities characterize gender relations in Rwanda. Disparities 
persist in post -primary education; in access to and control of property, including land and economic 
resources; in employment  opportunities and entrepreneurship; in decision -making at household and 
community levels; in family responsibilities and unpaid care work; and in the experience of violence, 
harassment, conflict, and insecurity. Sexual and gender -based violence persists a t high levels. While women 
have made impressive political progress, especially at the national level, their local political representation 
and engagement remains unequal. Economic opportunities remain markedly gender -differentiated. In 
Rwanda and the CND, structural barriers to economic and political equity and female empowerment have 
significantly impeded measures to adapt to climate change impacts. While these structural inequalities are 
lower compared to other countries because of leading gender -consider ate policies across sectors, the point 
remains that women’s ability to access, use and control natural resources, infrastructure and services is 
different and low compared to men. This means the degradation of natural resources and new infrastructure 
will affect genders differently and result in greater vulnerability for women. However, women are vital change 
agents and can be powerful leaders from community to global levels in mitigating and adapting to climate 
change. Three key themes in the Gender and So cial Inclusion Action Plan include i) Change negative gender 
and social norms, ii) Provide access to skills building, leadership and programmatic inclusion, and iii) 
Facilitate women’s financial autonomy. Youth account for over 50% of Rwanda’s population. An analysis 
was done to determine how GCF funding could support activities to align with and strengthen the 
sustainability of the overall program by supporting youth through the following activity themes: i) Non land -
based opportunities, ii) Access to skil ls building, and iii) Youth leadership and Programmatic Inclusion. Social 
norms are difficult to change, and deeply entrenched biases will require active engagement by men, women, 
and youth, in decision -making roles as well as grassroots stakeholders. By w orking through the themes 
outlined above, social and technical barriers to participating in decision -making, planning, and activities will 
be addressed. Specific targets will be developed after a brief inception phase. Further details are in Annex 
8. 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement  
Funds from GCF will be provided to the MOE's GCF account  (as the AE), under the terms of the  FAA.  MoE 
will be responsible for financial management and accountable for the use of GCF resources. Financial 
transactions will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally certified auditors. In addition, as 
the AE, MoE will: i) ensure that the p roject is executed in accordance with GCF standards; ii) supervise,


---
*Page 137*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 134 
  
 oversee and manage the implementation of project interventions; iii) report on Project progress; and iv) 
ensure that Project activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries' nat ional priorities. MoE will 
provide oversight to the project consisting of a) entering into a subsidiary agreement with the EE (RFA); b) 
managing and disbursing GCF funds to the EE, after providing no objection to work plans and budgets; c) 
reviewing financ ial expenditures and progress reports; d) overseeing Project implementation in accordance 
with the Project document and Annual Work Plans and Budgets, agreements with co -financiers and each 
executing entity rules and procedures; e) providing technical guid ance to ensure that the appropriate 
technical quality is applied to all Project activities; f) providing financial reports to the GCF for Project funds 
received; g) ensuring that the project complies with the terms agreed in the Project’s respective FAA as  well 
as the AMA signed between MoE and the GCF; and h) undertaking regular annual supervision missions 
according to the MoE’s guidelines and convene  Project  Steering Committee (PSC) meeting twice a year  
aimed to review progress and approve  work plans.  The PMU will manage, monitor and report on day -to-day 
implementation of the EE. The EE will execute the tasks within the overall project management structure: a) 
implementing day -to-day activities as per the project work plan and budget, including the Env ironmental and 
Social Management Plan; b) undertaking procurement activities as per the agreement signed by GCF and 
AE as well as the sub -agreement signed by the AE and EE; c) managing contracts of suppliers and services 
providers; d) hiring and managing p roject staff relevant to the EE -managed project areas; e) implementing 
activities as per the project work plan; and f) carrying out financial and technical monitoring of activities, 
including the achievement of outputs and outcomes the EE are in charge of.  The EE will enter into a 
Memorandum of Understanding with different partner agencies that will provide technical know -how to the 
implementation of the project activities. Procured parties will be contracted in accordance with MoE rules 
and regulations of procuring goods and services. The financial management structure of the project is built 
on the Permanent Secretary of MoE, the Project Coordinator/ Chief of Party and the Finance Management 
Specialist at the PMU level who will oversee and monitor the proj ect finances with project directors and 
finance managers from the EE (RFA).  
The project will be executed by Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA), a Rwanda government entity affiliated to 
the Ministry of Environment with a semi -autonomous legal entity. RFA has t ransparent and accountable 
financial management systems in place, which are essential elements for the effective, accountable 
management of the project. RFA will follow the Government of Rwanda procedures for planning, budgeting, 
and accounting, which are outlined in the law n° 12/2013/ol of 12/09/2013 on state finances and property, 
and ministerial order n°001/16/10/tc of 26/01/2016 relating to financials; and supporting operational manuals 
issued by the Ministry of Finance.  
The MoE shall ascertain that t he EE has in place efficient internal control systems, review financial reports 
and proceed funds disbursements and will also periodically inspect the project for compliance as well as 
coordinate audits exercises for the EE. RFA will enter into agreements with MoE that outline general 
modalities of the funds management in line with GCF grant requirements and RFA’s policies. GCF funds will 
be transferred to an RFA designated bank account. Funds will be disbursed to the EE based on agreed 
annual work plans an d budgets, and its reporting will be on a quarterly basis. The project financial processes 
will rely on the EE’s charts of accounts, internal control systems, disbursement plans, budgeting, expenditure 
management and accounting, reporting, and assets manag ement as assessed by MoE. Procurement 
regulations embed the principles of fairness, transparency, accountability and the promotion of competitive 
economy and efficiency. The Project will be audited annually and commissioned by the Accredited Entity 
(MoE) t o produce certified financial statements and reports to ascertain that GCF funds are well managed. 
The project will maintain a regularly updated record of all assets and documents that will be retained for at 
least 5 years after the end of the project.


---
*Page 138*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 135 
  
 G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.


---
*Page 139*
---

H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 136 
  
  
(f) ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval    
☐ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☒ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)


---
*Page 140*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 141*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest 
and Landscape Restoration   
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Ministry of Environment  (MoE) of the Republic of Rwanda  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Three Provinces of Rwanda (Western, Southern, and 
Northern) in 10 Districts (Karongi, Musanze, Ngororero, 
Nyabihu, Nyamagabe, Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru, Rubavu, 
Rusizi, and Rutsiro).  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans . 
Link to disclosure  English  
Kinyarwanda * 
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans .  
Link to disclosure  English  
Kinyarwanda * 
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”  
Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS ) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A


---
*Page 142*
---

Any other relevant ESS reports, Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website   Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans . 
Link to disclosure  English  
Kinyarwanda * 
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  A Historically Marginalized Peoples Plan , which serves as an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework , is contained as an 
Annex to the ESMF.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Place  To accommodate for those who may not have access to the 
Internet, a computer, or a reliable power source, the 
Ministry of Environment will be sharing the ESMF 
documents to the following districts:  
• Karongi district  (2.0526° S, 29.4128° E) , P.O Box: 23 
Kibuye , village: Kamuvunyi, Cell: Gacaca, district: 
KArongi  
• Musanze district  (1.5020° S, 29.6332° E), P.O Box: 03 
Musanze , village: Byimana, Cell: Ruhengeri, District: 
Musanze  
• Ngororero district  (1.8537° S, 29.6347° E) , P.O Box: 
103 Muhanga , village: Ngororero, Cell: Kazab e, 
district: Ngororero  
• Nyabihu district  (1.5911° S, 29.5220° E) , P.O Box: 
125 Musanze village: Mukamira Cell: Rubaya 
District: Nyabihu  
• Nyamagabe district  (2.4671° S, 29.5736° E) , P.O 
BOX: 36 Gikongoro , village: Nya rusange , Cell: 
Nyamugari , district: Nyamag abe 
• Nyamasheke  district ( -2.342014193676258, 
29.08901503907659) , P.O Box: 72 Nyamasheke , 
village:Gikuyu, Cell: Ninzi, district:Nyamasheke  
 
• Nyaruguru district  (2.6987° S, 29.5703° E) , P.O Box: 
215 Butare  village: Nyarusovu Cell: Mubuga , district: 
Nyaruguru  
• Rubavu district  (1.6736° S, 29.2886° E) , P.O Box:  173 
Gisenyi ; village: Ny aburanga , Cell: Nengo , district: 
Rubavu  
• Rusizi district  (2.4830° S, 28.9054° E) , P.O Box: 253 
Rusizi , village: Ntwali, Cell:Cyangugu, district: 
Rubavu  
• Rutsiro district  (1.9617° S, 29.3857° E)  P.O Box: 49 
Kibuye , village: Nduba, Cell: Congo -Nil district: 
Rutsiro


---
*Page 143*
---

and request them to have physical copies of ESS reports  in 
their local government offices , publish an Executive 
Summary of the ESMF on their notice board in both 
Kinyarwanda and English and publish it on their website to 
ensure it is accessed by all affected people in their location 
as well as to those who may have access to the Internet, a 
compute r. 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 23, 2023  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
 
* Subsequent to the disclosure of the ESS report to the Board and active observers on 22 September 2023, the 
following update has been made: the links to the Environmental & Social Management Framework (ESMF), 
in which the ESMF document -had been made availa ble, have been updated for both English and 
Kinyarwanda. The footnote 86 has been removed.


---
*Page 144*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 144 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP 217 
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda  
Country/(ies):  Rwanda  
Project/programme size: Small  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
This Congo Nile Divide  project will 
safeguard Rwanda ’s biodiversity, enhance 
climate resilience, and support vulnerable 
communities.  The project should ensure linkage to other 
GCF funded projects in the country. In 
addition, we encourage MOE Rwanda to 
establish finan cial mechanisms to upscale 
across the wider landscape.  
The project is  located in  the Albertine Rift, 
which is one of the most biologically rich 
regions in Africa, containing more than half 
of Africa’s birds and 40% of its mammals.  The project should ensure monitoring and 
evaluation of the project interventions is 
undertaken.  
With more frequent extreme rainfall events 
in recent years, this agricultural landscape is 
recognized as the region of Rwanda most 
vulnerable to floods and landslides.  
Project interventions will include improved 
management  on 250,000 hectares (ha)  
(including promotion of natural 
regeneration/planting on 10,000 ha) and 
improved agroforestry practices on 2,000 ha 
of on -farm plantations . 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XXI titled “List of proposed conditions 
and recommendations” , respectively.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’ s assessment
2.1 Project ba ckground  
3. The proposed project’s goal is to improve the resilience of vulnerable communities to
climate variability and shocks by increasing the extent and integrity of natural forests and by
strengthening the capacity for climate -responsive forest and land scape management. The
project will:


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 145 
 
 
(a) Strengthen institutional and regulatory frameworks for low -emission climate -resilient 
development pathway s by mainstreaming climate change into integrated land -use 
planning.  
(b) Increase the climate resilience of vulnerable rural communities through forest and 
landscape restoration and reducing demand for fuelwood.  
4. The proposed interventions will target districts along the Congo Nile Divide  (CND)  
region. Rwanda’s CND, an area of 444,600 hectares  (ha) , is a high -elevation land scape of 
remnant natural forest reserves embedded in a mosaic of intensively managed smallholder 
farms and commercial plantations. The CND separates the drainage basins of the Congo and Nile 
Rivers. It is part of the Albertine Rift, which is one of the mos t biologically rich regions in Africa 
and “one of the most important regions for conservation” on the continent, containing more 
than half of Africa’s birds and 40  per cent of its mammals.   
5. Though covering barely 5  per cent of the country, this archipelag o of protected forests is 
of critical importance for:  
(a) Its globally recognized high biodiversity values ; 
(b) Its role in Rwanda’s acclaimed ecotourism offerings , serving as the primary source of 
Rwanda’s foreign revenue and as a major economic development drive r; 
(c) The ecosystem services provided for surrounding subsistence farmlands as well as 
commercial tea and coffee plantations offering employment opportunities for women 
while providing the  second and third  highest sources of foreign revenue ;  
(d) The regulation o f water capture and release to growing urban centr es on the CND 
periphery, the nation’s extensive river network, and downstream hydroelectric 
operations; and  
(e) The sequestration and storage of nearly 60  per cent of Rwanda’s national carbon stocks . 
6. These values and services are already compromised by a combination of anthropogenic 
and climatic factors; they will be much more severely threatened by the potential negative 
feedback loops associated with projected climate change impacts. The project will  promote an 
ecosystem -based approach to forest protection and restoration and will increase the extent and 
resilience of forest ecosystems and species, including by functionally linking currently isolated 
forest fragments. Through these approaches, the project will protect, restore and rehabilitate 
forest ecosystems,  thus  enhancing biodiversity and reducing key threats while increasing the 
provision of critical ecosystem services to strengthen  the adaptation of vulnerable communities.  
7. Project interventions will directly benefit 1,254,242 people (654,404 women). The 
project will also indirectly benefit 9,260,745 people and create approximately 24,212 job 
opportunities in forest -dependent communities. The total mitigation impact is estimated to be 
1,204,448  tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  (t CO 2 eq) by 2043.  
8. The total project financing is USD 50,000,000 with a request for GCF grants of USD 
39,056,422. The Rwanda Forestry Authority  (RFA) , Rwanda Water Board  (RWB) , Rwanda 
Development Board  (RDB)  and the Minis try of Environment  of Rwanda (MOE Rwanda)  will 
provide co -financing of USD 10,831,308 in grants. MOE  Rwanda  will also provide  an in-kind 
contribution of  USD  112,271. The project is submitted under environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category B.


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 146 
 
 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1: Mainstreaming climate adaptation into integrated land-use planning (total cost: 
USD 2.9 million; GCF cost: USD 2.9 million)   
9. This component aims to integrate climate change adaptation considerations into land -
use planning at the national and subnational levels. The goal is to achieve climate resilience 
through col labor ation among government agencies, civil society, the private sector and diverse 
partners. The component has two main outputs : The first is to deve lop a climate -resilient land -
use plan for the CND by integrating climate adaptation information into existing land -use 
planning efforts. The second aims to strengthen institutional capacities in Rwanda to integrate 
biodiversity and climate risks into land -use planning.  
Component 2: Forest and landscape management and restoration (total cost: USD 18.9 million; 
GCF cost: USD 16.3 million)   
10. In this component, targeted interventions will integrate climate change awareness and 
adaptation into national forest pa rk planning, policies  and management, as well as restore 
degraded areas within those parks. These efforts will help sustain the forests’ rich biodiversity, 
the lucrative tourism revenues that flow into local and national economies, and the ecosystem 
servic es needed for  the climate resilience of vulnerable communities. This suite of activities will 
also identify priority areas outside of parks – in remnant natural stands, around wetlands and 
along streams – for protection and restoration.  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods (total cost: USD 22.6 
million; GCF cost: USD 15.3 million)   
11. The activities under this component aim to combine environmental conservation with 
socioeconomic development, creating a multifaceted app roach that resonates with the global 
commitment to sustainable growth. They include initiatives such as enhancing and restoring 
forest plantations, providing sustainable fuel sources, delivering carbon sequestration benefits 
totalling 522,606 t  CO 2 eq over  20 years, and developing comprehensive land -use planning. The 
other activities focus on rural livelihoods, financial services and sustainable farming methods.  
12. The component will support reafforestation on steep slopes on both public and 
smallholder privat e lands. It will develop farm -based agroforestry for climate -resilient species 
that produce fuelwood and/or market products, while conserving and enriching soils. The 
component will complement land -based production with a scaling -up of alternative value -chain 
products for smallholders that are nature -positive, including , but not limited to , tourism -based 
income, beekeeping, and improved cooking stoves. Central to these activities will be the 
facilitation of access to market chains and financial mechanisms f or establishing and 
maintaining businesses. Given that these activities are designed at the core to be profitable and 
promote financial sustainability, it is intended that they be replicable and sustained once GCF 
funding expires.  
Project management (total  cost: USD 3.1 million; GCF cost: USD 2.7 million)  
13. The Project Management Unit (PMU) of the CND project will be established under MOE 
Rwanda /Single Project Implementation Unit ( SPIU ) to manage day -to-day operations of 
complex program me interventions. Heade d by the Project Coordinator, who will also serve as 
the secretary and rapporteur of the Project Steering Committee , the PMU will be responsible for 
tasks such as managing and monitoring identified risks and reporting new risks to the  
accredited entity  (AE) and the Project Steering Committee . The PMU will adhere to MOE 
Rwanda /Government of Rwanda  recruitment practices and provide quarterly progress reports. 
The Project Coordinator  will report  to the MOE Rwanda /SPIU  Coordinator as the immediate 
supervisor an d to the Permanent Secretary as the secondary supervisor.


---
*Page 147*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 147 
 
 
14. The PMU ’s structure will comprise various specialists , including for monitoring and 
evaluation, procurement, gender, financial management, communication and outreach, along 
with an office manager and driver. Its staff will be selected and recruited following M OE 
Rwanda /Government of Rwanda  procedures, aiming for a lean management structure. 
Operations will conclude once the final project evaluation report and other required documents 
have be en submitted to M OE Rwanda , signifying a comprehensive and organized approach to 
the management of the entire program me. 
15. The GCF portion of this project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GC F Policy on Fees.  
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                                                                 Scale: N/A  
16. The projec t has  1,254,24  direct beneficiaries,  representing  30.9 per cent of the CND 
population , and 9,260,745  indirect beneficiaries , representing almost 70  per cent of Rwanda’s 
population. Additional adaptation benefits will include the training of 45,992 community 
members in forest management and restoration for clim ate resilience. Altogether, t he project 
will contribute to the restoration of 5,000 ha of intact forest, 2,500 ha of protective forests , 
3,346 ha of smallholder farmland, 1 ,000 ha of pastures and 1,500 ha of riparian linkages. 
Overall, 275,617 ha of landsc ape could potentially be positively impacted by the project. 
Although the project is focused on priority landscapes covering 275,617 ha, it is likely that 
benefits due to increased adaptive capacity could feasibly extend across the full 700,000 ha 
CND. The  project will generate mitigation benefits by sequest ering  approximately 250,841  t CO 2 
eq during the five-year project period, which is about 0.9  per cent  of the 28. 2 million t CO 2 eq 
reduction target in Rwanda’s Vision 2050. The total mitigation impact fr om reduced 
deforestation,  the introduction of  forest restoration and adoption of improved cookstoves is 
estimated to be 1,204,448 t CO 2 eq by 2043.  
17. The project contributes to  the implementation of Rwanda’ s updated nationally 
determined contribution ( NDC ) (2020) commitments. It is also aligned with the country’ s Green 
Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy and other national policies. The proposal objectives are 
also well aligned with the country’ National Forest Policy and related plans for reversing trends  
of high deforestation.  
18. With support from the NDC Partnership, Rwanda now has a single NDC implementation 
framework that captures both national and subnational climate actions and investments plans 
and includes a strategic program me for climate resilience,  scaling up renewable energy 
program me, green climate fund strategic framework, public investment priorities , sector 
strategic plans and district development strategies. Therefore, the proposed project is well 
supported by this existing NDC implementation framework that provides an enabling 
environment that will ensure climate actions undertaken are integrated in to national planning.  
19. The proposed project further strengthens the country ’s national and subnational 
adaptation priorities, approaches and plans through promoting ecosystem -based adaptation 
while utilizing climate science, effective landscape planning, p olicies, cross -sectoral 
coordination and management in addressing climate risks and adaptation benefits.  
20. The project in general seeks outcomes at a range of levels (from national through to 
catchment  level ) across the public sector, while scaling  up lesso ns and initiatives from aligned 
programming. It will build the capacity of MOE Rwanda (AE) and other related agencies and 
stakeholders to coordinate and col labor ate more effectively to help accelerate  subnational and 
local climate action. It is envisaged t hat these funds will also crowd in additional private sector


---
*Page 148*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 148 
 
 
capital (e.g. cookstoves and forest plantations ) while enabling the g overnment to implement the 
adaptation interventions. However, without a clear private sector framework or plan, this might 
be challenging to implement. Nonetheless, Rwanda has a GCF country program me and strategic 
framework and has managed GCF funded projects and program mes. 
21. Furthermore, the project clearly articulates the alignment, additionality and/or 
complementarity with seve ral ongoing or planned program mes funded by significant 
international and multilateral agencies (e.g. World Bank, Global Environment Facility  and 
United Nations Development Programme , etc.), which reflects on the experience  and track 
record of MOE Rwanda  to deliver on this project  interventions.   
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                                     Scale: N/A  
22. By utilizing integrated landscape and ecosystem -based adaptation approaches in 
addressing climate change impacts in Rwanda , the project  offers myriad opportunities for 
upscaling and replication to similar ecological zones across the country. This approach to land -
use planning and management is entirely new for Rwanda and will restore and sustain varied 
ecosys tem services for both adjacent and nationwide populations. The project coordination and 
collabor ation efforts across both geographic and sectoral boundaries , while mainstreaming 
climate risks in management planning , represents a fundamental paradigm shift for land -use 
planning and management in Rwanda.  
23. The project has the potential to contribute  to the regulatory frameworks and policies for 
driving climate investments in the forest and renewable energy sectors. The project will finance 
the development of t he integrated land -use plan , which will be adopted by all ten CND districts 
as a framework for seeking synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity 
protections, reconciling land -use conflicts that arise, and guiding development decisions  and 
climate change adaptation. It will also update the National Land Use Master Plan  to ensure it 
incorporates climate resiliency and is accurate and relevant to local contexts. The adoption of an 
integrated land-use planning approach helps to better reco ncile cross -sectoral trade -off’s  and 
improve climate adaptation planning in the CND ; this approach will prove a successful model 
for application in other regions of Rwanda and other forest/farming landscapes beyond. In 
addition, revising two national park management plans to include climate concerns will serve as 
a model for the remaining parks of Rwanda, as well as for the East Africa region.  
24. Overall, the project ’s efforts in shifting policy, practice and col labor ative learning 
processes symbolize a fundam ental change towards climate -resilient development pathways in 
Rwanda, with implications for broader regional application.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                              Scale: N/A  
25. The project is closely aligned with several Sustainable Development Goals. Key 
environmental benefits include restoration of degraded lands to reduce erosion, sedimentation, 
and landslide risks; the planting of native trees to enhance biological connectivity; and 
mitigation of greenhouse gas  emissions through both increased carbon sequestration and fuel -
efficient cookstove technologies.  
26. Social benefits extend to more than a million people, focusing on increased awareness of 
climate change, empowerment of the rural poor (with an emphasis on wo men ’s participation), 
and creation of social capital through col labor ative adaptation strategies. The project aims to 
significantly reduce poverty and inequality . It will provide economic co -benefits such as 
increased agricultural productivity, employment opportunities for around 24,212 households, 
modern beekeeping practices yielding significant income, and a net present value (NPV) of USD 
369 million over 20 years from forest restoration and other activities. Private capital


---
*Page 149*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 149 
 
 
investment is also targeted,  thus fostering a “triple bottom line” that balances social, 
environmental and economic benefits. Emphasis on gender -sensitive impacts ensures that 
women are actively engaged in planning and decision -making, leading to increased income, 
improved health and n utrition, and strengthened leadership and entrepreneurship skills.  
27. Overall, the project offers a comprehensive and strategic approach to sustainable 
development, thereby promoting climate resilience, economic growth, social cohesion and 
gender equality wi thin the CND region.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                Scale: N/A  
28. The project proposal interventions were designed from key findings and 
recommendations of a climate change vulnerability assessment of the selected project 
geographical area ( see a nnex 2). Climate exposure, sensitivity, adaptive capacity, impacts and 
barriers as well the greenhouse gas emissions profile were established and either quantified or 
supported with reference to scientific publications. Further, climate change impacts on t he 
target sectors as well as size and economic and social development of the target population , 
including critical barriers to reduce their vulnerability , are e labor ated herein. The proposed 
interventions are targeted to match the identified barriers. The vulnerability of the target 
sectors is quantified to the extent possible, however , gender disaggregation is covered in 
qualitative terms only.  
29. The CND landscape districts support nearly one  third of Rwanda’s population on barely 
one fifth of its land base . The total population is 1,598,536, of which women account for 52.2  per 
cent . Through the project interventions, targeted vulnerable groups will attain more climate -
resilient livelihoods  from reduced exposure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and mor e 
knowledge on climate risks, the value of forests and forest ecosystems, climate adaptation 
options, access to  quality  indigenous and agroforestry materials , and improved ecosystem 
services.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                                      Scale: N/A  
30. MOE Rwanda,  which is the AE for this proposal , clearly played a pivotal role in defining 
and drafting the proposal stakeholder engagement report and plan ( see a nnex 7) as it is aligned 
with Rwanda ’s GCF country program me stakeholder engagement strategic framework. In its 
country program me, Rwanda arti culated how it will conduct stakeholder engagement at the 
readiness stage and in delivering GCF concepts, projects and program mes. This process has 
provided Rwanda with an overarching framework that supports its stakeholder engagement 
processes, which is c learly seen in this proposal . This framework  can support the strengthening 
of local climate action from national to local levels with clear feedback loops and avenues for 
incorporating learning.  
31. The proposal indicates that a detailed stakeholder and gende r analysis were conducted, 
augmented by extensive consultations of various actors from national, subnational and local 
levels. A range of stakeholders from the public and civil society were consulted , in addition to 
government agencies at all levels that w ill be engaged throughout the project cycle, cutting 
across all key sectors and scale. The general concern relates to  local ownership and the transfer 
of knowledge that can sustain interventions after the project closure. It w ould be  ideal if 
Indigenous kn owledge and technology transfer is well factored in to implementation.


---
*Page 150*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 150 
 
 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                        Scale:  N/A  
32. Utilizing grant financing reflects the public good character of the investments, the 
proj ect aims to create a model that overcomes barriers to private  sector investment in 
Rwanda ’s forestry s ector. With an economic internal rate of return of 43.32  per cent  and a 
financial internal rate of  return  of 42  per cent , the project is estimated to generate a n NPV  of 
more than US D 120.48 million over 20 years,  which  translat es to US D 64 per direct beneficiary. 
The mitigation cost is estimated to be US D 43.84 per t  CO 2 eq. Implementing best practices for 
tree planting and utilizing cuttin g-edge monitoring technologies, the project is aligned with 
similar initiatives and sets the stage for potential replication in other regions. Its community -
focused approach, including measures to develop economically viable units, contributes to a 
threefo ld increase in net economic benefits compared to a scenario without the project.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
33. Project background : The project aims to increase resilience of vulnerable rural 
communities in the Rwandan side of the CND by building capacity for integrated planning and 
management through forest and landscape restoration and reducing demand for fuelwood. The 
project will involve the formulation and implementation of plans (i.e. int egrated district land -
use plans and enhancements of general management plans of national parks), coordination with 
various agencies, capacity -building, and physical interventions on the ground. This includes 
afforestation/reforestation of protected forest and private landholdings, installation of soil 
conservation measures, ecological interventions such as fern removal in natural forest s and 
restoration of degraded forest s in Gishwati -Mukura National Park , production and distribution 
of fuel -efficient cooks toves, beekeeping activities , and support for the value chain s of these 
enterprises. Among the environmental and social  (E&S)  co-benefits are the enhancement of the 
unique, endemic biodiversity of the area through decreased sedimentation, improved water 
quality and recharge, reduced erosion, decrease in loss of soil organic matter as a result of forest 
restoration and establishment of connectivity between the forests across the CND landscape. 
The project is also expected to contribute to the empowerment of the women and youth in the 
target areas.  
34. E&S risk category and safeguards instrument : The overall project E&S  risk category  is 
Category B (moderate). The Secretariat confirms the proposed E&S risk category since the 
project is, in itself, an environmental and social enhancement project. The potential adverse E&S 
risks and impacts will mainly come from the implementation of ground activities , are expected 
to be mostly minimal  and highly localized  and can be avoided/mitigated through careful design 
and the ap plication of generally accepted mitigation measures and standards. The Secretariat 
conforms to the assigned risk category and it is within the accreditation level of the AE. A partial 
environmental and social impact assessment and environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) have been prepared for the project.  
35. Compliance with the GCF ESS standards : The paragraphs below provide a brief 
description of the programme’s compliance with ESS standards.  
36. ESS 1 (Assessment and managem ent of environmental and social risks and 
impacts) : The ESMF discussed the baseline socioeconomic conditions of the project area. It has 
also provided a general assessment of the risks and impacts of the project. The assessment 
included an indication of th e positive and negative components of the activities and 
subactivities, the consequence of the impact, the probability that the impact will occur, the 
duration for which the impacts are expected to occur, and the overall significance of the impact.


---
*Page 151*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 151 
 
 
Neverth eless, given that much of the project activities cannot yet be fully specified in terms of 
location, ownership, design and approach and will only be identified and fully specified through 
consultations and coordination with various stakeholders during proj ect implementation, the 
ESMF provided the basis for identifying the risks and impacts of the subprojects and defining 
the processes and procedures to be applied in assessing and managing the risks and impacts of 
individual project activities during impleme ntation. The major anticipated negative impacts of 
the proposed activities and subactivities include , but are not limited to: disproportionate 
distribution of project benefits, potential for gender -based violence  (GBV) , risks related to 
labo ur and working conditions, community health and safety, potential for introduction of 
invasive species and pests on planted seedlings, water use at nurseries diverting from other 
uses, use of pesticides and fertilizers in seedling production, destabilization and erosion during 
construction/reconstruction of terraces, land classification that impact access and introduce 
restrictions, increased exposure to disease/vector -borne illnesses, potential for negative 
human -wildlife interactions, and environmental risks related to the supply chain. Among the 
mitigating measures include a commitment to stakeholder engagement, a process of consent, 
training on sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment ( SEAH ), establishing a grievance redress 
mechanism  (GRM) , adhering to the labo ur and  safety laws and international good practices, 
providing training on invasive species management, providing oversight in the supply chain, 
and adopt ion of  practices to reduce the use of chemicals and production of wastes.  
37. ESS 2 (Labo ur and working conditio ns): The project will likely require the hiring of 
professionals, service personnel and assistants , and activities on the ground such as terracing, 
removal of ferns and reforestation/afforestation activities will require  the hiring of field 
workers and labourers. Risks associated with these activities include , but are not limited to , the 
potential for SEAH in the hiring process or at work, forced labour , child labour , and exposure to 
occupational health and safety hazards. Workers may be exposed to hazardous working 
environments such as steep slopes, disease vectors in standing waters, safety hazards in the 
fabrication/production of stoves, and exposure to bee stings in honey production, among other  
things . The project will ensure proper labour  and working conditions are provided to workers 
(e.g. in forest camps) , and trainings on labour  and occupational health and safety standards will 
be undertaken. A Code of Conduct  as regards worker safety and security will also be reflected in 
contract documents. Moreover, the project will not support activities that include the use of 
forced labour , human trafficking and child labour. During implementation, risks and potential 
imp acts related to labour  and working conditions will be further assessed and managed through 
the development of a labour and working conditions risk management plan,  including ensuring 
that workers have access to a GRM . 
38. ESS 3 (Resource efficiency and polluti on control) : The nature of the proposed 
interventions does not entail  the use of substantial amounts of fuel, water, electricity  or raw 
materials, except for the operation of nurseries (for its water requirement) and the production 
and distribution of cook stoves (for raw materials and electricity). The project will however 
promote the increased use of energy -efficient cooking stoves to lessen the impact on forest 
resources for fuel. During implementation, further review on resource efficiency and pollution 
control risks will be undertaken to assess and manage issues as regards water use and water 
availability, use of pesticides and fertilizers, potential for soil loss, soil erosion and slope 
destabilization, and use of raw materials and waste generation in t he cook stove 
fabrication/production and distribution. The project will also ensure raw materials are from 
sustainable sources and will establish measures to minimize production waste and maximize 
distribution efficiency of stoves. Appropriate management m easures will be developed upon 
screening and assessment of these risks.  
39. ESS 4 (Community health, safety and security) : The project activities could have 
community health, safety and security issues , which include potential for increased exposure to 
vector -borne diseases should ecological balance be altered or stagnant water develop  as a result 
of the reforestation/afforestation and fern removal activities in the area (which may increase


---
*Page 152*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 152 
 
 
the population of certain disease vectors and insect pests). Some of t he mitigating measures 
include proper drainage design of terraces. There could also be possibility for human –wildlife 
conflict in areas where fruit trees are planted , which may inadvertently increase physical 
interactions with wildlife that could result in  crop loss or physical injury both to humans and 
wildlife. The risk related to the presence of migrant labour  is considered low given that the 
project will hire residents from surrounding communities. Nevertheless, the activities will be 
assessed more clos ely with regard to  such risks , with measures to be discussed and determined 
in consultation with the communities during implementation.  
40. ESS 5 (Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement) : The project does not include 
any activities that will require resettlement or involuntary taking of land. However, project 
activities could facilitate a potential loss of access to lands given that the 
afforestation/reforestation activities could result in stricter enforcement of land use and park 
laws in changes to  rules of access or land classification. To address this, the project will not 
establish protective forests on lands used for food production. On -farm afforestation will not 
involve the acquisit ion of lands, land rights or land -use rights through expropriation or other 
compulsory procedures and will comply with the country’s legal system. Communities will be 
engaged in an inclusive and participatory manner and will be part of the planning and 
afforestation processes , and agreements on land rights and responsibilities will be developed 
with them. An access restrictions mitigation process framework is developed and will be 
implemented as required.  
41. ESS 6 (Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources) : The project intends to enhance the region’s ecosystem to reduce the vulnerability 
of communities to climate change impacts. For instance, the proposed interventions on 
protected forests will be restoration (e.g. restor ation of the 500 h a of degraded forest in GMNP, 
and the fern removal covering 4,500 h a of Nyungwe National Park , while the proposed 
interventions in the Stepping Stones and Landscapes Linkages (located outside of the parks) 
will be composed of  the protecti on of isolated forest patches and afforestation on steep slopes 
and riparian areas supplemented with agroforestry activities to enhance ecosystem services. 
Nevertheless, care should be exercised in implementing these activities to ensure that negative 
impa cts such as potential for the introduction of alien or invasive species, pests and pathogens 
from poorly managed nurseries are adequately addressed. During project implementation, 
consultations with communities and stakeholders will aid in determining the selection of 
appropriate species suitable to the locality . 
42. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7 (Indigenous Peoples ): The AE recogni zes 
that while there are historically marginalized groups as well as "Categories C, D and  E, groups " 
that may meet the GCF criteria for Indigenous Peoples that could potentially be included in the 
project area, the screening so far has indicated that Indigenous Peoples have not be en found in 
the project area.  Given that specific sites will be selected fo r project activities during project 
implementation, each subproject will be subject to more in -depth screening for impacts to 
historically marginalized peoples, with particular attention to the GCF criteria of Indigenous 
Peoples, during project implementat ion. The AE will conduct a screening for subprojects as 
outlined in the “Screening for Presence of and Risks to Historically Marginalized Groups” to 
evaluate the characteristics of historically marginalized and Categories C, D and  E people. 
Should the scre ening process identify Indigenous Peoples , then the subactivity will require a 
historically marginalized peoples plan. The AE also recognizes  that there are potential barriers 
to integrating historically marginalized peoples into the project.  Nevertheless,  there is interest 
in working with historically marginalized groups  to identify how traditional livelihoods like 
beekeeping can be adapted and promoted  and how negative impacts on these livelihoods will be 
mitigated.  The AE has included in the project the hiring of an ESS specialist and community 
engagement specialist to minimize risks as well including a commitment to stakeholder 
engagement, free, prior and informed consent and the setting up of a project -level  GRM . In line 
with its roles and functions, the GCF Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group  (IPAG)  is available to


---
*Page 153*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 153 
 
 
provide advice to the AE , which  is also encouraged to share emerging good practices and 
success stories with  IPAG . 
43. ESS 8 (Cultural Heritage) : The physical interventions (i.e. afforestation, reforestation 
and terracing, etc.) will be undertaken in mountainous areas where there are few human 
settlements. The preliminary screening of target areas also indicated that it is not expected that 
the pro ject activities will disturb any cultural heritage sites. Nevertheless, the project has 
developed a chance find procedure to cover chance encounters of artefacts during project 
implementation.  
44. Institutional implementation arrangements : As the AE, M OE Rwan da will oversee 
and monitor the management and implementation of the project. The Wildlife Conservation 
Society (WCS)  and RFA  will serve as EEs for the project through a project cooperation 
agreement. All work will be coordinated by the PMU and supported b y other relevant 
government agencies , including the National Land Authority and the RWB within M OE Rwanda . 
The PMU will have oversight o f the day -to-day operations of the project , including monitoring 
and evaluation. It will engage specialists (e.g. Enviro nmental and Social Safeguards Specialist, 
Invasive Species Specialist, Community Engagement Specialist, Behavio ur Change Specialist, 
Gender Specialist, etc.) that will screen for the potential environmental and social risks and 
impacts and develop manageme nt measures for proposed activities. The PMU will also be 
responsible for coordination on trainings for all project EEs. As regards safety, a Labour  and 
Safety Coordinator will also oversee working conditions in the field. The project will also engage 
Comm unity Engagement Specialists and Labour  and Safety Officers.  
45. Stakeholder  engagement and GRM : The project benefited substantively from an 
extensive stakeholder consultation process, which started during the project conceptualization. 
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has also been prepared to engage the stakeholders throughout 
project implementation. The project will have a project -level GRM , which is described in the 
ESMF. The GRM is independent of governmental judicial procedures. The project also allows 
access to the GCF independent redress mechanism.  In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples 
Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples ’ focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, 
including before a claim has been made.  
46. Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment safeguarding : The SEAH 
safeguarding approach proposed by the AE is consi dered by the Secretariat  to be  in compliance 
with the SEAH provisions pursuant to the revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The 
project identifies that all project components may exacerbate the existing power differentials 
and expose the project ben eficiaries to potential SEAH risk. The AE will take a number of 
mitigation measures to prevent and manage SEAH, including ensur ing that all staff are trained 
on survivor -centred approaches to address SEAH, and that the Human Resources and 
Administration Of ficer and the ESS Specialist of the project will work together to develop a 
Security and Risk Management Plan to prevent SEAH incidences. The project’s Gender Specialist 
and Community Engagement Specialist will develop training on SEAH prevention, GBV 
prog ramming and survivor -centred approach. The project will also safeguard against SEAH 
through a Code of Conduct that explicitly indicates zero  tolerance for GBV . This  Code of Conduct 
will be shared with all personnel and used for training all employees. In addition to  the 
prevalence of GBV in the target countr y, the project also recognizes that the influx of funds and 
activities , combined with power dynamics , may disproportionately affect women, youth, 
historically marginalized people, and others in the poverty categories  of Rwanda . As the specific 
locations and beneficiaries will be determined during full implementation, each subproject will 
be screened to av oid any subproject that may aggravate risks of GBV and SEAH. The project will 
respond to SEAH incidents through GRMs at  the AE, EE, and project levels . Training  will be 
organized  for all project staff, implementing partners, key service providers and other  partner 
organizations to identify and regularly assess SEAH risks along the project cycle  as well as


---
*Page 154*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 154 
 
 
ensure that  both  the AE and all the EEs respond to SEAH incidents with  survivor -centred and 
gender responsive approaches.  
4.2 Gender policy  
47. The AE has provide d a gender assessment and action plan therefore complies with the 
requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
48. The gender assessment provided demonstrates the commitment of Rwanda to 
advancing gender equality and women’s empowerment. The assessment shows that Rw anda 
has a strong political commitment to promoting gender equality, reflected in its policy and legal 
framework and various sectoral strategies. It is the first country to have a majority female 
Parliament , with 61  per cent  of these positions being held b y women , and has established 
through its constitution a minimum of 30  per cent  female representation in public governance. 
The country has also made international commitments such as ratifying and implementing the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms  of Discrimination against Women , the Beijing 
Platform for Action and the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa. An institutional 
framework for coordinating and ensuring oversight of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment is in place , which mai nly rests with the Ministry of Gender and Family 
Promotion. The Ministry is mandated to coordinate the implementation of the national gender 
policy and advocacy on gender issues, a gender monitoring office and the National Women’s 
Council. All ministries a nd public institutions have gender focal points. However, there is 
divergence between the frameworks in place and implementation on the ground due to 
challenges such as lack of financial resources and technical capacity within the various 
ministries as wel l as existing norms and practices that run contrary to equality principles and 
practices.  
49. The gender assessment was conducted through desk review and stakeholder 
consultation. Additional stakeholder consultation will be conducted at national, district and  
project site level in order to further adapt project activities to  the local context. The assessment 
indicates that women and men have different roles and responsibilities within society and 
households. These roles rigidly set women as caregivers and home makers, while men are 
considered breadwinners engaging in income -generating activities, wage employment and 
decision -mak ing. Women own less land, have less access to extension services and financial 
support (loans) , and are less educated and able to  gain  experience in handling money. Women 
rely more on informal sources of loans as they do not usually have collateral to put up to access 
loans from financial institutions. Women engage and represent 66  per cent of the agricultur al 
workforce ; however , they  occu py 19.7 of the paid jobs. Women’s role s in afforestation and 
agroforestry is also curtailed by their lack of ownership and or land rights. Lack of land rights 
hinders the financial benefits women can get from resources on land such as trees. Women 
mostly u se trees that provide little commercial value ; rather they  are focused on fulfilling their 
household needs through fuelwood, fodder, bean poles and fruits. Discussion with women had 
indicated that women observed shortage s of fuelwood, fodder  and wood suitable to their bean 
poles , and also that there is declining soil fertility and crop yields. Fuelwood also is the main 
source for cooking , which has health hazards for women , and gaining access to cleaner, 
improved cook  stoves is a challenge. M en usually decide not to spend money to purchase the 
improved cook  stoves that can directly address the multiple challenges faced by women. 
Female -headed households are identified as much more vulnerable to climate change impact s 
compared to male -headed ho useholds owing to the prevalent gender inequality. Engagement in 
alternative source of incomes for women poses its own challenge s to women, one of which is 
affordability of required inputs, and this is particularly so for the beekeeping sector. The 
interes t of the government is this area is also high, and investments have taken place , but only 
23 per cent  of women engaged in the sector.


---
*Page 155*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 155 
 
 
50. The action plan includes activities that will address the challenges identified through the 
gender assessment. Activities  contain corresponding indicators, targets, gender expertise and 
budget while also including timelines for each of the actions. The project will direct investments 
to the areas of equal access to resources (e.g . land), services (finance), capacity developm ent, 
decision -making and also the participation of women in management, as beneficiaries /partners 
and as critical stakeholders in processes. Project intervention s will respond  to and address the 
growing pressure on natural resources , thus  ensuring that the resilience and adaptive capacities 
of communities , including that of women and disadvantaged people , are built. The gender action 
plan  is focused on  ensuring  (1) climate adaptation program mes and land-use planning address 
the priorities of women and youth ; (2) women , youth and marginalized households have 
increased capacity to effectively engage in and benefit from forest management and forest 
restoration ; (3) women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage 
in green jobs and livel ihood activities ; and (4) monitoring and evaluation effectively measures 
how women, youth and marginalized people  are benefiting to enable  the adaptive management 
of the project. A capacity -building component that focus es on strengthening cooperatives and 
village savings and loans institutions through gender mainstreaming across decision -making, 
membership , and products and services is included to ensure women  are able to benefit  from  
and engage in all aspects of the proje ct. Private landowners who will be willing to engage in land 
afforestation activities will create private forest management units , which will then be assisted 
in form ing and register ing cooperatives that are  at least 50  per cent  women. Further , the 
selecti on of tree species will take into consideration women’s us age and priorities. Women will 
be engaged and supported through knowledge acquisition, trainings , and skills development 
processes  so that they  benefit from the project implementation, particularly focusing on critical 
challenges such as rights to land  and access to decision -making positions. Further, the challenge 
of rights to land  will be addressed through advocacy work with men and local judiciary systems. 
This will be complemented by activities t hat will advocate for women’s land rights and access to 
redress mechanisms. The project will engage community leaders  and women and men 
community influencers to further promote equal and fair control of resources to mitigate the 
risk of men taking control  over  incomes earned by women.  
51. There are three recommendations to  the AE. The first recommendation is that the AE 
needs to ensure that gender issues are mainstreamed across all components of the project ; this 
is lacking for component 3 (output 3.1 of the gender action plan) , which presents many 
important opportunities to address gender issues. Secondly, the AE needs to refine and clearly 
show what outcomes it intends to achieve as a result of the interventions . Activity 3.1.1 in the 
funding proposal  states the following regarding the composition of administrative committees: 
"Note that gender consideration is mandatory (at least 30% women) ". It is not clear  if 30  per 
cent  refers to “women in decision -making bodies” or “membership of women in cooperatives”, 
or both. These results are different in nature and should be captured independently. The AE 
should provide clarification in this regard . Thirdly, as part of its expressed commitment to do so, 
the AE should consistently  collect  data  and report in a sex -disaggregated manner  on the gender 
action plan . 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( low risk )  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk)  
52. We acknowledge th e important role of the Government of R wanda via MOE Rwanda  as 
the AE  (direct access) . The AE demonstrate d its comparative advantage and capability in


---
*Page 156*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 156 
 
 
relation to this project with references to its track record  in executing projects  of comparable 
size or above (including FP073  and FP167 with GCF) and existing affiliation with the EE,  RFA . 
53. The AE provide d adequate assurance that RFA  has the necessary capa city to undertake 
the role as EE.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific execution risks (Medium risk)  
54. Co-financing: We acknowledge the sizable amount of co -financing totalling USD 
10,493,579 (grants and in -kind) for a co -financing ratio of 1:0.27. If co-financing does not 
materialize then this may impede project imple mentation . The AE identified this risk , and the 
covenants in the term sheet are adequate mitigation measures – noting  that  the term sheet for 
the proposed project has not yet been agreed.  
55. Project viability (and concessionality) : The use of grants  (and 100  per cent  
concessiona lity) is justified given the country context , the beneficiaries in Rwanda’s CND , and 
the fact that  the proposed activities are  public goods in nature , including creating enabling 
opportunities for market development beyond the project to cataly se private investments  (see 
component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods) .  
56. Capacity -building activities and technology development/transfer  (i) represent 45 per 
cent  of total GCF funding requested ; (ii) may not result in realizing expected results in case 
issues arise during implementation ; and (iii) are embedded in the project ’s design and thus 
crucial to achieving intended  objectives and outcomes . On the other hand , we note that 
identification of risks and the mitigation measures proposed by the AE are adequate.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk (medium  risk )   
57. MOE Rwanda, in its capacity as AE, confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment of 
money laundering and terrorist financ ing (ML/TF) in relation to project implementation. The 
probability of occurrence was assessed as ‘low’, and the impact severity in the event of 
occurrence was assessed as ‘medium’.  
58. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that co -financiers have been identified based on their  existing 
mandates and activities implemented in the  CND region. Co -financiers ’ commitments will serve 
as a basis of M OE Rwanda  engagement during the project implementation. During 
implementation, annual work plans  for the project  will be adjusted in col laboration with the EE, 
and all co -financiers are to align with all activities. M OE Rwanda , per its oversight role, will 
ensure that all of these stakeholders commit during planning to their co -financing and report  
this in the a nnual performance reports submitted to GCF.  
59. MOE Rwanda  indicated that the Governme nt of Rwanda currently has robust measures 
to fight ML/TF risks (e.g. law N° 001/FIC/2022 on regulations relating to anti -money 
laundering and counter ing the financing  terrorism). The Governmen t of Rwanda has also put in 
place a special agency for this purpose, the Financial Intelligence Center (FIC),  which has  a clear 
mission to promote financial system integrity by conducting effective financial intelligence to 
counter ML/TF and related financ ial crimes in governmental institutions, projects and 
parastatal agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. 
Both M OE Rwanda  and this project under its supervision will also comply with FIC regulations.  
60. MOE Rwanda c onfirmed that it has an internal audit function as well as regular audit s 
conducted by the Office of the Auditor General to ensure  the efficiency and effectiveness of 
internal controls , which includes handling ML/TF risks. In addition,  MOE Rwanda uses 
segrega tion of duties within financial management process es.


---
*Page 157*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 157 
 
 
61. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment of prohibited practices 
in relation to project implementation. The probability of occurrence was assessed as  Low , and 
the impact severity i n the event of occurrence was assessed as Medium.  
62. MOE Rwanda indicated  that to ensure materials or technology procured under the 
project are used only for the purposes intended and not diverted or misused for unauthorized, 
improper or illicit purposes, a c omprehensive set of controls will be used. This includes explicit 
terms and conditions in all procurement contracts or agreements that clearly  (i) state the 
intended purpose of the materials or technology being provided and explicitly prohibit any 
unauthor ized use or diversion ; and (ii)  define the individuals that are authorized to access and 
use the procured materials or technology. Furthermore, this will involve the implementation of 
strong authentication and access controls to ensure that only approved u sers have access . This 
refers to the record of any materials or technology procured under projects within  an assets 
register. The records include assets identification, the person using the material  and the 
location.  
63. Monitoring and auditing the usage of th e procured materials or technology will be 
undertaken to detect any anomalies or potential misuse, including periodic  site visits. Training 
sessions will also be conducted to educate all stakeholders involved in the project about the 
importance of adhering  to the intended use of the materials or technology and the consequences 
of misuse. For technologies that involve data transmission or storage,  MOE Rwanda  will ensure 
that appropriate encryption and data protection measures are in place to safeguard sensit ive 
information.  
64. MOE Rwanda confirmed that no projects will be undertaken in any jurisdiction or 
territory that is subject to or affected by sanctions or restrictive measures per the United 
Nations Security Council (UNSC) r esolutions. Additionally, no individual or entity that is lis ted 
on any UNSC sanctions list, including the U nited Nations  Consolidated Sanctions list , will be 
involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer 
or beneficiary.  
65. MOE Rwanda  acknowledged that there are United Nations  sanctions in the neighbouring 
country of the Democratic Republic of  the Congo, close to the CND. According to  MOE Rwanda,  
the U nited Nations  Consolidated Sanctions List indicates approximately 20 individuals with  ties 
to Rwanda, a small percentage of whom may live in Rwanda. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that the 
United Nations  Consolidated Sanctions List has been circulated internally and will be cross 
checked when hiring for the project and once project sites are selecte d to ensure these 
individuals will not be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a 
counterparty, implementer  or beneficiary.  
66. MOE Rwanda  indicated  that the project involves many actors for successful 
implementation , including m inistries, government agencies, non -government al organizations, 
subgrantees, vendors, service providers, community members and beneficiaries. MOE Rwanda 
confirmed that there is specifically an intention to distribute or disburse to beneficiaries , both 
dire ctly and indirectly , commodities and other items of value such as (i) the distribution of 
seedlings for trees that will produce fruits or contribute to enhancing biodiversity of farming 
systems ; (ii)  access to improved cook stoves ; as well as  (iii) the option for the distribution of 
bees to start honey operations. MOE  Rwanda  acknowledged that, as with any project infusing 
large sums of money directly or indirectly with multiple actors, corruption could occur.  
67. MOE  Rwanda  indicated that the distributions will  be coordinated through procured 
contractors. The contractors are hired based on the  Government of Rwanda /MOE Rwanda  
procurement policies , which are aligned with GCF policies and include due diligence in the 
hiring and contracting process. As for direct co mmunity contracting, the intended beneficiaries 
are screened and certified by local authorities in the area of project interventions, which 
mitigates the risk of prohibited practices.


---
*Page 158*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 158 
 
 
68. MOE Rwanda confirmed that  for report ing and remedy ing any risks that may occur, 
MOE Rwanda will maintain a project -level GRM t hrough which anyone can report the 
occurrence of prohibited activities. All complaints will be investigated accordingly. Any 
complaints believed to contribute to prohibited activities  will be referred to the appropriate 
authorities in Rwanda.  
69. MOE Rwanda indicated that all staff will be made aware of the prohibited activities, and 
all subcontractors/counterparties will be screened for current and past engagement in such  
activities and made aware of their obligations to alert the PMU and/or submit grievances 
related to such activities occurring as part of the project.  
70. Compliance risk rating : The Secretariat has conducted a review of the project in 
accordance with relevant GCF Board -appro ved policies and does not find any material issue or 
deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding 
proposal, the Secretariat has determined a compliance risk rating of ‘ Medium ’ and has no 
objection to this pro posal proceeding.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk )   
71. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
72. It is recommended that the B oard consider the above factors in its decision.   
Summary risk assessment  
Overall programme  Low  
Accredited entity/executing entity capability  Low  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
73. MOE Rwanda is the AE for the project and will provide oversight to the project 
consisting of , inter alia : (a) entering into a subsidiary agreement with the EE (RF A); (b) 
managing and disbursing GCF funds to the EE; (c) reviewing financial expenditures and 
progress reports; (d) overseeing project implementation following the project document and 
annual work plans and budgets, agreements with co -financiers and each EE’s  rules and 
procedures; and (e) providing technical guidance to ensure that the appropriate technical 
quality is applied to all project activities.  
74. RFA will serve as the EE for the project through a subsidiary agreement signed with  
MOE Rwanda . RFA will execute the tasks within the overall project management structure  as 
follows : (a) implementing  day-to-day activities as per the project work plan and budget, 
including the environmental and social management plan; (b) undertaking procurement 
activities as per the signed agreements; and (c) managing contracts of suppliers and service 
providers. The EE will enter into a memorandum of understanding  (MOU)  with different 
partner agencies, including WCS and the Catholic Or ganisation for Relief and Development,  
which will provide technical assistance services to implement the project activities. Procured 
parties will be contracted following  MOE Rwanda rules and regulations for procuring goods and 
services. The PMU will manag e, monitor and report on the day -to-day implementation  progress  
of the EE.


---
*Page 159*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 159 
 
 
75. As one of the project implementation partners, WCS will provide technical assistance to 
RFA through an MOU signed with RFA. The MOU will detail all the activities that WCS will 
dire ctly support during this project ’s implementation. The technical assistance  services will 
include advising RFA/SPIU, procuring and supervising international experts and consultants, 
and procuring materials to support the execution activities. Relevant tech nical experts from 
WCS will be embedded within RFA to advise SPIU on day -to-day project management. At the 
same time, the Catholic Organisation for Relief and Development will provide technical 
assistance to RFA through an MOU.  
76. The co-financiers (RDB, RFA, RWB and  MOE Rwanda ) will execute and manage the 
implementation of their activities.  
77. MOE Rwanda  shall ascertain that the EE has efficient internal control systems in place, 
review financial reports and proceed with funds disbursemen ts. It will also periodically inspect 
the project for compliance and coordinate audit exercises for the EE. RFA will enter into 
agreements with MOE Rwanda  that outline general modalities of the management of funds in 
line with GCF grant requirements and RF A’s policies.  
78. GCF funds will be transferred to an RFA -designated bank account. Based on agreed 
annual work plans and budgets, the funds will be disbursed to the EE, and its reporting will be 
quarterly. The project ’s financial processes will rely on the EE ’s charts of accounts, internal 
control systems, disbursement plans, budgeting, expenditure management and accounting, 
reporting, and assets management as assessed by MOE Rwanda . 
79. The project will be audited annually and commissioned by MOE Rwanda  to produce  
certified financial statements and reports to ascertain that GCF funds are well managed. The 
project will maintain a regularly updated record of all assets and documents that will be 
retained for at least five years after the end of the project.  
4.5 Results m onitoring and reporting.  
80. The Secretariat has provided various rounds of feedback on results monitoring and 
reporting, which have been generally addressed by the AE. This includes  a review of beneficiary 
numbers, revisions to the logical framework, mapping of project outcomes to GCF result s areas , 
and timelines and resourcing for the mid -term and final evaluations . However, there are some 
issues related to beneficiary calculation that are pending as of the final review . These should be 
appropriately addressed a s the project is mobili zed as follows :  
(a) It w ould  be helpful to provide gender disaggregation for beneficiary numbers wherever 
possible. This is currently done in section E (log ical frame work ), but not in section A6 
and annex 23;  
(b) In section E  (log ical frame work ), the AE should  also provide a brief description of how 
beneficiary numbers against GCF result s areas have been calculated.  These detail s are 
currently missing, and w hile we have mid -term and final targets for various indicat ors 
related to beneficiary count, we do not  have information to understand how these have 
been calculated, and how  potential double -counting will be avoided. If space is limited  in 
section E, the AE may consider including this information in a clearly marked section in 
annex 23 related to beneficiary count.


---
*Page 160*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 160 
 
 
4.6 Legal assessment  
81. The original Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 
23 June 2016, and it became eff ective on 1 August 2017, which agreement was amended and 
restated pursuant to the first amendment and restatement dated as of May 14, 2019, which 
became effective on even date. The Accredited Entity’s first term of accreditation lapsed on 31 
July 2022. The  Accredited Entity was reaccredited by the Board pursuant to Decision B.34/17. 
The second amendment and restatement agreement amending and restating the accreditation 
master agreement was signed on 22 November 2022, and the second amended and restated 
accr editation master agreement (the “AMA”) became effective on 26 January 2023.  
82. The Accredited Entity has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
83. The proposed  project will be implemented in the Republic of Rwanda. The GCF has 
signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with the Government of the Republic 
of Rwanda. It was signed on 8 November 2022 and became effective on 25 May 2023.   
4.7 List of pro posed conditions (including legal)  
84. To address matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by the 
Board is made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 161*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 161 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP217  
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda  
Country:  Rwanda  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1. This funding proposal for a small -sized project in environmental and social safeguards  
(ESS)  category B is submitted by the Government of Rwanda  as a cross -cutting project 
contributing to both adaptation ( 92 per cent) and mitigation ( 8 per cent) results areas. The 
Ministry of Environment  of Rwanda (MOE Rwanda)  (a GCF d irect access entity)  is the 
accredited entity  (AE)  for the proposed project, and the executing entit y (EE) is the Rwanda 
Forestry Agency , with several  implementing partners , including other government agencies and 
the Wildlife  Conservation  Society (WCS ) in Rwanda.  The total co st of the funding proposal is 
USD 50 million,  of which USD 39 million is GCF finance and USD 1 1 million is co -finance from 
the Government of Rwanda . 
2. The project’s goal is to apply a landscape approach to reduce the exposure of 
populations in Rwanda’s Congo  Nile Divide (CND) landscape to the impacts of unfavourable 
climatic trends and hazards intensified by climate change, including flood s, landslide s, soil 
erosion and wildfires.  This is to be achieved  through integrated land -use planning and 
management that allows for protecting, restoring and managing a matrix of interconnected 
ecosystems , including pristine forest in protected area nodes, important landscape linkages, 
pockets of forest in stepping  stones , and agro -ecosystems in farmlands . Interventions in various 
spatially defined target areas include  forest protection and fire management , assisted natural 
regeneration,  afforestation of steep slopes , and support to silvopastoralism and agroforestry 
and its value chains.  
3. The project has three planned outcomes  (see the table below ), with outputs under each 
outcome as well as the parties responsible for executing them ( see t able 5 in the funding 
proposal ). 
Project outcomes and outputs  Executing entity 
per output  Technical 
implementation 
partners  
Outcome 1 : Landscape planning, policies and management are effective and coordinated across 
sectors and scales to address climate risks and adaptation benefits  
Output 1.1. Landscape -wide land -use plan developed 
for climate -resilient livelihoods and forest 
ecosystems, integrating district development 
strategies  Rwanda Forest 
Agency (RFA)  
  Wildlife Conservation 
Society (WCS) and 
National Land Authority 
(NLA)  
Output 1.2. Local and national institutional capacities 
strengthened to integrate biodiversity and climate 
risks into land use planning and management  RFA  WCS and NLA


---
*Page 162*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 162 
 
 
Outcome 2 : Natural forests are protected, connected, and more resilient to climate impacts and risks  
Output 2.1. Protected areas management 
effectiveness improved to address climate risks and 
adaptation  RFA  WCS and Rwanda 
Development Board  
Output 2.2. Natural forest cover restored; biodiversity 
connections established  RFA  WCS  
Outcome 3:  Vulnerable rural livelihoods are more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable 
and nature -positive  
Output 3.1. Farming methods enhance productivity, 
reduce erosion and flooding risks, contribute to 
ecosystem services, and support connectivity  RFA  Rwanda Water Board  
Output 3.2. Rural livelihoods generate alternative 
incomes and reduce pressure on forests  RFA  Cordaid  
Output 3.3. Financial services and private sector 
investment engagement  RFA  Cordaid  
Monitoring and evaluation  Project Management Unit, h osted by the 
Ministry of Environment  of Rwanda  
1.1 Impact potential                                          Scale:  N/A  
4. The cross -cutting impact potential of the proposed project  and the relative weighting of 
the intended results can be s een in the attribution of GCF and co -financiers ’ contributions to the 
relevan t GCF result s areas as follows:  
GCF result s area GCF 
contribution  Co-financiers ’ 
contribution  
Mitigation Result Area 4 (MR4)  Mitigation through forestry and 
land use  8% 0% 
Adaptation Results Area 1 (AR1)  Enhanced resilience of most 
vulnerable people and communities  13%  49%  
Adaptation Results Area 2 (AR2)  Enhanced resilience of health and 
well -being, and food and water security  2% 0% 
Adaptation Results Area  4 (AR4)  Enhanced resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem services  77%  51%  
5. The emphasis on utilizing the GCF investment to enhance the resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services is reflected in the project’s focus on new mechanisms of land -use 
planning and management that consider the CND as a landscape  consisting of an 
inte rdependent mosaic of forests and farms, the management of each determining the health of 
the whole. The independent Technical Advisory Panel  (iTAP ) believes that such an approach 
(i.e. targe ting project interventions on the ground based on a systematic spa tial planning 
process that emphasizes “ecological infrastructure” functioning as well as biodiversity ) 
represents best practice for enhancing ecosystem resilience . Such an approach  ensur es that 
interventions are at sufficient scale to achieve a transformat ive effect : preserving landscape -
wide ecosystem processes and functions that help buffer impacts of climate change.  Maximizing 
connectivity is also important for maintaining the long -term health  and stability of forests as 
carbon sinks.  
6. Adaptation impact potentia l: The funding proposal  outlines the major climate change -
related hazards characterizing the landscape , in particular more frequent intense rainfall events 
increasing floods and landslides, and worsening soil erosion that is alrea dy widespread as a 
result of direct anthropogenic  pressures.  The project’s main a daptation benefits will accrue to


---
*Page 163*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 163 
 
 
vulnerable communities primarily engaged in agriculture on the CND’s steep terrain, achieved 
through improved soil management, forestry and a groforestry to reduce catastrophic events 
affecting production systems , lives and livelihoods . This will be achieved through integrated 
landscape planning and management to enhance tree cover in crop and grazing lands and 
improve the connectivity of natura l ecosystems and the key services they provide, including 
regulation of runoff and flows from increasingly extreme rainfall events; and  through  reduction 
of localized and downstream flooding, erosion and landslide incidence and risk.  
7. Indicators for the ma in adaptation results are as follows:  
(a) 135,104  hectares (ha) of land to be brought under climate -resilient management  
through targeted interventions for protection, afforestation and agroforestry (AR4): 
(i) Including  121,758 ha of core protected areas , linkages and stepping stones that 
will be brought under climate -risk informed planning and fire management  to 
maintain landscape -scale ecosystem services ; and 
(ii) Including  13,346 h a for focused interventions  (i.e. degraded forest in parks to be  
restored (5, 000 ha), riparian lands restored (1,500 ha), pastures brought under 
silvopastoralism (1,000 ha), steep slopes afforested (2,500 ha), and farmland 
with new agroforestry practices (3,346 ha) ); 
(b) 1,254,242  people , resident in the landscape where targeted  interv entions will be carried 
out, will benefit  directly  from reduced exposure to climate -intensified disasters  and/or 
enhanced adaptive capacity  (AR 1 and 2) ; and  
(c) 9,260,745 people, approximately  two thirds  of the country’s population, will benefit  
indirectly  from  a wide -scale education and outreach programme , including radio 
programming , on climate change and gender issues, climate risks, value of forests and 
forest ecosystems, and climate change adaptation op tions.  
8. Mitigation impact:  The project seeks to deliver greenhouse gas  (GHG)  emission 
reduction s and removal benefits equivalent to 224,871  tonnes  of carbon dioxide  equivalent (t  
CO 2 eq) during the five-year project implementation period, reaching a total of 1,084,291 t CO2  
eq after 20  years. The estimation of reductions and removals is made based on the difference 
between the projected emissions with and without the project interventions  – through  
impro ved cookstove s, and through on-the-ground interventions across a total of 13,346  ha of 
land . The land -based  interventions will have cross -cutting benefits , since they contribute to core 
indictor 4 on hectares of land to be brought under climate -resilient m anagement, as well as 
brin ging mitigation benefits . 
9. The following activities will contribute to achiev ing this mitigation potential: (i) assisted 
natural regeneration (ANR) in 4,500 ha of Nyungwe National Park through invasive fern 
removal; (ii) restoration of 500  ha of degraded forest through ANR in Gishwati -Mukura  National 
Park ; (iii)  afforestation on 2,500 ha of public and private land with a slope >55  per cent; (iv) 
planting 1,500 ha of  protective forest  in riparian zones (public and private) ; (v) implementing 
erosion control and  agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of  smallholder farm land ; (vi) 
implementing silvopastoral ism on 1,000 ha in the  Gishwati  area ; and (vii) adoption of improved 
cookstoves  by 8,500 households . Indicators for achievement  of these targets are included in the 
project log ical frame work  in section E.3 of the funding proposal .  
10. The methodology for calculating GHG emission reduction s and carbon sinks mirrors two 
approved consolidated methodologies for the A/R CDM, AR -ACM0003 and AR -AMS0007. This is 
considered  a good practice because the applicability conditions of the methodologies are 
appropriate to the project conditions.  The method ology is clear and conservative , considers the 
relevant guidance from the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , and was used in an 
appropriate, clear and transparent manner when estimating the mitigation potential for each 
activity.


---
*Page 164*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 164 
 
 
11. With regard to mon itoring and reporting mitigation benefits, annex 22 proposes a clear 
and straightforward approach, but does not clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various 
actors that will be involved in the process over time , nor the frequency of the steps. 
Furthermore, the activities as presented in annex 22 are not reflected in annex 11 (monitoring 
and evaluation plan_rev August 2023).  According to its updated  nationally determined 
contribution  (NDC ) (2020, p age 6)1 Rwanda has already developed a  national  mea surement, 
reporting and verification ( MRV ) framework. At the present stage it is not clear how this project 
will be aligned with the existing arrangements for the national MRV system , and/or how  it will 
support or contribute to enhancing the functioning of  this system across the country.  
12. The iTAP assesses the impact potential of the  project as  high . 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                                               Scale: N/A  
13. The proposed project is designed to bring about a paradigm shift away from the current 
situation of fragmented, unplanned decisions and a collection  of isolated sector -by-sector 
projects that fail to take into account evolving climate risk and allow contin ued degradation . 
Instead , a new approach of integrated land use planning and management  is promoted  that 
preserves ecological connectivity across the landscape and helps maximize valuable ecosystem 
services for buffering the impacts of climate change. The new approach is based on 
international best practice  and considers the  CND  as a landscape consisting of an 
interdependent mosaic of production and protected lands , the health of which is completely 
interconnected.  
14. The idea behind the project is that a new  holistic, climate -smart, evidence -based 
approach to planning and development will enable systematic, ecosystem -based, multi -sector 
analysis of land -use tradeoffs. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination across both 
geographic and sectoral boundar ies, while mainstreaming climate risks in management 
planning , represents a fundamental paradigm shift for land -use planning and management in 
Rwan da. Success in putting such a system into place could represent a crucial first step in 
reversing the previou s negative feedback loop of ecosystem degradation to  achieve  a more 
positive, climate -resilient system.  
15. Utilizing integrated landscape  management  and ecosystem -based adaptation 
approaches in addressing climate change impacts in Rwanda offers a myriad of op portunities 
for scaling up and replication to similar ecological zones across the country. The project also has 
the potential to contribut e to the regulatory frameworks and policies for driving climate 
investments in the forest and renewable energy sectors . The project will finance the 
development of an integrated  land-use plan, which will be adopted by all 10 CND districts as a 
framework for seeking synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity 
protection, reconciling land -use conflicts that arise, and guiding development decisions and 
climate  change adaptatio n. It will also update the National Land Use Master Plan, en suring it 
incorporates climate resilienc e and local plans.  
16. Systematic conservation planning : Although biodiversi ty conservation is considered a 
co-benefit of the project rather than a core focus, t he project makes innovative use of systematic 
conservation planning to identify spatial areas in the landscape that are targeted for restoration, 
afforestation and agrofor estry activities. This includes work to restore national parks as the 
core of an interconnected system , with landscape linkages and stepping stone s identified for 
interventions to promote connectivity between remaining areas of natural habitat. Optimizing 
this kind of mosaic of land uses with management actions for protection, restoration and 
sustainable use helps to maximi ze the functionality of landscape -wide ecosystem services such 
 
1 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -06/Rwanda_Updated_NDC_May_2020.pdf .


---
*Page 165*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 165 
 
 
as nutrient cycling, soil fertility, slope stability, water infiltration,  flood management and 
precipitation . 
17. Innovative f inancial mechanisms:  The project also includes an output to e stablish 
long -term plans for CND financial sustainabilit y post -GCF  by employing a technical advisor to 
support the establishment of  innovative mec hanisms such as those identified in the Biodiversity 
Finance Plan and also to refine existing financing mechanisms (for example, integrating climate 
resilience principles into the existing successful and growing Tourism Revenue Sharing 
Program ). Support wi ll be provided t o beneficiaries of the project in applying to the existing 
Community Adaptation Facility within  the Rwanda Green Fund  (FONERWA ). The Government 
of Rwanda, represented by the Rwanda Development Board, is also in advanced stages of 
negotiation with the World Bank for establishing a wildlife bond, potentially a gorilla  
conservation  bond, modelled on the successfully established rhino conservation bond in South 
Africa , with interes t shown by impact investors.  
18. Overall, based on the above, the paradigm shift potential of the project is assessed as  
medium to high. 
1.3 Sustainable development potential                                    Scale: N/A  
19. The proposed project is aligned with the Uni ted Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, including significant contributions towards Rwanda’s efforts to mee t Sustainable 
Development Goal  (SDG ) 5 (Gender Equality ), SDG 13 (Climate Action ) and SDG 15 (Life on 
Land ), and will contribute to the achievement of SDG 1  (No Poverty ), SDG 2 (Zero Hunger ), SDG 
3 (Good Health and Well -being ) and SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities ). 
20. Environmental co -benefits:  Key environmental co -benefits (beyond the core benefits 
related to ecosystem -based ad aptation) include restoration of soil fertility  through 
silvopastoralism and regenerative mixed-use agroforestry , and the enhancement of biodiversity 
through planting 50  per cent  native tree species . Promotion of improved cookstoves using 
significantly les s fuel will contribute to relieving pressure on the remaining indigenous forest.  
21. The iTAP was surprised to see the relatively low target of 50  per cent  (30 per cent  on 
private land and 70  per cent  on public land) in the  use of indigenous tree species in 
afforestation, reforestation and agroforestry interventions.  The AE explained that exotic species 
are more suitable for afforestation of steep slopes, where they can easily establish themselves , 
“but this does not mean tha t exclusively exotic species will be used on such sites ; there will be a 
mixture of both wherever applicable . In addition, while establishing blocks in the Participatory 
Forest Management Units , indigenous species will be used to separate one block from an other. 
Indigenous species will be given due consideration in agroforestry to create positive 
interactions in the farm as well as promoting native species, avoiding monoculture and 
benefiting from their positive impacts in terms of resilience.”  
22. It is under stood that  there is often a preference for fast -growing, easily available and 
usually cheaper species like eucalyptus, pine and alnus for urgent needs such as slope 
stabiliza tion and fuelwood, and also that a balance needs to be struck between promoting 
indigenous trees species and being responsive to farmers’ wishes . At the same time, the project 
could potentially make more o f the opportunity to rekindle traditional knowledge about 
indigenous species and their uses, and to build the nursery supply chain fo r quality native 
planting material  given the vast superiority of indigenous  tree species in terms of their multiple 
benefits, non -invasiveness,  positive  impact on soil and water quality, and resistance to pests and 
diseases that may worsen with a warming c limate.  
23. Social and health co -benefits:  In enabling the transition to more climate -resilient and 
productive livelihood models, the project aims to increase household incomes and the 
nutritional status of families. It is expected that significant social capi tal will be created through


---
*Page 166*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 166 
 
 
beneficiaries’ participation in co -designing and co -managing a range of adaptation strategies, 
with an emphasis on women ’s participation . Social cohesiveness will also be enhanced through  
the strengthening of joint saving and lending systems. Social benefits will also accrue to indirect 
beneficiaries, for example those listening to radio programming that leads to increased 
awareness of climate change, or of opportunities for climate -adaptive a groforestry and agri -
processing.   
24. Economic co -benefits:  Inequality and poverty will be addressed through increased 
financial inclusion and improved economic opportunities, especially for women, youth and 
historically marginalized groups. Forest and landsc ape restoration in the CND will bring 
economic benefits, since  soil erosion control measures, protective forests on public lands , and 
agroforestry on private lands will  all increase agricultural productivity and associated income. 
The project will create d irect and indirect employment opportunities, benefiting an anticipated  
24,212 households and stimulating the local economy. Private capital will be leveraged to invest 
in value chains , including those for improved cookstoves , irrigation pumps and beehives,  as well 
as honey , woodlots, macadamia, avocado  and vegetable  production and processing .   
25. Gender benefits:  The project aims to achieve positive outcomes around access to 
resources, improved livelihoods, and income generation opportunit ies and capacit ies for 
women. With support from a dedicated gender specialist , the project will engage women in 
project planning, investment and decision -making.  It is envisaged that w omen  will respond to 
incentives that address their families’ basic needs, s uch as better health and nutrition, link ed to 
agriculture and food security improvements. The project will also get support from  non-
governmental organization s that engage men in programming and discussions to increase their 
participation in household and parental responsibilities and enhance their  awareness of the 
importance of women’s fair access to and control of resources, including income. Women will 
benefi t from training and educational activities, leadership, entrepreneurship and decision -
making , as shown in annex 8  (Gender Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion 
Action Plan ). 
26. The iTAP assesses sustainable development potential a s high . 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                                 Scale:  N/A  
27. Western Rwanda and its  CND  region are highly vulnerable to climate change, and are 
expected to experience a continuing upward trend in average annual temperatures, total annua l 
rainfall (with  a longer dry season), and more intense rainfall events and storms  and increasing 
risk of flash floods, landslide, soil erosion and wildfires. Despite Rwanda’s solid economic 
progress since 2000, poverty remains widespread and pervasive. Ov erall, 38.2  per cent  of the 
country’s population lives in poverty and 16  per cent  in extreme poverty. Women are more 
affected by poverty than men, with 47  per cent  of female -headed households living in poverty 
compared with 44.9  per cent  of all households.  
28. The CND landscape supports nearly one  third of Rwanda’s population on barely one  fifth 
of its land base. Average population density is 736 people/ square kilometr e (km2), with some 
districts now exceeding 1,000 people/km². The highest rates of rural poverty in the country are 
reported from the CND, including its most vulnerable subsistence farmers. While high rainfall 
has historically permitted generally sufficient  food production, the region’s rugged topography 
requires farming on extremely steep slopes. With more frequent extreme rainfall events in 
recent years, this agricultural landscape is recognized as the region of Rwanda most vulnerable 
to flash floods and l andslides. Between 2013 –2016 , heavy rains generated landslides that killed 
at least 174 people and destroyed the homes of more than 5,000. Landslides wipe out  highly 
productive raised -bed cultivation systems in the CND’s valleys  and bottomlands, many hecta res 
of crops are washed away , and a n estimated 1.5 million ton nes of fertile soil are lost annually to 
erosion.


---
*Page 167*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 167 
 
 
29. The funding proposal  reports that d uring stakeholder consultations, communities 
indicated several socioeconomic changes stemming from changing c limate conditions. Notably, 
the longer dry season and unpredictable rains have reduced agricultural yield significantly, 
leading to more widespread malnutrition and extreme poverty, and farmers can barely meet 
their own families’ needs. In particular, wome n, youth, and historically marginalized people are 
feeling the impacts. As arable land is increasingly constrained, youth and historically 
marginalized people have few opportunities and are more focused on survival and short -term 
gains. This becomes  a nega tive feedback loop, in which poverty leads to unsustainable practices 
such as overharvesting from forests  and cultivation on extremely steep slopes, with degraded 
ecosystems then less able to provide services, worsening the cycle of poverty.  
30. As a result, t he Government of Rwanda has invested significantly in developing an 
enabling policy and institutional framework for a more climate -resilient development pathway. 
Yet, while adaptation is a top priority,  as a least developed country, Rwanda lacks sufficient  
public financial resources to implement its climate change and resilient green development 
objectives.  Currently there are no alternative funding options at the scale needed to secure 
Rwanda’s priority forests to reduce the vulnerability of rural communit ies to climate risks . 
Rwanda’s debt -to-gross domestic product  ratio stands at 64  per cent , making further loans 
difficult, and the Government of Rwanda  seeks maximum concessionality  from the GCF for the 
urgent adaptation actions proposed under the project.  
31. The Government of Rwanda  recogni zes that a piecemeal approach to decision -making 
has exacerbated competition over scarce land resources  and reduced the adaptive capacity of 
both e cosystems and rural populations . Additionally, district government staff and community 
members have limited technical understanding of the complex interactions between forest 
structure and functions, climate change , and the provision of ecosystem services , and limited  
technical capacity for complex forest monitoring.  In the face of worsening climate change 
impacts, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive approach that crosses siloes of 
government and achieves integrated land use planning and management informed by the 
evolving climate and socioeconomic conditions. The proposed interventions are well targeted to 
address the identified barriers and the great needs of these vulnerable communities .  
32. Overall, based on the above, the needs of the recipients are rated as high . 
1.5 Country ownership                                                 Scale: N/A            
33. Policy and strategy alignment:  The project is closely aligned with Rwanda’s national 
adaptation plan and three of its adaptation priorities: (i) promotion of non -agricultural income 
generating activities ; (ii) introduction of species resistant to environmental conditions ; and (iii) 
development of alternative sources of energy to firewood. It contributes to several priorities 
identified in the 2020 NDC: promotion of afforestation/reforestation; improvement of forest 
management; an integrated approach to planning and monitoring for sustainable land 
management; and development of a harmonized and integrated spatial data management 
system for sustainabl e land use management.  
34. The project will support the implementation of Rwanda’s Green Growth and Climate 
Resilient Strategy and the Rwanda National Strategy for Transformation (2017 –2022) and is 
aligned with the goals of the Rwanda National Forestry Policy  2018, the Forest Sector Strategic 
Plan 2017 –2022, the Strategic Plan for the Environment and Natural Resources Sector (2018 –
2024) and  the National Forest Management Plan 2017 –2026, thus reflecting the government’s 
intention to address climate change impac ts and mitigation targets by improving forest 
management. It is also aligned with the national Biomass Energy Strategy 2020 , which aims to 
ensure a more sustainable biomass supply and combustion technologies for homes and small 
enterprises.


---
*Page 168*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 168 
 
 
35. GCF country pr ogramme:  According to the  funding proposal  (section D.5), the project 
aligns with the forthcoming GCF country programme, which “prioritizes forest management 
through restoration and protection of natural forests, afforestation and agroforestry, as well as 
distribution of high -quality reforestation inputs and capacity development”. While this project 
proposal to GCF focuses on a different geographic area , the early and ongoing lessons from the 
experiences from existing GCF -funded projects “Strengthening Clim ate Resilience of Rural 
Communities in Northern Rwanda ”2 and “Transforming Eastern Province through adaptation”3 
will be applied during the implementation of this project in the  CND  landscape.  
36. Roles of key entities:  The proposed p roject was initiated by  MOE Rwanda  and 
supported by the  national designated authority , Rwanda Environment Management Authority, 
due to the high vulnerability to  climate change of the CND region of the country. MOE Rwanda  is 
well placed to oversee the project  as AE si nce the ministry is responsible for  (i) ensuring  the 
sustainable management of natural resources and for the development of policies, strategies  
and regulations ; and (ii) mobilizing resources for the development of the sector. M OE Rwanda  
managed USD 10 mil lion from the Adaptation Fund to implement the Reducing Vulnerability to 
Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based Adaptation Programme4 and 
has overseen a number of other climate projects , including: an early warning system project 
(fun ded by  the Least Developed Countries Fund  (LDCF )), the Landscape Approach to Forest 
Restoration and Conservation and the “Building resilience of communities living in degraded 
forests, savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem management approa ch” 
programme (funded by LDCF)5.  
37. Given the centrality of forest protection, restoration and management to the project, the  
RFA is well placed to carry out the role of EE. It is noted that this would be RFA’s first GCF EE 
role, since MOE Rwanda’s  other GCF project is executed by FONERWA. Strong support will be 
provided by a set of implementing partners – including the  WCS and government agencies such 
as RDB , which  are resp onsible for the national parks, RWB, Rwanda Environment Management 
Authority and the National Land Use Authority. The project activities overseen by each are 
shown in the table in the introduction  above and are aligned with their mandates , as well as  
secto ral plans and strategies.   
38. Consultation and engagement with civil society:  To better understand the interests 
of stakeholders and potential impacts of the proposed project, and as  a preparation for 
designing future engagement strategies, a comprehensive, gender -responsive, culturally 
sensitive, non -discriminatory, and inclusive stakeholder analysis was undertaken and is 
reflected in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan ( annex 7). In terms of future engagement, the 
funding proposal  indicates a number of specific  areas where consultations will be ongoing  to 
inform the rollout of activities , for example, consultations with communities  and civil society 
organizations representing men, women, youth, and historically marginalized people in local 
communities , as well a s district and national government agencies, on the following activities: 
Activity 1.1.1.  Synthesize and disseminate information on value of natural forests and ecosystem 
services; Activity 1.1.2. Develop climate -resilient landscape land -use plans; Activit y 2.2.3 
Promote silvopastoralism with indigenous trees around Gishwati;  Activity 3.1.1 Restore high 
slope areas (>55  per cent ) as protective forests;  and Activity 3.2.1 Develop  an agroforestry -
related value chain for market access.  
 
2Rwanda Ministry of Environment, 2018. FP073: Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern 
Rwanda. Green Climate Fund.  
3International Union for Conser vation of Nature, 2021. FP167: Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation. 
Green Climate Fund.  
4Adaptation Fund, 2014. Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based 
Adaptation. Link . 
5United Nations Environment Programme,  2016. Building resilience of communities living in degraded forests, 
savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem management approach.


---
*Page 169*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 169 
 
 
39. Country  ownership of the project is thus seen to be high. 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                          Scale:  N/A  
40. Of the project’s total  proposed budget of USD 50,000,000, 78  per cent  (USD 39,056,579 ) 
is proposed to be a GCF grant, and 22 per cent (USD 10,943,579 ) is made up of government co-
financing to the project. The Government of Rwanda is providing grant financing via RFA, RWB, 
and RDB to support activities in component 3. In addition to these c ontributions totalling USD 
10,831,307, the AE will cover office costs in the form of an in -kind contribution equivalent to 
USD 112,271 for the Project Management Unit , which will be hosted at  MOE Rwanda .  
41. Government co -finance:  In response to a question fr om iTAP about the nature of the 
co-finance and the extent to which it represent s new and additional funds, the AE explained that 
“[t]he co -financing commitments were provided based on the existing Government 
commitments provided every year in the project i ntervention area . These are earmarked funds 
that go into  forest management, community revenue sharing around the parks, monitoring 
resources for catchment restoration interventions and also different in -kind contributions. All 
the details are indicated in the Annex 4 of the budget and activities to be covered by co -
financing resources and Annex 13 indicates the commitment letters from the co -financier s.” It is 
iTAP’s understanding that these funds will not be spent in a business -as-usual manner, but will 
be newly directed towards climate risk management, through support to the project’s 
adaptation and mitigation interventions and efforts to develop officials’ capacity for climate 
risk-informed integrated land use planning and management.  
42. Role of financial institutions : Participating financial institutions (PFIs) will be 
important in two ways – firstly as providers of credit to farmer cooperatives , savings groups  
and small enterprises in the targeted value chains, and secondly as recipient s of trai ning – to 
enhance their knowledge of good agricultural practices, equip them to assess the impact of 
climate change on their clientele and loan portfolio, and help ensure equitable access to 
financial assets by women, youth and historically marginalized co mmunities .  
43. In response to a question from iTAP about whether any consultation has happened with 
the potential PFI s, which are not mentioned in the extensive stakeholder consultations reported 
in annex 7,  the AE stated that “At this stage [neither] Cordaid  nor RFA have notified the 
participating financial institutions. As per the project implementation plan, a 6 -month to 9 -
month inception phase will include in -depth analysis of existing financial institutions including 
microfinance institutions  and saving a nd credit cooperative societies . They will be scored 
against a list of criteria to understand their leadership, financial  position and financial products 
portfolio on a case -by-case basis.”6   
44. The iTAP  believes this engagement will be crucial to the success of Output 3.3 on 
“Financial services and private sector investment engagement ” in order to ensure sustainability 
of livelihood interventions, and urges the AE to start dialogue with potential partner s as soon as 
possible since they will have experience and advice that can guide the way this output is 
approached for maximum effectiveness.  
45. Level of concessionality : The project’s proposed 100  per cent  concessionality level is 
justified because the projec t is investing  in multiple ecosystem goods and services  that are 
public in nature , including  landscape mosaics , at the core of which are public assets, in the form 
of national parks and other protected areas , as well as landscape linkages and stepping stones 
to promote connectivity and flood management, and steep slopes t o be afforested t o prevent 
landslides and er osion. Benefits will accrue also to privately owned small -scale family farms , but 
these are on a very small  scale , and any profits made through processing and sale of 
 
6 MOE Rwanda responses to iTAP, 4 September 2023 .


---
*Page 170*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 170 
 
 
agroforestry products will need to be retained at household level to buffer  against shock s and 
stresses to increase and diversify incomes , and to improve families’ nutri tional status.  
46. Market transformation for cookstoves : The project aims to avoid challenges which 
the feasibility study s ays were experienced with previous improved cookstoves (I CS) 
program mes in the region , which “have historically been characterized by poorly designed 
subsidy/incentive programs which in some instances have provided 100% subsidies to end -
users” and have sometimes led to “unnecessary long -term dependence and poorl y managed 
exits, which consequently created long -lasting ICS market distortions”. Instead, the project  
adopts a market -oriented approach to strengthening the improved cookstove supply chain in 
the region, creating “strong linkages and business relationship s among the key actors, including 
cookstove producers/youth  small and medium -sized enterprises , farmers/savings groups, and  
microfinance institutions  to ensure sustainable access and finance of cookstoves”.  
47. In collaboration with technical and vocational education and training  institutes , youth 
producers , central and local authorities , and experts on biomass and micro -finance will refine 
and test, for each type of ICS/fuel to be promoted, the category/profile of households to be 
targeted and the related subsidy/microcredit schemes to be implemented to facilitate stove 
adoption with minimum concessional ity. Subsidized  cookstove s will be supplied to 4,000 poor 
households identified as being in a category of vulnerable groups , including yout h, women , 
landless and disabled people. The stoves will be locally manufactured, with a competitive 
process leading t o the award of a supply contract to local  women - and youth -owned 
cooperatives or start -ups. A partnership with t wo integrated polytechnic regional colleges will 
enable the design of prototype affordable Tier 2 ICS customized to local conditions and 
customer preferences .   
48. After year 4, the start -ups that will have graduated from the training and incubation 
programme (also conducted for the manufacture of beehives and irrigation pumps) will be fully 
empowered to maintain the supply of new equipment an d repair of old equipment , as well as to 
market their products to producer organizations and households. Access to microfinance 
institutions will be facilitated to allow emerging cookstove  business to grow. The members of 
village savings groups will be abl e to use income generated from the sale of fast -maturing crops 
(chili and French beans) , coupled with savings accumulated from their groups , to buy new or 
replacement stoves over time. A specialized small business development fund  will be 
established to su pport dissemination, accompanied by public awareness -raising of the benefits 
of ICS.  
49. Return on investment : The project cost per direct beneficiary of USD 31 ( USD 40 with 
co-finance ) and 20 -year economic rate of return of project interventions for agroforestry  (49 
per cent ), protective forests (72  per cent ), and silvopast oralism  (51 per cent ) all highlight the 
project’s  viability , as does t he economic  net present value  of USD 10,586  for the improved 
cookstoves  intervention . The mitigation cost is hi gh, at an estimated USD 43.84 per t CO 2 e, but 
comes with a multiplicity of adaptation benefits and socioeconomic and environmental co-
benefits . The cost of restoring natural forest for providing both adaptation and mitigation 
benefits is significantly gre ater than the cost of simply planting trees for mitigation , since a 
complex multi -strata, multi -trophic level natural ecosystem (like a tropical rainforest) provide s 
more varied and in many cases more robust ecosystem services than a simpler ecosystem (lik e a 
monocrop plantation) . Restoration of natural forest in Rwanda is essential for sustaining the 
critical ecosystem services on which vulnerable rural communities and the national economy 
depend , and are now even more essential for  buffer ing intensifying climate change impacts .  
50. Best practices : The project will use Rwanda’s best practice guidelines for tree nursery 
establishment , tree planting and tree management. For assisted natural regeneration, methods 
developed and proven through multi -year research in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura National 
Parks will be used . The project will use multiple contemporary methods for monitoring the  
success of project interventions , as well as  forest coverage and condition . Forest plantations will


---
*Page 171*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 171 
 
 
be mapped and monitored using the Rwandan Government ’s newly developed Forest 
Monitoring and Evaluation Software specifically developed for this purpose. T he project will 
develop a modern indigenous forest monitoring system, utilize the most high -resolution data  
sets currently available (<3  metres ) and take advantage of recent  remote -sensing advances , 
including cloud computing and machine learning. Although replication of effective and cost -
effective project techniques through knowledge -sharing with other countries in Africa is not 
planned in the project design , this could be a by -product of the project . 
51. The project’s overall efficiency and effectiveness is r ated as  medium  to high. 
II. Overall  remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
52. The iTAP believes this cross -cutting public sector project from the Government of 
Rwanda  is an important one that  will make significant strides towards effective management 
and sustainable financing of forest -and-farm  landscapes that play a vital  role in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation  in the  Congo Nile Divide . 
53. The iTAP recommend s to the AE that they undertake the  following actions to strengthen 
the measurement, reporting and verification  (MRV ) of the project’s core mitigation benefits:  
(a) Clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various  actors who  will be involved in the  
steps of the  MRV process over time , and t he frequency of the se steps ; 
(b) Capture the MRV activities as presented in annex 22 , also in  annex 11, such that they 
become part of the project’s overall monitoring and evaluation system ; and  
(c) Clarify how this project will be aligned with the existing arrangements for the national 
MRV system and/or will support or contribute to enhancing the functioning of this 
system across the country.


---
*Page 172*
---

 
 
       GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add. 08 
Page 172 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP21 7) 
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda  
Country/(ies):  Rwanda  
Project/programme size:  Small  
 
Impact potential  
The iTAP assessment of the impact potential of the project as high is well acknowledged and no 
further comments from the AE.  
Paradigm shift potential  
 iTAP assessment as Medium to High is acknowledged  by AE . The project is going  to utilize 
integrated landscape management and ecosystem -based adaptation approaches in addressing 
climate change impacts in Rwanda which offers opportunities for scaling up and replication to 
similar ecological zones across the country.  
Sustainable developm ent potential  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE . 
Needs of the recipient  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE  
Country ownership  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
iTAP assessment as Medium to High is acknowledged  by the AE . The AE has received t he 
confirmation letter regarding the co-financing from the Rwanda Development Board, Rwanda 
Water Resources Board and Rwanda Forestry Authority to support com plementary activities of th is 
project . The AE will  report on the co -financing in line with GCF Policy on co -financing  annually in 
APRs.  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
The AE acknowledges iTAP overall assessment and recommendation for the Board approval.


---
*Page 173*
---

BUILDING RESILIENCE OF VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES TO 
CLIMATE VARIABILITY IN RWANDA’S CONGO NILE DIVIDE 
THROUGH FOREST AND LANDSCAPE RESTORATION
ANNEX 8 - GENDER ANALYSIS/ASSESSMENT AND GENDER & 
SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  Gender Documentation for FP217


---
*Page 174*
---

2 
 Table of Contents  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  3 
INTRODUCTION  4 
1.1 Purpose of the Gender Analysis  4 
1.2 Meth odology  6 
SITUATION ANALYSIS  7 
1.3 Policy framework  7 
1.4 National and international legal framework for gender equality  9 
1.5 Institutional framework for implementing gender policies in Rwanda  11 
1.6 Poverty and labor force participation  12 
1.7 Beliefs, perceptions and cultural norms  15 
1.8 Gender roles, responsibilities and labor allocation  16 
1.9 Access to and control over capital and natural assets  17 
1.10 Women’s health and access to health services  20 
1.11 Women’s educational attainment and access to education services  21 
1.12 Patterns of power and decision -making  24 
1.13 Social service and support systems that contribute to gender empowerment, wellbeing, and security  25 
CONCLUSIONS - ONGOING CHALLENGES TO GENDER EQUITY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE GCF CND 
PROJECT  26 
1.14 Afforestation, agroforestry and tree tenure  26 
1.15 Improved cook stoves  27 
1.16 Honey production and marketing  28 
1.17 Coronavirus (COVID -19) implications  in advancing gender equity  29 
1.18 Promoting gender equity within the CND GCF project  29 
5 LITERATURE CITED  31 
 GENDER, YOUTH AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  34 
1.19 Methods  34 
1.20 Gender Issues  35 
1.21 Youth Analysis and Key Issues  37 
1.22 Internal program considerations  40 
1.23 Gender and Youth Action Plan  42


---
*Page 175*
---

3 
 ● EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Since 1994, Rwanda has made significant progress in empowering women and countering the numerous 
inequities and discrimination to which women were historically subjected. Today Rwanda has one of the 
most progressive, gender equitable policy frameworks of a ny country in Africa, and has established and 
funded the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion and the Gender Monitoring Office to oversee the 
implementation of these gender progressive policies.  
There is no single definition nor understanding of gender equity and women’s empowerment, and the 
meaning, and reality of these terms differs across communities and cultures and over time. That said, 
the Government of Rwanda holds the simple belief in the fundamental equality of all people. In a just 
society, men  and women of all ages, at a minimum, should have the same rights to self -determination, 
should be equally represented at all levels of political leadership, and should not be subject to 
discrimination or gender -based violence.  
Today rural women continue t o play a vital role in ensuring the wellbeing and security of their famil ies. 
But being the caretaker of the family is getting harder for women as farmland becomes increasingly 
scarce, as soil erosion and declining soil fertility lowers crop yields, and as  fuelwood, fodder and clean 
water take ever longer to find and carry home. Changes in rainfall timing and intensity, driven by climate 
change, will further exacerbate the challenges women will face to meet the needs of their famil ies. 
Women, youth and marginalized groups are the primary targeted beneficiaries of the Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) proposal “Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate Variability in Rwanda’s 
Congo Nile Divide Through Forest and Landscape Restoratio n.” Empowering women, youth and 
marginalized groups to play an equal role in land and resource use decisions will ensure that their 
interests and concerns are incorporated into plans designed to increase the wellbeing and security of 
families in the Congo Nile Divide (CND) by helping them to evolve their livelihood strategies and 
practices in ways that adapt to climate change.  
Investing in women’s lives and strengthening their capacity to overcome existing and looming challenges 
will do much to implement Rw anda’s progressive gender policies and help reduce the continuing 
inequities and discrimination that rural women, in particular, still face in their daily lives. It will also reduce 
poverty, the incidence of child failure to thrive, and food and income ins ecurity within families across the 
CND.  By ensuring a robust integration of women and youth in programming, the resilience of 
households in the Congo -Nile Divide will be strengthened.  
The following summarizes the primary desired outcomes for women and you th that will be generated by 
implementing the four components of the GCF program in the CND.  
 
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning  
● Outcome 1: Climate adaptation programs in LUPs reflect and address the priorities of women and 
youth  
● Component 2: Forest Landscape Management and Restoration  
● Outcome 2: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage in 
forest management and restoration  
● Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods  
● Outcome 3: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacit y to engage in green 
jobs


---
*Page 176*
---

4 
  
Component 4: Monitoring & Evaluation  
● Outcome 4: Disaggregated and specialized monitoring generates data showing whether and 
how women, youth and marginalized people are benefiting from adaptive management systems  
 
● INTRODUCTION  
Decades of project design, implementation and impact evaluation have demonstr ated conclusively that 
gender equality and women's empowerment are necessary conditions for effective investment and 
action to achieve environmental conservation, economic development and climate change resilience. 
This program seeks to ensure that women p lay equal roles in determining how to improve the wellbeing 
and security of their families and communities in ways that maintain the agro -ecological systems, 
biodiversity, and environmental services essential to the economies, nutrition and safety of their  families 
in the Congo -Nile Divide (CND) now and in the future.  
Our approach goes beyond trying merely to ensure that women are no longer ignored or marginalized 
but seeks to empower women so that they can decide how they can best engage in determining what 
support would best help them and their families to increase fo od and income security and resilience to 
climate shocks. To do this we need to complete a thorough gender analysis that identifies the differences 
in men and women’s lives, including those that lead to sociocultural and economic inequalities, and 
applies t his understanding to project development.  
This gender analysis attempts to answer four questions:  
 
1. What roles do men and women play in determining wellbeing objectives and the allocation of 
labor and capital, and how do these differ in male versus female headed households?  
2. What are the inequalities, discriminations and rights denials faced by men and wo men in 
different social, economic and political contexts? How do these issues intersect with other factors such 
as age, ethnicity, disability, wealth class, etc.?  
3. How might gender inequity impact on the effectiveness and sustainability of the project 
inves tments, actions and desired outcomes?  
4. What are the risks that project efforts to reduce gender inequality by empowering women, 
actually exacerbates inequities and further undermines the status, and agency of women?  
 
The purpose of this gender analysis is to ensure that the project proposal des ign and implementation 
will be informed by a thorough understanding of gender roles, power relations and dynamics. This 
assessment provides information to address the relevant environmental and climate change critical 
issues from a gender perspective. Info rmation generated during the analysis will ensure that sufficient 
and appropriate attention is paid to gender issues within all CND project interventions.  
Furthermore, these gender inclusion methods fall in line with the GCF’s gender mainstreaming 
guidelines, designed to involve women, youth, and the historically marginalized in all climate adaptation, 
mitigation, and resilience strategies.  The gender asses sment will provide the foundation for a credible 
and practical gender action plan to be implemented by the GCF CND project.  
 
1.1 Purpose of the Gender Analysis  
Increased greenhouse gas emissions linked to human activity continue to threaten the livelihoods,


---
*Page 177*
---

5 
 safety, and wellbeing of communities worldwide. However, climatic impacts will vary based on numerous 
factors, including geography, socioeconomic status, age, and gender. Women experience unequal 
access to resources, land, and power, reducing their ability t o adapt to climate change as effectively as 
men. Women face greater domestic responsibility to maintain the home and raise children, reducing 
their time for education and careers. As a result, women are more tied to their land and more vulnerable 
to climat ic impacts, yet also represent a potential group of leaders to spur mitigation and adaptation 
efforts.  
Given the potential of women as environmental pioneers, climate resiliency efforts require a thorough 
understanding of gender roles in the region. MoE recognize the inextricable link between sustainable 
development of communities through gender pla nning and the conservation of wild places. Effective 
conservation strategy requires working to balance gender inequity and providing opportunities for 
women in the conservation space. Furthermore, the high dependence of women on agriculture as 
livelihood i n Rwanda impacts both conservation and climate change mitigation efforts. Smart 
conservation programs therefore target agricultural interventions to aid marginalized groups such as 
women and youth. Such projects offer employment opportunities and reduce th e threat of illegal or 
paramilitary activities that threaten conservation outcomes.  
Shifting the imbalance of power and access for women is not only a conservation target, but a human 
rights issue. Sustainable development at all levels, local, national, an d international, requires the 
empowerment of women. When women receive higher education, they have more flexibility in careers 
and are more likely to escape poverty. These women strengthen economies through diversified incomes, 
marry and have babies later,  and have greater independence (NISR, 2018). However, climate change 
is likely to worsen financial stressors, particularly in rural communities, and increase the risk of gender 
based violence (GBV). As the frequency of extreme weather events increases, und erstanding how 
climate change impacts women is essential to combatting the human rights issue of gender equality.  
There are numerous international human rights agreements that provide a framework for gender equity. 
Rwanda has signed on to several of these commitments, including the Convention on Elimination of all 
Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW), the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, 
and the Convention on Slavery and Repression of Human Trafficking (IUCN, 2021). Participating in 
these commitments requires periodic progress reporting and helps hold countries accountable.  
In Rwanda, the government has made significant strides to address gender disparity following the 
Genocide. Thirty -four percent  of households became run by widows post -Genocide, demonstrating an 
obvious need for the Rwandan government to address the newfoun d elevated standing of women 
(Vanhees, 2014). Several laws help ensure that on paper, Rwandan women have increased access and 
protection under the law. Such policies include the 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law ( Law/nº 
22/99 of 12/11/1999) , the 2008 Girls’ Education Policy, and the 2010 National Gender Policy (IUCN, 
2021). However, these policies are new and compete with a long history of patriarchal norms in Rwandan 
society, particularly outside of urban areas. Practice of these policies r emains inconsistent, especially 
when women do not know their rights. Helping men and women understand gender policy is the first 
step to shifting cultural perceptions. But gender equality cannot be achieved by women alone, it also 
requires the active parti cipation of men to accept the deconstruction of traditional gender roles and be 
aware of the intersectionality of women and other groups. For example, considering how to  includ e 
youth and marginalized communities, espec ially the women in those groups,  in equality strategies will


---
*Page 178*
---

6 
 help lift up the most at -risk groups and reduce illegal activity.  
 
1.2 Methodology  
This Gender Assessment uses a range of primary (24 focus groups and 18 key informant interviews) 
and secondary (published reports, policies and academic literature) information sources to triangulate 
our understanding of the gender context for climate resi lience and the project design.  
Key Informant Interviews (KII) were conducted, using purposive sampling, with senior decision makers 
in governmental organizations at local, district and national levels. Results from these interviews were 
validated and enric hed by 24 Focus Groups (FG) with 58 men and 91 women of different age groups 
within 21 communities bordering Nyungwe, Gishwati and Volcanoes national parks. Originally a large 
number of consultations was envisioned, but because of COVID constraints, includ ing limitations on 
travel between districts, a smaller sample was completed. Additional stakeholder consultations will be 
conducted at national, district and project site level to inform the implementation of the project and to 
adapt activity implementatio n to the local context.  These consultations will include the review of 
Environmental and Social Frameworks included in Annex 6. A desk study of secondary data sources 
gleaned from government reports and published policies, grey literature produced by civi l society groups, 
and peer -reviewed academic papers has also fed into the report.  
The following desired outcomes helped guide our interviews, the desk study and the analysis of all 
information garnered:  
● Gender roles, needs, concerns and aspirations in the context of the proposed project are well 
understood and documented;  
● Root causes of  existing gender inequalities in the context of the proposed project are identified;  
● Proven options for redressing traditional power imbalances between men and women are 
identified;  
● Increased confidence that gender focused investments and actions proposed by the project will 
deliver the desired results.  
 
The information generated from the gender analysis and assessment will be considered in all stages of 
the CND project cycle: design, work planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. In each 
of these stages, managers will both be enabled and en couraged to view the project through a ‘gender 
lens’ so that project investments and actions:  
● Reconcile gender inequalities that pre -date and might emerge from the project;  
● Ensure the differential needs and concerns of women and men are addressed;  
● Ensure women and men have equal access to resources, services, and human capital 
development;  
● Ensure equal participation of women and men in management arrangements and as 
beneficiaries, partners and key stakeholders; and  
● Ensure women’s equal participation in decision -making processes.  
 
 
 
● SITUATION ANALYSIS


---
*Page 179*
---

7 
  
1.3 Policy framework  
The implementation of gender focused policy and legislation after 1994 has provided Rwanda with a 
strong legal framework for advancing women’s status and rights. The high prevalence of female and 
orphan headed households, as a result of the Genocide, requi red the Rwandan government to reassess 
the country’s property ownership laws. The 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law provided women 
with the right to own and inherit property, protecting widows and orphans from losing their land to male 
family membe rs (Vanhees, 2014). However, this law only applies to formally registered, monogamous 
unions, and the children of such unions, denying inheritance rights to women engaged in consensual 
cohabitation or polygamous relationships and illegitimate children. Ful l equal rights to land titles and use 
of land for women were established by Law N° 43/2013 of 16/06/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda 
(IUCN, 2021). Furthermore, while the 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law established equal 
inheritance rights for male a nd female children, it was not mandated that all children should inherit equal 
amounts of property until Law N° 27/2016 of 08/07/2016 Governing Matrimonial Regimes, Donations 
and Successions (IUCN, 2021).  
The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda of 2003, revised in 2015, outlawed all forms of 
discrimination, provided legal equality within recognized marriages, and set a minimum of 30% female 
participation in the Senate and other public governance (East Af rican Community, 2009). These high 
gender equality standards have helped propel Rwanda to both become the first country with a majority 
of female representation in Parliament and rank 7th out of 156 countries for the smallest gender gap 
(World Economic For um, 2021). The 2010 National Gender Policy functioned to further advance gender 
mainstreaming and equality, confirming the Rwandan government’s stance on gender as a cross - cutting 
issue that must be addressed for successful development (Republic of Rwanda , 2019).  
This foundational principle of gender equality as a driving factor for growth is highlighted in Rwanda 
Vision 2020 and Vision 2050, which have been used as frameworks for Rwanda’s development 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2000; Republic of Rwanda, 2020). W hile the primary objectives of these 
frameworks were to elevate Rwanda to a middle -income country by 2020 and a high -income country by 
2050, these goals could not be accomplished without addressing gender inequality. Strategies for 
mitigating gender inequa lity included updating existing laws to account for gender aspects, increasing 
women’s representation in decision -making positions, developing gender training programs, increasing 
women’s involvement in associations and cooperatives, and increasing women’s  access to resources, 
such as education (IUCN, 2021). The 2008 Girls’ Education Policy further aimed to increase girls’ access 
to education by promoting elimination of gender disparities through the development of a 12 year basic 
education system, a school  feeding program, separate girl’s bathrooms, and increased infrastructure 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2019). Separate girl’s bathrooms were introduced to limit gender - based violence 
(GBV) in schools, while the 2011 National Policy against Gender Based Violence a imed to progressively 
eliminate GBV through the development of a preventive, protective, supportive, and transformational 
environment (Republic of Rwanda, 2019).  
To provide oversight and coordination of the gender policies, the Rwandan government establish ed a 
number of gender machinery institutions. The Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF) 
implements national gender policy and ensures gender mainstreaming (IUCN, 2021). The main 
responsibilities of the Ministry are to implement and assess poli cies and provide resources for programs. 
The Gender Monitoring Office (GMO) implements gender audits in the public and private sector, and the


---
*Page 180*
---

8 
 National Women’s Council (NWC) advocates for women’s rights and recruits female participation in 
development prog rams (IUCN, 2021). The National Gender Cluster is a forum of representatives from 
private sector, government, and development groups that meets to discuss the prioritization and 
coordination of gender equity efforts (IUCN, 2021). The Rwanda Women Parliamen tarians oversee legal 
issues related to gender and help create new gender policy. Together, these groups work to ensure 
gender policy is not only implemented, but practiced in Rwanda.  
At the international level, Rwanda has ratified several humanitarian agreements in support of gender 
equality. The Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW) is an 
international bill of rights for women. All signatory countrie s are evaluated for national issues that may 
conflict with the agreement. In Rwanda, GBV and lower rates of education among women are areas for 
concern (UN Human Rights, 2017). Almost every country in Africa has committed to the African Charter 
on human an d peoples’ rights on the rights of women (ACHPR), which provides a continental framework 
for human rights. Most recently, Rwanda prioritized several of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals, namely Quality Education (4), Gender Equality (5) and Reduced Inequalities (10) 
(United Nations Rwanda, 2021). These international agreements provide Rwanda with a level of 
accountability to implement and practice national gender policies.  
While the Rwandan government has made significant progress to advance women’s rights under the 
law, a gap remains for women not engaged in formal marriages. Approximately 30% of women in 
Rwanda participate in consensual partnerships but are not legally married, or are in polygamous 
marriages; neither of which are recognized under the law (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). This creates 
conflicts regarding land inheritance for women in these situations. Polygamous marriages do take place 
in Rwanda, and the status of wives is fluid; inheritance (without official marriage) can change base d on 
seniority or who had children in the partnership (Vanhees, 2014). However, the 2008 Gender Based 
Violence Law does assert that if a person in a polygamous relationship wants to officially marry one of 
the partners, common belongings must be divided eq ually between the other spouses (Vanhees, 2014). 
This law does establish a precedent to address the rights of polygamous women, but remains 
insufficient. The Rwandan government sought to increase legal protections for women by hosting group 
weddings in rur al areas, but further legislation to recognize women’s rights as human rights, regardless 
of marital status, are necessary (IUCN, 2021).  
 
1.4 National and international legal framework for gender equality  
The Government of Rwanda, State of Gender Equity Report (2019) provides a comprehensive summary 
of constitutional provisions, and national laws that support the principle of gender equality  and women’s 
empowerment in Rwanda. Information for the legislative  and policy review was drawn primarily from this 
report. Additional information was gleaned from Rwanda Vision 2020, the National Policy against Gender 
Based Violence (2011) and the National Gender Policy (2010).  
Rwanda is internationally recognized as a w orld leader in promoting gender equality principles and 
women's empowerment. In the aftermath of the 1994 genocide, the Government undertook radical and 
far-reaching reforms to address the political, social, legal, and economic status of women. Legal refor ms 
to give women property rights, and to enable them to inherit property, including land, were especially 
important. The Constitution, adopted in 2003 and amended in 2015, proactively promotes gender 
equality. It outlaws any form of gender discrimination, and enshrines the principle of equality within


---
*Page 181*
---

9 
 marriage.  
With 53% of the Rwanda population being female, the Vision 2020 national government strategy 
emphasizes  that Gender equality will be one of the driving factors towards achieving rapid growth and 
sustainable development. Vision 2020 commits to continuously update and adapt laws on gender, 
strategies for an increased access to productive resources by women, r epresentation in decision - 
making positions and apply positive discrimination in favour of women.  
The National Gender Policy (NGP) of 2010 formulated to support government programs in various 
sectors that are directly aimed at addressing gender inequalities and women’s rights. T he NGP seeks 
to free Rwandan society from all forms of gender based discrim ination and create an environment where 
both men and women equally contribute to and benefit from the national development goals.  
The main goal of the NGP is to contribute to reducing gender inequalities in all sectors, as a key 
component of sustainable de velopment. THe NGP was informed by the Economic Development and 
Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS I) of 2007 It helped to shape theThe Agriculture Gender Strategy 
(2010), the EDPRS II (2013), the National Strategy for Transformation (2017 -2024), the Strate gic Plan 
for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA3), the National Information and Communication Technology 
in Rural Agriculture (ICTRAg) Strategy (2016 -2022), the National Policy against Gender - Based Violence 
(2011), the National Strategy on Climate Ch ange and Low -Carbon Development (2011) and several 
others.  
Constitutional provisions and gender  
The Constitution of Rwanda of 4 June 2003, as amended on December 24, 2015, affirms the 
fundamental rights of all citizens of Rwanda, consistent with the United Nations Declaration of Human 
Rights and other human rights instruments. According to Article 11  of the Constitution: “All Rwandans 
are born and remain free and equal in rights and duties. Discrimination of whatever kind based on, inter 
alia, ethnic origin, tribe, clan, color, sex, region, social origin, religion or faith, opinion, economic status, 
culture, language, social status, physical or mental disability or any other form of discrimination is 
prohibited and punishable by law.” Article 16 further enshrines the principle of gender equality, and the 
Government has committed to establishing equity and equality at all levels of society.  
Key provisions within the constitution that relate to gender equality include the following:  
● The preamble reaffirms Rwanda’s adherence to human rights conventions, including the UN 
Convention on the Elimination of All  Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW 1979) and 
declares Rwanda’s commitment to ensure equal rights between women and men;  
● Articles 11 and 16 outlaw any form of gender discrimination;  
● Articles 9, 76, and 82 mandate a minimum quota of 30% female representation in the Senate 
and other areas of public governance;  
● Article 37 prohibits discrimination in employment; and  
● Article 26 enshrines equality within monogamous marriage.  
 
Since 1994, the Government of Rwanda has enacted a series of gender progressive policies. These 
include the following three key laws:  
Gender equity in the right to inherit property  
Enacted in 1999 Law n°22/99 (supplements book one of the civil code regarding succession) and revised


---
*Page 182*
---

10 
 in 2016 (Law Nº27/2016 of 08/07/2016 Governing Matrimonial Regimes, Donations and Successions) 
provides that both male and female children have the rights  to inherit their parents property. This in terms 
of that law obviates customary practices where only sons inherit land and tangible assets.  
Gender equity in the right to own land  
Enacted in 2013, Law N° 43/2013 OF 16/06/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda, ensu res that all women 
have equal rights to land titles registered in their name. This law enables women to secure loans from 
financial institutions using their land as collateral, which in turn removes a significant barrier from women 
engaging in commercial e nterprise that require capital investment.  
Gender -based violence  
Enacted in 2008, Law n° 59/2008 of 10/09/2008 on Prevention and Punishment of Gender -Based 
Violence makes explicit that gender -based violence is a crime that is punishable under Rwanda law.  
At the international level, Rwanda is party to key international i nstruments addressing women’s and 
children's rights, including:  
● The Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).  
● The Convention on Slavery and Repression of Human Trafficking and its Additional Protocol 
repressing and punishing the sale and trafficking of children and women.  
● The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the Optional Protocol within the 
UNC RC on Child Trafficking, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography.  
● The African Charter on Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC)  
● The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the Protocol to the African Charter on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa.  
● ILO Convention 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor.  
 
The government has also ratified and/or implemented numerous international conventions and 
instruments. Those include:  
● The Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW),  
● The Beijing Platform for Action, the African Charter on human and people’s rights on the 
rights of women (ACHPR),  
● The International Convention on Social and Cultural Rights (ICCPR),  
● The United Nations Security Council Resolution on Peace and Security (UNSC R 1325 and 
1820) and  
● The UN declaration on human rights (UDHR).  
 
Lastly, the Government of Rwanda is committed to delivering on the 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) which includes gender equality. To fast track attainment of the SDGs, the Government of 
Rwanda argues that policies must be in place and effectively implemented to ensure that both women 
and men equally participate in and benefit from development investments and processes.  
 
1.5 Institutional framework for implementing gender policies in Rwanda  
Key efforts to implement the Government of Rwanda’s gender progressive policies are included in the 
remit of the Agriculture, Justice, Health, Education, and Local Government ministries and  their


---
*Page 183*
---

11 
 executing agencies.  
To help coordinate and oversee Rwanda’s gender equality and women’s empowerment efforts and 
ensure their compliance with national policies and regulations, Rwanda has established four key 
governmental and civil society entities. These include the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion 
(MIGEPROF), the Gender Monitoring Office (GMO), the National Women’s Council (NWC) and Rwanda 
Women Parliamentarians (RWPF/FFRP).  
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF)  
The Ministry responsible for Gender has the mandate of coordinating the implementation of the national 
gender policy and advocating on gender issues at local to national levels. MIGEPROF formulates 
regulations and its staff support gender mainstreaming acr oss the Government of Rwanda.  
The Gender Monitoring Office (GMO)  
The GMO documents and reports the extent to which a “gender lens” influences the investments and 
actions of public agencies and private organizations. The GMO undertakes monitoring and evalua tion 
to assess the implementation and social impact of public and private sector implementation of activities 
that seek to comply with Government gender policies.  
The National Women’s Council (NWC)  
The National Women’s Council is a local to national organization of women that advocates for women’s 
rights and the promotion of gender equality. Its members help mobilize women across the nation at all 
social, economic and political levels to ensure that their voices are heard and acted on in development 
and conservation programmes and activities. The National Women’s Council provides a formal structure 
to give voice to women and through which women can raise ideas and concerns to inform policy. Lack 
of financial resources remains a constraint to the active engagement of village women in this process.  
Rwanda Women Parliamentarians (RWPF/FFRP)  
The RWPF/FFRP works to build the capacity of women Parliamentarians to navigate the halls of 
government successfully , to represent women’s voices in the formulation of all policies not just those 
related to gender equality, and to hold the parliament and its members accountable for redressing 
historical inequities in the rights of women and the power that they wield in determining the future of all 
Rwandans.  
The National Gender Cluster  
This is a Government convened forum in which the Government of Rwanda, development partners, the 
Private Sector and Civil Society meet and discuss planning, coordination and prioritization of Gender 
Equality interventions.  
 
1.6 Poverty and labor force particip ation  
The poverty rate in Rwanda averages 39% (NISR, 2018). The Western (CND) region is the poorest in 
the nation with a poverty rate that averages 47.7% and ranges from 33.5% in Rusizi to 69.3% in 
Nyamasheke. Between 2013/14 and 2016/17 (NISR, 20 18) 50.5% of female headed households had 
been poor during that time period, compared to 48.8% of male headed households. Poverty was more 
prevalent in households with more people and where the household head was older, had little education,


---
*Page 184*
---

12 
 was a farmer, and was not economically active (NISR, 2018).  
Figure 1: Poverty rates by district (Source: EICV5 NISR, 2018)  
 
 
Figure 2: Poverty in d istricts within Congo Nile Divide (Source: EICV5 NISR, 2018)  
 
Labor force participation is lower in women (48.2%) than in men (65.6%) 16 years and older (NISR, 2020), 
and unemployment is higher in women (20.3%) than in men (15.9%). Young women and men are less likely 
to be in the labor force and more likely to be une mployed. In 2020, women were less likely to be employees 
and employers, and significantly more likely to be a contributing family worker than were men.


---
*Page 185*
---

13 
  
 
 
Table 1: Population 16 years old and over by labour force status, sex, age group, and urban/rural area 
(Source: NISR Labor force survey report 2020)  
 
 
Table 2: Employed population by sex, status in employment, and urban/rural area  
(Source: NISR Labor force survey report 2020)


---
*Page 186*
---

14 
 1.7 Beliefs, perceptions and cultural norms  
Pre-1994 Rwandan families and society in general were characterized by a patriarchal social structure 
that translated into male dominance and female subordination (Mukabera, 2016). In principle, in 
traditional Rwandan society, women’s responsibilities incl uded raising and educating children, 
welcoming visitors, managing the household, advising their husbands and maintaining traditions 
(Mukabera, 2016). In practice, though women were allowed substantial autonomy in their roles as child 
bearers and food produ cers men remained the ultimate arbiters of most family decisions.  
Traditionally, the Rwandan woman was a symbol of fertility and weakness, while the man was a symbol 
of strength and protection who makes all major decisions. Rwandan women were valued as chi ld bearers 
and more specifically the number of boys they gave birth to (Mukabera, 2016). Boys were taught to 
defend the interests of the family. It was their job to build or repair a house, to engage in activities related 
to cattle, cut firewood, go to bat tle, milk the cows, make decisions on farm management, and generate 
income for the family. Girls were raised to help their mothers with household chores, raise children, and 
most importantly to be modest, reserved, silent, obedient, and present a submissiv e attitude toward men 
(Mukabera, 2016).  
These traditions effectively excluded women from accumulating material wealth and participating in 
economic and political decision making. The Family Code of 1992 precluded women from owning land. 
If a male head of household died, property passed to male h eirs or to the man’s brothers (Uwineza, 
2009). In the case of divorce or the husband’s death, a woman had no claim over the family property if 
she had not borne children; she would be forced to return to her birth family. Likewise, ‘the Commercial 
Code‘, d ating back to the colonial period, required the written consent of the husband whenever a wife 
wanted to engage in commercial activities, take up employment outside the household, or obtain credit, 
or take legal action (Mukabera, 2016).  
Prior to 1994 men m onopolized the public and political arena. Despite this, there have been some 
powerful women throughout Rwandan history, particularly the Queen Mothers who held substantial 
influence as advisers to the King in pre -colonial Rwandan society (Uwineza, 2009). In the customary 
system of justice, known as gacaca , women were not allowed to participate directly in public 
deliberations. Rather, they were expected to play an indirect role lobbying their husbands (Mukabera, 
2016). Women could and did hold powerful pos itions as high priestesses within the religious realm, but 
this was undermined with colonization and the introduction of christianity.  
Post-1994, the Rwandan government has taken large strides in improving gender equality and women’s 
rights policies, howev er these policies have yet to reach their full potential in making substantial changes 
in women’s lives. This may be due to gaps in policy and a dearth of resources applied to ensure proper 
functioning of the legislation and gender machinery institutions. There is a lack of capacity -building 
strategies to develop gender machinery institution staff’s gender based knowledge and skills, and these 
staff include only a limited number of gender experts that rarely occupy decision -making positions (IUCN, 
2021). St rategies to mainstream gender in capacity -building strategies of these institutions are not 
comprehensive, which contributes to functional issues such as lack of trained staff, staff retention 
measures, proper orientation for new hires, and clear handover procedures. This suggests that although 
the Rwandan government has passed strong gender -based legislation, implementation is limited by lack 
of concrete guidelines and limited resources.  
While setbacks to establishing fully functional gender machinery institutions limit the effective execution


---
*Page 187*
---

15 
 of gender equality laws, the current cultural norms and belief systems in place in Rwandan society 
profoundly diminish the positive effects that the se laws have on women’s daily lives. Discrimination 
against women continues to exist in multiple aspects of Rwandan society including economic 
opportunities, agriculture, politics, and division of labor. The long history of patriarchal dominance in 
Rwanda has led to the development of robust cultural norms, many of which define men’s and women’s 
roles in society, limiting women from taking advantage of the full range of opportunities within their legal 
rights. Other societal factors, such as the high preval ence of GBV, further limit women’s ability to venture 
outside of their perceived household roles. In a recent study 52% of women surveyed in districts within 
the CND agreed that men were justified in beating them if they: burned the food, argued with him, went  
out without telling him, neglected  the children, or refused  to have sex with him (Government of Rwanda, 
2016). Today, male and female policymakers are quick to acknowledge that many aspects of traditional 
Rwandan culture repressed women and abrogated their human rights (Uwineza, 2009).  
 
1.8 Gender roles, responsibilities and labor allocation  
Rwandan cultural norms divide household duties into activities that fall under either men’s or women’s 
responsibilities. Men are considered the breadwinners of the fam ily, and engage in significantly more 
off-farm and wage employment than women (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). Men also hold domain over 
any valuable property or resources that the family owns or acquires, including cash crops, livestock, and 
valuable trees (IU CN, 2021; Kiyani et al., 2017). Men possess the majority of the decision -making power 
within the family, and are largely able to engage in any activities they desire.  
Women’s role in society is predominantly seen as being a mother and caretaker of both the family and 
the home. Primary duties include caring for children and elderly, cooking, growing food for the family, 
and providing labor on their husband’s land. While the law allows for women to engage in other 
endeavors outside of their traditional duties, several factors often limit them from diverting from the 
cultural norm. The dominant barrier for women is lack of time, as the majority of their time is spent 
fulfilling their household responsibilities (IUCN, 2021). Women spend anywhere from 1 to 8 hours each 
day at their cookstove, not including the time it takes to collect the food, water, and fuel wood required 
for cooking (Campbell et al., 2012). Additionally, wo men are responsible for growing and tending to 
subsistence crops for the family, and are often required to take on other informal jobs on their husband’s 
farms. These duties, on top of childcare, take a large toll on women’s available time, preventing many  
from engaging in wage labor, training, and other forms of off -farm activities (Republic of Rwanda, 2019).  
Innovations that reduce the time spent on these tasks, such as improved cookstoves and agricultural 
technologies, may increase women’s ability to eng age in activities outside of their traditional roles. 
Furthermore, male involvement in work traditionally delegated to women, such as childcare, would allow 
women to spend more time outside of the household. However, men are not expected, and are often 
unwilling to engage in what they perceive as women’s work (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). As a result, some 
Rwandan women believe that government promotion of women’s equality has increased their workload, 
as they are now expected to be bringing home money on top o f their childcare, domestic, and farming 
duties (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). Furthermore, any additional income earned by women outside of 
traditional female tasks may be taken by the husband or result in increased domestic violence due to a 
perceived emascul ation of the male role as breadwinner.  
Violence is an issue for both men and women (30% vs 37%, respectively), but women are more prone 
to being victims, particularly sexual and gender -based violence (SGBV) (6% for men vs 23% for women,


---
*Page 188*
---

16 
 DHS Survey, 2021). Although there are strong laws and policies against SGVB, trends of violence are 
not decreasing. Factors that impact higher rates of violence include lower education, earning money, 
household alcohol levels, and familial historical violence. In seeking sup port, both men and women turn 
to neighbors (32% vs 40%) and family (24% vs 33%), whilst some go to the local authorities (17%, 18%), 
police (17%, 11, ibid).  Women also seek out their partners’ relatives for support whilst men seek out 
friends. This demons trates the importance of social networks much more than government agents.  
 
 
Figure 3, Trends in spousal violence over time.  Source: Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey, 
2021  
 
1.9 Access to and control over capital and natural assets  
The 1994 genocide left behind unprecedented distortions in social relations and exacerbated the alrea dy 
existing gender imbalances and inequalities. This is illustrated by the fact that today, 25% of households 
in Rwanda are headed by women. Women performing non traditional roles such as decision making, 
managing financial resources, constructing houses a nd many others have characterized the post 
genocide roles of women period in Rwanda.” (Gender and Community Development Analysis in 
Rwanda, EAC 2009).  
Although collection and dissemination of credible data disaggregated by ethnicity is not available.1 There 
has been some recognition of some ethnic minorities as Historically Marginalized People (HMPO, see 
Annex 6 for further details). While there is limited data based on ethnicity of HMPO, which critically 
impacts the baseline for monitoring activities p otential impacts (positive and negative), we will refer to 
trends aligned with governmental policies supporting pro -poor programming, and rely on data from 
reports conducted by African Initiative for Mankind Progress Organization (AIMPO), Women’s 
Organizat ion for Promoting Unity (WOPU) and Minority Rights Group International (MRG) leading a 
project titled, ‘Strengthening the Capacity of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), Human Rights 
Defenders (HRDs) and Media Houses to Challenge Discrimination against HMP O and Promote their 
 
1 The project will be unable to disaggregate data based on traditionally marginalized people, however, all data collected 
will be disaggregated by sex and wealth category where possible


---
*Page 189*
---

17 
 Human Rights in Rwanda’.  
Women are likely to constitute the majority of genocide survivors which informs a  need for intersectional, 
or the interconnected nature of social categorizations’ integration of history, gender norms, social 
disparity, power dynamics, rural/urban divide, and most importantly access to land rights.  Despite  
policies and initiatives implemented by the government, other entities and projects, including this  project 
to ensure HMPO are equitably included in project  design, implementation and benefits, there are 
potential barriers which include: (1) Inadequate disaggregated data (2) Limited capacity and resources 
to analyze intersectionality (3) Limited access to decision -making (women) (4) Social inequality from 
increased long -term poverty of HMPO (5) Lack of promotion and protection of  HMPO rights, including 
land tenures.  
In addition, climate change is adversely impacting CND’s landscape with increasing temperatures and 
changing rainfall patterns contributing to e cosystem degradation and reduced livelihoods for the most 
vulnerable populations. The agricultural sector in Rwanda is primarily focused on subsistence farming, 
and most cultivated land is rain -fed, exposing farmers to significant climate -related food secu rity risk. In 
addition, Rwanda’s efforts to reduce poverty are affected by high dependence on agriculture, especially 
when combined with climate change, declining plot sizes, and limited investment in intensification and 
erosion prevention. Thus, the impac ts of climate change is a risk multiplier as it has exacerbated the 
social, cultural, and economic conditions of HMPO communities in Rwanda. In the face of the climate 
crisis, culturally -based climate resilient approaches should be adopted in policies alon g with ways to 
address the potential barriers listed above.  
Compared to men, women are significantly less likely to own land (productive assets), they are less often 
engaged in income -earning activities, have less access to higher education (Govt of Rwanda , 2018), 
financial services (though this is rapidly becoming more equitable), health services, employment, direct 
payments, and non - school training opportunities. But that is changing according to the 2019 State of 
Gender Equity in Rwanda report.  Women -headed households are more likely to use firewood (85% vs 
78%), less likely to use charcoal than male -headed households (13% vs 19%), suggesting increased 
labor burdens for searching for fuelwood.  However, women and male -headed households have the 
same acc ess to water sources (EICV 5, 2018).  
There are no significant differences by household’s poverty status [between male and female headed 
households], education or ownership of land (Abbott 2018). However, a s men receive 75% of agricultural 
loans, and women  only 25% this strongly suggests that land owned by married couples is in reality 
“owned” by the husband and not jointly, and the man in a married household is still culturally considered 
the head of the household. For married couples it is unclear whether  women, on the death of their 
husbands, inherit their assets or are these, according to tradition, bequeathed to the sons. In addition, 
should women grow crops or trees, or raise livestock on marriage land do these assets belong to her or 
him or both. The power of women in illegal but still common polygamous marriages is even less than 
those in monogamous marriages.


---
*Page 190*
---

18 
  
Figure 4.  Land ownership by men, women, and co -owned parcels in 2021  
(Source: Rwanda Land Dashboard https://rwandalanddashboard.rlma.rw/p20_o19 , accessed October 10, 2021)  
 
Though women are not the primary land or livestock owners in Rwanda they still play a key role in food 
production primarily to feed their family. In fact few Rwandans and almost exclusively men are involved 
in cash crops as land holdings are typically smal l and often barely enough to produce food sufficient to 
meet the nutritional security of the land owners’ families.  
Access to microloans and credit for women contributes to economic development of Rwandan society 
as a whole and helps women escape poverty ( Mpakaniye, 2016). However, microloans remain difficult 
for the poor to attain for a number of reasons. Transaction fees reduce the value of already small 
accounts, while complicated account registration procedures, minimum balance requirements, and 
illiteracy all hinder access to loans, especially for women, who are more likely to be illiterate or have less 
experience handling money (Mpakaniye, 2016). Women typically rely on more informal loans from family 
because they lack collateral to access credit from a financial institution (IUCN, 2021). In 2018, of rural 
Rwandan women who accessed loans from a financial institution, 44.2% used saving and credits 
Cooperatives (SACCOs), compared to 39% of rural men (IUCN, 2021). 22% of rural men used a 
commercial bank, as opposed to only 16% of rural women (IUCN, 2021).  
Helping women access loans from formal financial institutions will allow greater independence for 
women and more economic security for families. Several banks in Rwanda have already signed on to 
the Afric an Guarantee Fund, aimed to reduce poverty and increase female access to loans (Mpakaniye, 
2016). The fund helps those who lack collateral still receive credit (Mpakaniye, 2016). Annually, the 
number of microloans accessed by women in Rwanda is increasing,  but additional support to enhance 
female financial literacy will help maintain the upward trend (Mpakaniye, 2016).  
Agricultural extension services include training  to innovate farming practices, and improve profitability 
and efficiency. The 2010 National  Gender Policy (MIGEPROF), the 2018 Strategic Plan for the 
Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA3) and the 2010 Agriculture Gender Strategy (MINAGRI) have 
committed to increase extension staff in Rwanda, particularly women (IUCN, 2021). At present, women 
are significantly underrepresented as extension personnel, which furthers a cycle of reduced female 
access to extension services; 82% of extension workers are male in Rwanda (IUCN, 2021). Male 
extension workers are more likely to approach male farmers regardi ng men’s crops, perpetuating the 
exclusion of women.


---
*Page 191*
---

19 
 Similarly, farm promoters, village leaders who promulgate knowledge from extension services, are also 
dominated by men (IUCN, 2021). Women tend to be less educated than men and have greater domestic 
obligations that inhibit them from working with the community as promoters. Promoters are perceived as 
having elevated social status, leading men to more quickly jump on the opportunity than women (IUCN, 
2021). By enabling more women to hold leadership positio ns as extension workers and farm promoters, 
more women can subsequently benefit from extension services, training and innovative farming 
practices.  
This sector has vast potential for greater female involvement, but legal frameworks may be necessary 
to ensure more equal representation. Women represent 66% of the agricultural workforce, but only 
19.7% of women in the sector occupy paid jobs (IUCN, 2021) . Therefore, enabling women to become 
agricultural leaders through extension services and farm promoters may offer greater independence, 
financially and socially. Female -only extension service training  may motivate women to participate and 
bring more atten tion to female crops, and establishing hiring quotas may enable more female leadership.  
Women are equally likely as men to have access to a mobile phone and use mobile financial services. 
But are less likely to be mobile money account holders, or have acce ss to bank services such as an 
ATM bank card. This is particularly true for women in rural areas, and ownership of capital goods  is 
much less for women -headed households (see Table 3) , demonstrating their marginalization across 
communities.   
 
Head of 
hous ehold 
sex Living room 
set % owning at least one  Total 
surveyed  
Radio  TV Computer  Mobile 
phone  Bicycle  
Male  19.6  78.6  11.9  3.6 71.1  16.2  2,031  
Female  12.8  59.3  5.7 2.3 54.3  4.9 677 
Table 3:  Comparison of assets held by women and male -headed households (Data from EICV 5, 2018)  
 
1.10 Women’s health and access to health services  
In 2010 life expectancy at birth was 71.13 years for women, and only 66.82 years for men 
(https:// www.statista.com/statistics/971106/life -expectancy -at-birth-in-rwanda -by-gender/) .  
Based on the 2019/2020 Demographic and Health Survey report (NISR, 2020), the maternal mortality 
rate or ratio (MMR), which measures the obstetric risk associated with each live birth and is the age - 
standardized maternal mortality rate divided by the age -standardized fertility rate, declined from 10.7 per 
thousand live births in 2000, to 2.03 per 1000 in 2019 -2020.  
The mortality rate of children under 5 years of age continues to decline from 50 deaths per 1,000 live 
births in 2014 to 45 per 1,000 in 2020.  
Women’s health, proxied using Body Mass Index shows that on average 76% of women within CND 
districts are within the normal BMI range, 19% are considered obese and only 5% fall below 18.5 which 
is considered nutritionally compromised (Republic of Rwanda, 2016). The averages for Rwanda as a


---
*Page 192*
---

20 
 whole are 73% normal, 21% obese, and 7% too thin. Similarly,  only 18% of women exhibit signs of 
anemia, compared to 19% for the nation. Prevalence of malaria in children and women is low (0.5% and 
0.4% respectively ) compared to 2.2% and 0.6% for the country as a whole (Republic of Rwanda, 2016).  
In 2017 74% of women had health insura nce and 94% of women had access to community health 
services. The percentage of health insured households is lowest in Rubavu district (54%) and highest in 
Ngororero district (82%) according to the 2014 -15 demographic and health survey (Government of 
Rwand a, 2016).  
 
Figure 5: Percent population with health insurance by district ( Source: Government of Rwanda, 2016)  
 
 
Overall access to sanitation facilities is high among Rwandans (IUCN, 2021). However, due to unequal 
income distribution between men and women, households led by women are less likely to have 
sanitation access than male led households; 80.6% of female head ed households have improved 
sanitation facilities compared to 88.0% of male headed households (IUCN, 2021). Traditional pit latrines 
are seen as more cost effective than modern sanitation systems, but pose risks of disease, overflow 
during the rainy season , groundwater contamination, mosquito breeding, and an increased risk of GBV 
for women due to distance from the house and night use (Tsinda et al., 2013). Lack of sanitation services 
poses both a serious social and environmental threat in Rwanda, particula rly in informal settlements.  
 
1.11 Women’s educational attainment and access to education services  
Education can lead to better health and greater access to resources (Allan et al., 2018:26). In Rwanda, 
the rate of people who have ever attended school is high, at 87%, but rates are higher in urban areas 
than rural areas (IUCN, 2021). The rates of primary education are approximately equal between boys 
and girls in Rwanda, and in secondary education women actually attend in higher numbers than men, 
53% women to 46 % men (Education Statistical Yearbooks, 2018). However, the disparity between men 
and women shifts with regard to technical training and tertiary education, in which men are more 
dominant.


---
*Page 193*
---

21 
  
 
Figure 6: Gender balance in education in Rwanda ( Source: State of Gender Equality in Rwanda, 2019)  
 
In 2018, 92% of children (1.64 million boys and 1.68 million girls) were enrolled in pre -nursery to 
secondary education (Ministry of Education, 2018). Literacy rates continue to climb from 38.2% in 1978 
to 73.2% in 2018. By this time youth literacy was at 85%. Girls and women lag behind boys and men. 
Only 56% of girls, 41% of women, and 28% of elderly women are literate.  
 
 
Levels  Schools  Males  Females  Total  Percent  
Pre-Nursery  96 3,199  3,292  6,491  0.2%  
Nursery  3,210  112,044  114,662  226,706  6.3%  
Primary  2,909  1,259,344  1,244,361  2,503,705  69.0%  
Secondary  1,416  264,782  314,115  578,897  16.0%  
TVET  360 57,643  44,842  102,485  2.8%  
Tertiary  30 41,458  34,255  75,713  2.1%  
Adult literacy  4,991  51,220  81,145  132,365  3.7%  
Total  13,012  1,789,690  1,836,672  3,626,362


---
*Page 194*
---

22 
 Table 4: Levels of schooling in Rwanda ( Source: Ministry of Education, 2018 Education Statistics)  
 
 
The equal rates of primary education for boys and girls in Rwanda suggest a cultural value of education 
for all children, not only prioritization for boys. A lack of tuition fees for childhood education enables poor 
families to send boys and girls to schoo l, and increasing rates of education contributes to falling illiteracy 
rates in Rwanda (IUCN, 2021). Higher levels of girls in secondary education may be attributed to 
Rwandan policies such as the 2008 Girls’ Education Policy and the implementation of a sc hool meal 
program (IUCN, 2021). Despite lower rates of women enrolled in tertiary education, the percentage is 
increasing due to flexible programming, such as online learning or night school, which enables women 
with domestic responsibilities to participat e. According to the IUCN, the higher level of education men 
and women receive, the less likely they are to work in the agriculture sector (IUCN, 2021). In comparison, 
92% of women with no education work in agriculture (IUCN, 2021).  
Strong gender stereotype s in Rwanda still push girls into “traditional” soft trades including hairdressing, 
secretarial work and nursing (IUCN, 2021). 87% of women with a university degree work in the service 
sector (IUCN, 2021). Though women are more likely to be primary school teachers than men, they are 
rarely secondary, tertiary or technical/vocational teachers. In agriculture, women predominantly occupy 
informal roles, such as unpaid farming for the family, whereas the men typically hold higher paying 
positions or manage high er value products such as timber (IUCN, 2021). As a result, the majority of 
agroforesters are male in Rwanda (Anastase & Nahayo, 2020).  
One of the greatest challenges to achieving economic stability lies in challenges in achieving quality 
educational attai nment by female youth which leads to their lower literacy, especially in rural areas. 
Overall, social factors including traditional gender roles such as domestic chores and family care, historic 
marginalization of girls and women, patriarchal social tradit ions, and gender -based violence entrench 
girls’ underperformance throughout their schooling which has a cyclical effect, as low performance in 
the primary leaving exam results in girls being admitted to lower quality secondary schools, and 
ultimately into higher education institutions (HIEs) in lower numbers (Huggins & Randell, 2007).  
This results in limited access to paid labor and employment in sectors such as services or public 
government. Similarly, lower literacy has put them at a greater disadvantage  in agriculture, as 
commercialization of farming has made it more difficult to feed families. While there are national laws 
and policies to protect employment, there is little protection for the vast majority of women who work in 
informal sectors which sig nificantly affects women’s rights within the country (Abbott et. al., 2008). 
Women in rural areas are primarily care -providers for children and the elderly, which is unpaid labor and 
invisibilized due to gender norms (Abbot, 2015). Thus, understanding thes e barriers and challenges and 
how to overcome them will inform interventions at project -level.  
 
1.12 Patterns of power and decision -making  
Rwanda is internationally acclaimed for being the first nation to have a majority female Parliament, with 
61% of these positions held by women from 2018 -2022 (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). The Constitution 
of the Republic of Rwanda established a minimum of 30 % female representation in public governance, 
and this high level of female participation in upper levels of governance far exceeds this minimum (East 
African Community, 2009). However, female participation drastically decreases in many communities’


---
*Page 195*
---

23 
 level gov erning bodies.  
 
Figure 7: Female and male representation in different levels of local government in Rwanda in 2018 -
2019 (Republic of Rwanda, 2019)  
 
 
Although overall female representation in the Rwandan government is increasing, higher levels of female 
representation in upper levels of governance mirror the disparity between gender equality policy and 
practice in the country. In higher levels of govern ance, these policies are implemented well and appear 
effective, but at community levels, larger gender gaps in prominent roles are clearly evident. Comparable 
gender gaps exist in central government roles that undergo recruitment processes, with many of th ese 
positions not reaching the 30% female representation minimum (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). 
Furthermore, female participation in the police force is extremely low, although representation is high in 
most other areas of the justice sector.  
Similarly, in the private sector, women hold very few high level positions, particularly at the provincial 
level. Nationally, 30% of executive committee presidents are women, but there are 0 female presidents 
at the provincial level (Republic of Rwanda, 20 19). Women have high levels of representation in second 
vice presidency in the private sector, with 70% of national and 80% of provincial second vice presidential 
roles occupied by women, but have low levels of representation in more powerful executive pos itions 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2019). In more local organizations, such as cooperatives, men hold the majority 
of the decision -making positions, while women tend to hold stereotypically female roles, such as 
secretary, vice president, and treasurer (IUCN, 202 1). 
At the household level, women have very little decision -making power. Although under the 1999 
Inheritance and Marital Property Law women are legally allowed to own land, cultural barriers still inhibit 
their ability to control how this land is used. Th ese barriers are predominantly based in the belief that 
men are the head of the household, and thus are the primary owners of all of the family’s land and assets 
(IUCN, 2021). Women’s lack of power within their households limits their ability to make decis ions about 
the planting of crops and the use of land as collateral for credit, which would allow increased female 
engagement in other economic activities. Based on female reports, the majority of households (70%) 
make decisions jointly, while in 25% of hou seholds the husband makes the majority of the decisions


---
*Page 196*
---

24 
 (IUCN, 2021). However, even in households that make joint decisions, women’s decisions tend to 
revolve around day-to-day issues, while men’s decisions are primarily focused on productive assets and 
income.  
Women’s ability to make decisions within both their own households and broader Rwandan society is 
further hampered by GBV. The effects of a longstanding patriarchal regime in the country has created 
and perpetuated the notion that men must be dominan t and women must be submissive. Women break 
these gender norms by asserting their right to be involved in decision -making, and this can be seen as 
diminishing their husband’s masculinity, which can result in violent retribution. In 2010, around 57% of 
Rwan dan women reported experiencing GBV from their partner, and women who bring in more money 
tend to experience higher levels of GBV (RWAMREC, 2010). This suggests that increasing women’s 
opportunities to make decisions and earn their own income will have a v ery limited effect on female 
empowerment until GBV is addressed. Engaging men and boys in gender equality advocacy and action 
highlights that GBV is not only a women’s issue, and is believed to be successful in reducing the 
prevalence of GBV (UNDP, 2018).  
 
1.13 Social service and support systems that contribute to gender empowerment, wellbeing, 
and security  
Government mandated and running social support programs have reduced the percentage of extremely 
poor households from 23% and 26% in 2010 to 15% and 18% in 2 017 for MHHs and FHHs respectively. 
Three state managed social support systems have contributed significantly to these observed reductions 
in poverty and increasing wellbeing and security.  
The Girinka Program (One Cow per Family Program) of the Ministry of  Agriculture (MINAGRI) started in 
2006. By 2017 over 290,000 cows have been provided to vulnerable male and female headed 
households (approximately 6% of all Rwandan families) as a way to reduce child malnutrition, increase 
the productivity of agricultural  labor, generate a new stream of income through surplus milk sales and 
strengthen social cohesion amongst Rwandan families and communities as cow owners pass on surplus 
calves to other needy families. Male headed households were, however, more likely than female headed 
households to receive a cow through this government program.  
The largest social support program of the Government of Rwanda is the Vision 2020 Umurenge 
Programme (VUP) which was started in 2008 and is managed by the Local Administrative Entities 
Development Agency (LODA) within the Ministry of Local Government (MINA LOC). VUP has four 
components: wage labor through public works, direct cash transfers, financial services and awareness 
raising. The majority of public works support agricultural production, land conservation and the 
maintenance of physical infrastructure.  A review by FAO showed that VUP wages paid to women were 
often captured by men. Retaining control over VUP income was easier for women who owned an 
individual savings account (e.g., within a Savings and Credit Cooperative - SACCO), though most 
women only had accounts in Village Savings and Loan Group or informal tontines. Rural women were 
more disempowered than men through cultural constraints to speaking in public meetings, workloads 
that limited participation in community meetings and self -help associati ons, and limited access to credit 
and savings accounts. The FAO study also found that the majority of both MHHs and FHHs were 
unaware of the existence of a VUP GRM, or were skeptical about the effectiveness of this complaint 
process. The most important rec ommendations were to a) enable women to open their own formal bank 
accounts to increase their control over their incomes and strengthen their decision -making capacity, and


---
*Page 197*
---

25 
 b) redirect households with high dependency ratios and/or low labor capacity away fr om public works 
wage labor and toward VUP direct cash transfers.  
MINAGRI further supports poor rural families by offering subsidies for agricultural inputs, improved seeds 
and irrigation as well as offering credit through the Agriculture Guaranty Fund whic h provides specific 
opportunities for women.  
 
 
● CONCLUSIONS - ONGOING CHALLENGES TO GENDER EQUITY IN THE CONTEXT OF 
THE GCF CND PROJECT  
Despite tremendous efforts from the policy and legal perspectives, a patriarchal culture and persistent 
disparities continue to characterize gender relations in Rwanda. Disparities persist in post -primary 
education; in access to and control of property inc luding land and economic resources; in employment 
opportunities and entrepreneurship; in decision -making at household and community levels; in family 
responsibilities and unpaid care work; and in the experience of violence, harassment, conflict, and 
insecu rity. Sexual and gender -based violence persists at high levels in Rwanda. While women have 
made impressive political progress, especially at the national level, their progress in terms of local 
political representation and engagement remains unequal. Econo mic opportunities remain markedly 
gender -differentiated.  
In Rwanda and in the Congo -Nile Divide, structural barriers to economic and political equity and female 
empowerment have significantly impeded measures to adapt to climate change impacts. In Rwanda, 
these structural inequalities are at a lower level compared to other countries in the world, because of 
leading gender -considerate policies across sectors. However, the point remains that women’s ability to 
access, use and control natural resources, infras tructure and services differently is still low compared to 
men. This means the degradation of natural resources and new infrastructure will affect women and 
men differently, and will generally result in greater vulnerability of women. Women are vital agent s of 
change and can be powerful leaders from the community to global level in mitigating and adapting to 
climate change.  
 
1.14 Afforestation, agroforestry and tree tenure  
Kiptot et al (2012) noted that an ICRAF survey conducted across countries in eastern Africa concluded 
that women rarely have tenure over trees unless they exclusively have tenure over the land. Moreover, 
they stated that “Women’s rights to tree products ar e usually limited to products that are considered to 
have little or no commercial value. These products are mainly indigenous fruits….fodder and mulch.” 
They also noted that: a) the survivorship of trees and fodder shrubs planted by men and women was 
effec tively the same, b) low cost/input agroforestry techniques for replenishing soil fertility were attractive 
to women farmers given that they are both labor and capital limited. Fuelwood, fodder, green manure, 
and coppicing shrub production substantially inc reases benefits to women that cannot be captured by 
men. Women appear to grow trees/shrubs for domestic consumption (fuelwood, fodder, bean poles, 
fruit) and sell the surplus in local markets. It is unclear whether women who sell wood products from 
land th at is owned by their husbands are able to capture that revenue stream.  
Agroforestry offers multiple benefits to Rwandan farmers, in particular, women. Planting trees within 
farms represents a low effort pathway to high reward. To enhance climate resilience  of communities, 
agroforestry practices sequester carbon, prevent erosion, and enhance soil quality for sustainable


---
*Page 198*
---

26 
 farming. For women, trees provide additional income to elevate socioeconomic status and reduce the 
risk of GBV by eliminating the need to wa lk far distances for fuel wood (Anastase & Nahayo, 2020). 
Despite the majority of farms under female management in Rwanda, women are often excluded from 
agroforestry, as trees traditionally fall under male domain, women lack the necessary training and have  
less access to the retail market (Kiptot & Franzel, 2012). In order to better include women in agroforestry, 
training on forestry and marketing should be targeted to women. Tools and practices that reduce labor 
requirements for women, such as shorter tree s (which decrease the need for male labor) or more modern 
processing techniques, will save women time and make the field more accessible (Kiptot & Franzel, 
2012).  
Afforestation and reforestation on public lands should include measures where women and youth  
formally have the right to capture a proportion of the value of the trees at harvest time. Assuming a 
harvest cycle of 15 -20 years this will provide women with a long -term asset that could be used as 
retirement income, and/or given as gifts or bequeathed to children. Young men could use the trees as 
savings to be used to build or buy a house when they marry.  
Investments in agroforestry on private farmlands should reflect the different interests and concerns of 
women and men. During focus groups women reported shortages of fuelwood, fodder and wood suitable 
for bean poles. They were also concerned about soil er osion on their steeply sloped farmland, and 
declining soil fertility and crop yields. On -farm tree planting, to address the concerns of women, should 
focus on fast growing, nitrogen fixing, coppicing species that can be planted in contours between rows 
of crops. The nutrient rich leaves of leguminous species can be used as fodder for livestock, and as 
green manure. Cutting the stems to ground level before planting ensures that the trees do not compete 
with the crops for sunlight and soil nutrients, but the tree roots that remain intact help stabilize the soil 
and prevent erosion caused by heavy rains. The cut stems can be dried for fuelwood or used as bean 
poles. Surplus fodder, fuelwood and bean poles can be sold to neighbors or at local markets. Coppicing 
species readily re -sprout from the roots allowing an annual harvest.  
 
1.15 Improved cook stoves  
In rural areas of Rwanda, 98% of households rely on wood as their main cooking fuel. The GoR 
completed a comprehensive report on Gender in the Energy Sector. The rep ort noted that almost 60% 
of FHHs spent 1 -3 hours per day collecting firewood compared to 36% of MHHs. The latter purchased 
fuelwood twice as often as FHHs who primarily rely on gathering fuelwood. Over 50% of both Rwandan 
FHHS and MHHs still cook using th e three -stone method, and only 13.5% use efficient cookstoves. Over 
50% of FHHs are unaware of the health benefits of improved cookstoves. The report argued for 
supporting women to transition from fuelwood to Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) primarily to reduce smoke 
inhalation and respiratory disease. The report did not address the fact that in higher altitude areas 
cooking fires also provide a heating source for the home. The use of clean cookstoves has major positive 
impacts on gender equality, by reducing hou sehold work for women and providing opportunities for 
women to engage in paid work.  
Poor rural families, particularly FHH, are unlikely to be able to afford LPG stoves. Moreover, LPGs do 
not remain warm after the gas is turned off and thus do not provide a  heat source for the home during 
the night or during cold spells. Tier 1 Canarumwe clay stoves are relatively inexpensive, substantially 
reduce woodfuel use, and provide a thermal mass that keeps radiating heat long after cooking is


---
*Page 199*
---

27 
 completed. Though imper fect they are an improvement in efficiency compared to the 3 stones cookfire 
method. As men do not gather firewood nor do they cook they are often unwilling to spend “their” money 
to purchase an improved stove even though it substantially reduces fuelwood use and the time women 
must spend gathering fuelwood. Efforts to introduce improved cook stoves into MHHs in the CND must 
address this barrier.  
 
1.16 Honey production and marketing  
The Rwandan government has identified beekeeping as a potential source of additional revenue for 
farmers (Mushonga et al., 2019). The European demand for honey far outpaces the production in 
Rwanda, indicating a market incentive to raise bees beyond subsis tence level (Mushonga et al., 2019). 
Furthermore, global decline of bee populations reflects a high biological need for more apiarists in 
Rwanda. Despite the economic and environmental benefits, along with low startup costs, beekeeping is 
perceived as a vo cation for poor people. Out of 83,000 beekeepers in Rwanda, 86% are adult males 
and 71% lack primary education (Mushonga et al., 2019). To overcome the negative stigma around 
beekeeping, materials and training for modern hives need to be provided to women and youth. Modern 
hives produce a higher yield of honey, have lower risk of causing fires, and do not need to be placed as 
high up in trees as traditional hives, which deters some women due to cultural restrictions barring women 
from climbing trees (WCS, 2 018). In a WCS study, 83% of beekeepers used traditional hives in Rwanda, 
demonstrating a need for more modern tools (WCS, 2018). Additionally, marketing training may help 
women to better sell the honey, as women still have relatively low market and distri bution access in 
Rwanda. Despite the stigma, beekeeping remains a strong potential source of income, which could 
reduce reliance on more harmful forest livelihoods, such as deforestation and poaching (Fakhry et al., 
2010).  
A study by Mushonga (2019) sugges ts that people consider beekeeping for the poor and illiterate are 
largely the domain of older men no longer able to labor in agricultural production. Women do appear to 
be engaged in the production and marketing of honey beer. ADF provided $343,000 in 201 7 to 
strengthen the honey production sector in Rwanda. Production remains relatively low because of 
dependence on traditional hives rather than modern hives such as Kenya Top Bar or Langstroth (CODIT, 
2009). The CODIT report funded by the SNV noted that in  2009, of the estimated 30,293 beekeepers in 
Rwanda only 23% were women. The report recommended that the GoR do away with subsidies to 
beekeepers and their co -operatives, focus on addressing the root causes of the prevailing problems not 
the effects, encou raging beekeepers to actively participate in their own development and advocating for 
the replication of knowledge and skills from common to individual apiaries.  
During focus groups both women and marginalized groups noted that the cost of modern hives and other 
beekeeping equipment such as smokers was a barrier to entry as was lack of access to credit. A big 
concern was farmers’ use of pesticides that kill bees, m aking it impossible to locate apiaries near 
farmland.  
 
1.17 Coronavirus (COVID -19) implications in advancing gender equity  
The global coronavirus (COVID -19) pandemic left no country untouched from its impacts. While research 
is still emerging, the severity of t he pandemic is clear; struggling economies, vast unemployment, and 
threats to health and wellbeing continue to affect the global community. Women in particular are already


---
*Page 200*
---

28 
 vulnerable to socioeconomic inequity that is currently exacerbated by COVID -19. Ther efore, the impact 
of the pandemic must be considered in gender planning into the future.  
Rafaeli and Hutchinson (2020) compared the secondary impacts of COVID -19 to the Ebola crisis on 
women and girls in Africa, finding that women and girls are more likely to experience higher poverty and 
school dropout rates, an increase in unintended pregnan cies, reduced income and financial 
empowerment, greater domestic responsibility (increased childcare due to school closures), and food 
insecurity due to the pandemic. In times of crisis, school closures and financial stress also lead to 
increased rates of gender based violence (Rafaeli & Hutchinson, 2020). Women face greater exposure 
to COVID through their roles as caretakers in families and in healthcare, and have less decision -making 
power, rendering their needs unmet during COVID -19 (Parry & Gordon, 2020 ). Yet few countries have 
enacted policies to address the gendered impacts of the pandemic.  
In Rwanda, the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF), in partnership with UN WOMEN 
and UNFPA, conducted a 2020 study on the gendered impacts of COVID -19. The report indicates that 
44.2% of female respondents completely stopped their economic activities due to the pandemic, 
compared to only 17% of men (Bayisenge, Lo & Schreiner, 2020). In rural areas, the percentage was 
higher for women; 50% stopped their  work and thus sources of income, compared to 17.7% of rural men 
(Bayisenge, Lo & Schreiner, 2020). As women occupy more informal and unsecured jobs in Rwanda, 
they are at greater risk of income loss than men.  
The use of health care and maternal services i n Rwanda considerably declined during the COVID -19 
outbreak (Wanyana, Wong & Hakizimana, 2020). Declines in child health care services, particularly 
vaccinations, could be detrimental to avoiding future outbreaks of vaccine -preventable diseases 
(Wanyana, W ong & Hakizimana, 2020). Many women feared contracting the virus while attending 
regular checkups, which contributed to the decline of health services in Rwanda (Wanyana, Wong & 
Hakizimana, 2020).  
Recommendations to mitigate the impacts of COVID -19 on wome n in Rwanda include (Bayisenge, Lo 
& Schreiner, 2020):  
● Implement programs that offer employment or financial security in spite of COVID -19. 
● Provide online or socially -distant courses to prevent school dropouts.  
● Establish women -specific financial packages in the national economic recovery plan.  
● Strengthen the mobilization of men and boys in childcare and domestic responsibilities to offset 
increased labor caused by the pandemic in parallel with on -going “Men engage” national programmes.  
● Accelerate government interventions to address elevated levels of GBV.  
 
1.18 Promoting gender equity within the CND GCF project  
 
Gender equality and women’s empowerment should be considered in all stages of the CND project 
cycle: design, formulation, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. In each of these stages, 
project ma nagers should keep a ‘gender lens’ in mind, looking at ways the project can:  
● Address gender inequalities that emerge from the project;  
● Ensure the differential needs of women and men are addressed;  
● Ensure women and men have equal access to resources, services, and capacity development;  
● Ensure equal participation of women and men in management arrangements and as


---
*Page 201*
---

29 
 beneficiaries, partners and  key stakeholders; and  
● Ensure women’s equal participation in decision -making processes.  
 
Based on key expected outcomes, this gender assessment provides the foundation for a realistic gender 
action plan to be implemented in the CND project.


---
*Page 202*
---

30 
 5 LITERATURE CITED  
 
Abbott P, Malunda D. 2016. The Promise and the Reality: Women’s Rights in Rwanda. African Journal 
of International and Comparative Law 24:561–581. Edinburgh University Press.  
African Development Bank. 2014. Analysis of Gender and Youth Employment in Rwanda. Statistics 
Department, Rwanda Country Office, African Development Bank  
Allan EJ, Raupp M, Protik A, Ndirangu K (2018) Soma Umenye impact evaluation. United States Agency 
for International Development, Kigali, Rwanda  
Anastase GM, Nahayo L. 2020. Impact Assessment of Agroforestry Practices on Community Socio - 
Economic Livelihoods in Rwanda. International Journal of Environmental & Agriculture Research 6:59 –
71. 
Bayisenge J, Lo FA, Schreiner MB. 2020. Rapid Gender Assessm ent (RGA) on the Impact of COVID -
19 on Women and Men in Rwanda. Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Kigali.  
Campbell CA et al. 2021. Investigating Cooking Activity Patterns and Perceptions of Air Quality 
Interventions among Women in Urban Rwanda. Inte rnational Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health 18.  
CODIT. 2009. Beekeeping/ Honey Value Chain Financing Study Report. SNV Rwanda/IFAD  
East African Community. 2009. Gender and Community Development Analysis in Rwanda. Republic of 
Rwanda.  
Fakhry N, Gusak K, Hadjinian L, Vazquez M. 2010. Business Plan and Marketing Strategy for 
Beekeeping and Pottery Prod uct Development: Nyungwe Forest National Park, Rwanda.  
FAO. Public works and rural women’s economic empowerment: Rwanda’s Vision 2020 Umurenge 
Programme. FAO, Rome.  
Green, K, E Bagaye, R Blum, L Woolf, and C Jessee. 2019.  USAID/Rwanda Youth Assessment.  United 
States Agency for International Development, Wash ington DC.   
IUCN. 2021. Gender Analysis Report for TREPA Project Proposal on“Transforming Eastern Province 
Through Adaptation” (TREPA). International Union for Conservation of Nature.  
Kiptot E, Franzel S. 2012. Gender and agroforestry in Africa: a review of women’s participation.  
Agroforestry Systems 84:35–58. 
Kiyani P, Andoh J, Lee Y, Lee DK. 2017. Benefits and challenges of agroforestry adoption: a case of 
Musebeya sector, Nyamagabe District in southern province of Rwanda. Forest Science and Technology 
13:174–180. Taylor & Francis.  
Mukabera J (2016) Womens Sta tus and Gender Relations in Post -Genocide Rwanda: Focusing on the 
Local and Everyday Life Level. Seoul National University  
Mushonga B, Hategekimana L, Habarugira G, Kandiwa E, Samkange A, Ernest Segwagwe BV. 2019. 
Characterization of the Beekeeping Value Chain: Challenges, Perceptions, Limitations, and 
Opportunities for Beekeepers in Kayonza District, Rwanda. Advances in Agric ulture 2019 :5982931. 
Hindawi.


---
*Page 203*
---

31 
 Mpakaniye JP. 2016. The contribution of microcredit advanced to women on poverty reduction in rural 
areas  of Rwanda. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2811980 .  
National Institute of Statistics Rwanda (NISR). 2018. EICV5 Integrated Household Living Conditions  
Parry BR, Gordon E. 2020. The shadow pandemic: Inequitable gendered impacts of COVID ‐19 in 
South Africa. Gender Work Organ.  28:795–806. 
Survey Thematic Report GENDER -2016/2017. General technical report. Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Planning, Kigali, Rwanda.  
Rafaeli T, Hutchinson G. 2020. The Secondary Impacts of COVID -19 on Women and Girls in Sub - 
Saharan Africa. Education Development Trust.  
Randell, S. K. (2007). Gender Equality in Education in Rwanda: What is happening to our Girls? South 
African Association of Women Graduates Conference on “Drop -Outs from School and Tertiary Studies: 
What Is Happening to Our Girls?” Cape Town.  
Republ ic of Rwanda. 2000. Rwanda Vision 2020. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. 
Available from https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/handle/2152/5071/4164.pdf . 
Republic  of Rwanda.  2021. Rwanda  demographic  and health  survey  2019 -2020, 
Final Report. https:// www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2019. The State of Gender Equality in Rwanda from Transition to Transformation.  
Gender Monitoring Office.  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. Gender Profile in the Energy Sector. Gender Monitoring Office. Republic of  
Rwanda  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. 2018 Education Statistics. https:// www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. EICV5 Integrated household living conditions survey 2016/2017. 
https://www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic  of Rwanda.  2016.  Demographic  and health  survey  RDHS,  Western  Province. 
https://www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2020. Vision 2050. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. Available from 
https://www.nirda.gov .rw/uploads/tx_dce/Vision_English_Version_2050_ -31_Dec_2020.pdf . 
Republic of Rwanda. 2010. National Gender Policy.Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Republic 
of Rwanda.  
Republic of Rwanda. 2010. Strategic plan for the implementation of the National Gender Policy. 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Republic of Rwanda  
Republic of Rwanda. 2009. The state of gender equality in Rwanda: from transition to transformation.  
Gender Monitoring Office, Government of the Republic of Rwanda  
RWAMREC. 2010. Masculinity and Gender Based Violence in Rwanda. Rwanda MenEngage Network. 
Available from https://promundoglobal.org/wp -content/uploads/2015/01/Masculinity -and- Gender -
Based -Violence -in-Rwanda -IMAGES.pdf.  
Tsinda A, Abbott P, Pedley S, Charle s K, Adogo J, Okurut K, and Chenoweth J. 2013. Challenges to


---
*Page 204*
---

32 
 Achieving Sustainable Sanitation in Informal Settlements of Kigali, Rwanda. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health 10: 6939 -6954.  
UNDP. 2018. Gender Equality Strategy: UNDP Rwanda (2019 -2022). Unite d Nations Rwanda. 
https://www1.undp.org/content/dam/rwanda/docs/demgov/Gender%20Equality%20Strategy.p  df.  
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner. 2017. UN Human Rights Report. Office of the High 
Commissioner on Human Rights, G eneva, Switzerland.  
United Nations Rwanda. 2021. How the UN is supporting The Sustainable Development Goals in 
Rwanda. Available from https://rwanda.un.org/en/sdgs . 
University of California, Berkeley – Haas School of Business Consultants for the Wildlife Conservation 
Society, Berkeley, California.  
USAID. 2021. LEARN Project Gender and Social Inclusion Analysis. USAID, Rwanda 
USAID.  2019. Gender and social inclusion analysis report. USAID, Rwanda  
USAID. 2017. Integrating Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in USAID’s Program Cycle: ADS 
Chapter 205. USAID, Washington, D.C.  
USAID. 2015. Gender analysis for USAID/Rwanda Feed the Future (FtF) Project. USAID, Rwanda  
USAID. 2015. WCS Central Africa Ge nder Assessment. Central African Regional Program for the 
Environment, (CARPE III), USAID  
Uwineza P, Pearson E, Powley E (2009) Sustaining women’s gains in Rwanda: The influence of 
indigenous culture and post -genocide politics. Institute for Inclusive Security, Washington, DC  
Vanhees, Katrijn. 2014. Property rights for women in Rwanda: access t o land for women living in de 
facto  unions. Universiteit Gent, Academiejaar: 1 -108. 
Wanyana D, Wong R, Hakizimana D. 2020. Rapid assessment on the utilization of maternal and child 
health services during COVID -19 in Rwanda. Public Health Action 11: 12-21. 
Wildlife Conservation Society and Forest of Hope. 2018. A quick needs assessment in modern 
beekeeping around Gishwati -Mukura National Park, Rwanda. WCS . 
Wallace, C., Haerpfer, C., & Abbott, P. (2008). Women in Rwandan Politics and Society. International 
Journal of Sociology, 38(4), 111 –125. https://doi.org/10.2753/IJS0020 -7659380406   
World   Economic  Forum.  2021.  Global  Gender  Gap Report
 2021.  Available  from http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf.


---
*Page 205*
---

33 
 ● GENDER, YOUTH AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  
The goal of the programme is to increase climate resilience of vulnerable rural communities in the CND, 
reduce CO2 emissions, build capacity for integrated spatial planning and increase the extent and 
integrity of forest ecosystems in the CND. The programm e has three components directly targeting 
vulnerabilities within climate impact chains. Component (1) Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into 
Integrated Land Use Planning and Management will lead to enhanced adaptive capacity of both 
ecosystems and rural pop ulations, by strengthening coordination among sectors and integrating climate 
resilience considerations into planning and development. Component (2) Landscape Management and 
Restoration will implement high priority actions to enhance the resilience of vuln erable communities by 
increasing the extent and integrity of forest ecosystems and landscapes and by reducing demand for 
wood fuel. In addition, component (2) is designed to reduce the time women spend collecting and 
preparing fuelwood, and simultaneously to empower women to provide input to local -level decision 
making (see also Component (1)). As a co -benefit, greenhouse gas emissions will be reduced through 
restoration of natural forests, agroforestry, reduced fuelwood demand and fuel efficient cookstoves  
under components (1 and 2) are expected. Component (3) will focus on Enhancing climate adaptation 
through resilient livelihoods . 
Women, youth and marginalized groups, inclu ding women -headed households  in the CND are key 
stakeholders in the success of this  project, and are the primary target beneficiaries of the project. The 
project will be implemented across various sectors along the CND, particularly focusing on communities 
around Nyungwe National Park and Gishwati -Mukura National Park --critical for Rwand a yet highly 
vulnerable forests due to high population and increasing demography who depend upon fuelwood, and 
actions taken by poor households that illegally use forests to improve income streams.  
 
1.19 Methods  
This Action Plan operationalizes the findings from the Gender Assessment, the ESIA, and youth -based 
information collected during the feasibility studies and stakeholder engagement during the Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) phase. The Assessment used fiv e standard lenses (USAID 2017[1]) to conduct 
the analysis:  
1. Institutions, Laws and Policies  that influence the context in which men and women act and make 
decisions.  
2. Beliefs, Perceptions, and Cultural Norms  that shape how men and women, youth and elders 
are able (or expected) to practice activities, particularly those to be developed by this GCF  project.  
3. Gender Roles, Responsibilities, and Time Use  in reproductive, productive, and community work.  
4. Access to and Control over Assets and Resources  are different between young and old, men 
and women.  
5. Patterns of Power and Decision -making  focused on how individuals are able to be represented 
and be in decision -making positions.  
Based upon this framework of five lenses, the Gender Analysis  identified and analyzed the gender  risks 
and impacts of the program and climate change through four main steps:  
Scoping: The GYA included a scoping process to review relevant literature and data for the project 
area, including local reports and data, co nsult with government and other partners, and conduct field 
visits to understand the project, identify and characterize the project area, and identify stakeholders,


---
*Page 206*
---

34 
 including program -affected parties and other interested parties, who may have different con cerns and 
priorities about project and climate change impacts, mitigation mechanisms and benefits.  
Legislative and policy review: The GYA conducted a review of (1) Rwanda’s applicable policy 
framework, national laws and regulations and institutional capabi lities relating to gender and youth, (2) 
variations in country conditions and program context across the affected area, (3) relevant gender and 
youth studies, (4) Rwanda’s obligations and commitments under relevant international agreements and 
treaties, (5 ) applicable requirements under GCF standards and (6) internationally accepted best 
practices.  
Stakeholder consultation and analysis: Based on the identification of stakeholders identified in the 
scoping exercise, the GYA conducted initial consultations with stakeholders to gather information on 
concerns and priorities about the project and climate change, analyze the outcomes of the con sultations 
and develop a strategy for continuing stakeholder engagement.  
Baseline analysis: Drawing on the scoping exercise, the GYA assembled and analyzed existing 
information. The information was analyzed in light of the stakeholder consultation and anal ysis and 
legislative and policy review, to identify information gaps and ways in which these may be filled.  
This information was then used to guide the Gender Youth Social Inclusion Action Plan. The details of 
the stakeholders consulted, including key info rmant interviews (18), focus group discussions (24), and 
district workshops (4) can be found in Annex 7. A literature review is available in the Gender Assessment 
(above) and ESIA (Annex 6).  
 
1.20 Gender Issues  
There are three key gender -based themes that influenced the design of the Gender Action Plan:  
a. Change negative gender and social norms . The most profound barrier for this project is rural 
norms about the roles of men and women. Whilst the Government of Rwan da has made many advances 
and has implemented many policies (see Section 3 of the Gender Assessment) to achieve gender 
equality , particularly in national -level representation and inclusion, patriarchal privilege and decision -
making remains embedded in rura l society (IUCN, 2021). The consequences of this for this project is 
far-reaching. Men are generally seen as the head of household with the decision -making powers over 
all assets, resulting in male appropriation of household and farm -based assets (IUCN, 20 21; Kiyani et 
al., 2017). Though female headed households face the same issues and challenges as male headed 
households, they are disproportionately impacted because of prevalent gender inequality issues (GMO 
2017). Men in the CND are positioned to be sign ificantly more involved in programs that result in 
monetary benefits, such as fern clearing, casual labor, and plantation projects. Although under Rwanda 
law, sons and daughters receive equal inheritance rights (Law/nº 22/99 of 12/11/1999) the PPF focus 
groups highlighted that due to cultural practices, parents favor sons in land inheritance, leaving young 
women in a position where they depend on marrying a man to gain access to farmland; without a formal 
marriage, these women have no land tenure. Broadly, these gender and social norms leave most women 
with little decision -making power and no real control over assets. The threat of sexual and gender based 
violence (SGBV) at the household level where women try to assert independence and achievement is 
high. F or this project, the implications are that trees planted by women become men’s property; money 
gained in employment (tree planting, nursery maintenance) or through farmland production (fruit trees, 
honey, etc) are ultimately controlled by men; and women sh ouldn’t participate in activities without a


---
*Page 207*
---

35 
 husband’s permission. Although this seems bleak, this situation is not universal. The 24 CND community 
focus groups held in the PPF highlighted that many households decide together on how money should 
be spent; l and tenure is broadly seen as joint ownership; and men realize the impact of dwindling 
fuelwood resources on women and girls. Gender equity is not yet universal and rural culture has a long 
trajectory to achieving it.  
As a result, this program will focus heavily on social and behavior change communications (SBCC) as 
a means to positively change perceptions towards  gender equity. Community members, including 
community leaders and women and men community influencers  spec ifically will be targeted for 
sensitization  on gender equit y  in order to shift their attitudes and to build a conducive environment for 
women and HMPO to be able to participate in project activities. Women  have been engaged in the 
development of this proj ect to ensure time constraints, work burden and reproductive responsibilities do 
not impede their ability to engage in the various activities designed by the project. Women will be 
regularly consulted throughout project implementation to ensure they are ab le to actively participate in 
project activities and activities take place at times which are convenient for them and at locations that 
are safe and contextually appropriate. At project start, once communities are selected for 
implementation, barriers face d by women and HMPO to participate in project activities will be reviewed 
and solutions to overcome barriers incorporated into programming through an additional screening 
process outlined in Annex 6. The project ESS Coordinator and Gender Officer will prov ide support to 
ensure all project staff understand barriers faced by women and HMPO and programming works to 
address barriers to ensure their active participation in activities. The project will also get support from 
NGOs that help men on masculinity and a ddressing SGVB which will include targeted outreach to 
mobilize their participation in household and parental responsibilities to ease women’s responsibilities 
and sensitization on the importance of fair access and control of resources, including income. T he 
engagement of community leaders and women and men community influencers to further promote equal 
and fair control of resources between men and women will further mitigate the risk of men taking over 
control of incomes earned and targeted for women. Last ly, the project will clearly explain participant 
selection, intended benefits and how participants can help monitor benefits and risks and reduce risks if 
necessary, including reducing the risk of men taking over control of incomes targeted for women.  The 
program will  have a safe, accessible Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for all project stakeholders, 
particularly women, to access to pursue redress as needed. The project will also collaborate with existing 
Isange One Stop Centers in the project area in GBV prevention and immediate assistance to victims. All 
project staff will be trained and project beneficiaries informed on the purpose and use of the GRM, 
including reporting gender -based violence. The project will ensure confidentiality of the informatio n and 
identity of the complainant. The grievance process will include options for victims to remain anonymous 
which will add a layer of protection for individuals who may be subject to gender -based violence. 
Throughout project implementation, project staff  will disseminate information to beneficiaries on how 
they can use the GRM and solicit feedback on how the mechanism can be improved if needed.  
 
b. Provide access to skills building, leadership and programmatic inclusion . Because of 
existing gender norms, th ere is much to do to build technical skills of rural women to be able to participate 
in the project. In addition to that, finding women leaders and building their leadership skills to be at the 
forefront of rural gender equity is crucial for addressing the  root c auses of women’s exclusion in land 
use planning and decision -making . This project however will not just focus on rural women. Ensuring


---
*Page 208*
---

36 
 that women play a strong role at all levels of climate programming in the country is important. Thus 
developing pr ofessional networks and internships to provide opportunities to strengthen leadership and 
technical skills will be incorporated into the program.  
 
c. Facilitate women’s financial autonomy . In order to support rural women to capture financial 
benefits of this project, this project will incorporate three activities: financial skills building, support in 
joining cooperatives; and facilitating access to entrepreneurship through financial/entrepr eneurship 
training, access to village savings/loans and small grants, and mentoring.  The project will ensure all 
trainings are gender -responsive and inclusive. Gender considerations will be integrated into training 
curriculum, content and delivery methods.  Flexible training schedules and convenient venues will be 
selected to accommodate women's needs. Staff in charge of gender aspects will ensure gender 
mainstreaming and ensure the project addresses barriers to women's participation. Training will also 
use p articipatory approaches to create an inclusive learning environment and incorporate components 
on women's empowerment and leadership development, promoting gender equality and active 
participation . By facilitating independent access to financial services, women’s income can be managed 
independently until shifting norms and household situations reach gender equity for households in  
adapting to climate change . Within the program, microenterprise, access to finance, beekeeping, and 
agroforestry/cookstove value  chain support were chosen as key activities  because they  are feasible 
livelihoods within the target rural households and help strengthen resiliency of the rural economy. Further 
information on women in the value chains targeted by the project, including g ender characteristics, 
composition of workforce and ownership etc. is detailed in the project Feasibility Study where possible 
and will be refined during project implementation.  
 
1.21 Youth Analysis and Key Issues  
Rwanda is a young country; 82% of the population is under the age of 40 and 51.5% are 19 or under 
(NISR, EICV5 2018, see Table 5). The sex ratio for youth, classified as people from 14 -35 years old, is 
92 males for every 100 females. The literacy rate for youth is quite high; averaging 91% in urban areas 
and 82% in rural areas (ibid). Numeracy rates are linked to wealth, with poorer families having lower 
capacity (72.4% vs 92.7%). Larger urban -rural discrepancies are found in computer literacy (28.5% vs 
7%) and mobile phone ownership (70% vs 41%).   
Table 5: Youth population in Rwanda by district. (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)


---
*Page 209*
---

37 
 Table 6.  Youth Usual Economic Activity by Sex and Province.  Source: (NISR EICV5 2018).  
 
 
Employment figures for rural youth indicate that 54.7% are engaged in agriculture, and 32.9% in elementary 
activities. The rest are in services (7.8%), and very few  in managerial, professional etc jobs. According to a 
recent analysis, youth “envision self -sufficiency achieved through economic independence and the ability to 
provide for and support their families, and they see this path as most available to them throu gh self -
employment (USAID 2019)”.  The Youth Assessment highlighted key priority areas that youth identified for 
achieving their goals:  
 
● Livelihoods and skills development for productive self -employment activities  
● Education and skills for entering into the formal work sector  
● Reproductive autonomy and health to avoid early pregnancy which is a key hurdle towards economic 
self-sufficiency  
Poverty amongst youth has remained stable between EICV4 and EICV5, with about 30% of all youth below 
the poverty level, and 11.3% in extreme poverty. There are substantial gender differences, with young women 
increasingly vulnerable as they age (see Figures 7  and 8 with data from NISR’s EICV 5, 2018). Thus, 
programming ensuring attention on both young men and young women is vital for rural climate resiliency.


---
*Page 210*
---

38 
  
Figure 8: Percentage of youth below the poverty line by age (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)  
 
 
Figure 9:  Percentage of youth in extreme poverty line in Rwanda by age. (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)  
 
Translating this information into a climate adaptation program that supports  young men and women in the 
CND, three key topics influenced the action plan:  
a. Diversified  opportunities. With over 51.9% of the Rwandan population under the age of  
b. 15 and 18% between the ages of 15 -24, youth make up a significant percentage of the 
population. There is already a scarcity of arable land, with many households owning less  than what is 
needed for their subsistence. With the Rwandan population expected to increase from 12 million in 2019 
to 20 million in 2042. The future for the upcoming generation of rural youth is worrisome --agricultural


---
*Page 211*
---

39 
 lands will continue to grow scarcer  and demand for resources and land increase. The youth interviewed 
are very cognizant of these constraints, and many are keen to diversify their livelihoods yet they are 
most interested in short -term gains. This GCF program intends to seek out vulnerab le youth in critical 
areas of the CND to support entrepreneurship and diversified  opportunities to reduce pressure on highly 
marginal lands.  
c. Access to skills building . Many youth attend schools, but training in practical agroforestry, 
financial management, and forestry is lacking. This program intends to target youth for diversifying their 
skill sets and strengthening their resilience to adapt to climate change.  
d. Youth leadership and Programmatic Inclusion . Many youths  voiced their concerns over not 
being included in decision -making processes and programming, resulting in key stakeholders not being 
engaged in civil society. In order to engage the new generation of rural f armers and consumers, this 
project will identify and work with youth leaders in the CND to use SBCC to engage youth to benefit and 
support long -term tree initiatives. With youth involved in decision - making processes, innovative ideas 
to involve youth with  best practice on government lands and to get youth to appropriate long -term 
thinking through tree planting as future investments.  
 
1.22 Internal program considerations  
In addition to programmatic activities with women and youth, this program will also have an internal 
focus to ensure best practices. These include:  
a. Avoid perpetuation of gender inequalities and women’s exclusion in the agro/forestry sector. 
SBCC will be us ed heavily to shift norms towards inclusivity and skills building to facilitate women and 
youth to join the sectors.  In addition, women need to be engaged in the decision -making  bodies of the 
project itself, including a Steering Committee, which will be a t least 50% women, and the Project 
Management Unit with targets to achieve 50% women by the end of the program as mentoring and 
training increase capacity .  The Gender Monitoring Office will be a part of the Steering Committee and 
along with the The National Women’s Council and The Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion were 
consulted during proposal development and will continue to be involved at project implementation stage 
at the national and local level. There will be comprehensive consultation and feedback processes with 
these stakeholders through meetings and workshops to ensure perpetuating gender inequalities is 
avoided.  
b. Build partnerships . This GC F project provides a unique opportunity to engage civil society at 
national and local levels. The team will work with men’s, women’s, and youth organizations to build their 
capacity and facilitate their engagement with project beneficiaries and local gover nment actors.  
c. Gender and Diversity training . Training will be an important component of a large, 5 -year 
program. Building online training modules that can be viewed across the CND, and using new platforms 
like WhatsApp  to communicate with urban and rural p roject staff will ensure that static, one -off training  
is avoided.  
d. Staffing . Diversity and inclusion are important for the project, and hiring practices at all levels 
of the program will be reflected in hiring policies. The program management unit will hir e a full-time 
dedicated gender expert and a full-time dedicated  youth focal point (both AE staff)  and associated costs 
are included in the project budget .  These two staff will participate in all management meetings to support 
inclusion goals across the pr oject, and will lead and oversee the implementation of the Gender, Youth, 
and Social Inclusion Action Plan.  Another key role of these two positions will be to engage civil society


---
*Page 212*
---

40 
 partners, particularly women’s, men’s, and youth groups to build capacity and increase the sustainability 
of achievements during this five -year project.  Along with these positions, RFA staff will include a 
Community Mobilization Specialist and a Community Engagement Specialist who will be in charge of 
and support project gender  mainstreaming. Their responsibilities include reviewing site specific barriers 
faced by women to participate in project activities, ensuring these barriers are addressed in order to 
support full participation of women, ensuring gender equity in all projec t activities and where needed 
help women access the Grievance Redress Mechanisms to pursue redress and connect women with 
Isange One Stop Centers in the project area to prevent gender -based  violence and provide immediate 
assistance to victims.   
e. M&E. Many stakeholder meetings highlighted the lack of community engagement as a key 
reason for project failures in the past. This project will incorporate suggestions from our stakeholder 
engagement meetings to ensure best practice is followe d. This includes not only deeper local 
government engagement but also using a rights -based approach to ensure that communities are at the 
heart of planning our interventions. Targets for youth and gender are incorporated into the Gender and 
Youth Action Pl an below and are set to ensure women and youth are equally targeted where possible 
and encouraged to actively participate. Exceptions include situations where group composition, such as 
government agents or community leaders, are outside the project’s cont rol or the activity solely targets 
men, such as masculinity  sessions held with men to improve gender equity in program participation and 
benefits or assisted natural regeneration activities inside the park far from villages that will take male 
participan ts several weeks away from their homes. Overall targets for key activities (i.e., G4. 4.1.1.5, 
G4. 4.1.1.6) have not been set as the target will depend on the number of villages/sites where project 
activities take place, however disaggregated targets per v illage/site have been set. A project baseline 
will be conducted and baselines for all targets will be determined at project onset.


---
*Page 213*
---

41 
 
 
 
 1.23 Gender and Youth Action Plan  
 
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning  
Impact 1: Climate adaptation programming is successfully implemented because it is  
fundamentally informed by rural women and youth stakeholders  
Indicator: Equal participation by gender groups in contributing to expected outcomes  
Gender/Youth Outcome 1: Climate adaptation programs in LUPs reflect and address the priorities of women and youth  
Indicator: % of men, women and youth participating in LUP processes who feel LUPs incorporate their needs as they relate to c limate programmin g 
Activity  Gender/Youth Outputs  Indicators  Targets  Timeline  Responsi
ble Costs  
G1. 1.1.1.7  Conduct climate 
literacy seminars for local 
government and civil society 
organizations, aimed at increasing 
women and youth participation  Local institutions are 
trained to build capacity 
of rural people, 
specifically women and 
youth, to participa te in 
climate adaptation 
processes  # of CSOs 
and 
government 
agencies 
trained  60 people (50% male, 50% 
female) from  CSOs/Local 
institutions trained in Y1 and 
Y3 to increase participation of 
women/ youth/ marginalized in 
stakeholder consultations & 
activitie s Y1,3 PMU/RFA  $10,187   
  
G1. 1.1.1.8 Provide financial and 
logistical support to trained 
organizations in grassroots 
mobilization to increase women 
and youth participation in climate 
adaptation planning  Trained institutions hold 
meetings to train women, 
youth and marginalized 
people on forests and 
mobilize them to 
participate in planning 
processes  # of meetings 
held by 
trained 
organizations 
with local 
communities 
on climate 
adaptation 
programming  At least 10 grassroots 
meetings per district are held 
in Y1 and Y3 in the CND  Y1,3 PMU/RF A/
Local 
CSOs 
(TBD)  $12,262


---
*Page 214*
---

42 G1. 1.1.2.4 Develop and rollout a 
series of trainings (virtual sessions 
and online modules) on gender 
sensitivity and mainstreaming 
women and youth into planning  Program Staff and 
government officials  
understand gender 
barriers, understand how 
to mainstream g ender 
equality principles into 
planning  and are strong 
facilitators to support 
women, youth and 
marginalized participation 
in meetings  # of people 
trained 
(disaggregat
ed by 
gender)  
# project staff 
trained in 
social 
inclusion  - 65 government agents 
trained  per year .  
- 100% project staff trained  Y1-5 PMU + 
Local 
Women's 
NGO 
(TBD)  $40,523   
 
Component 2: Forest Landscape Management and Restoration  
Gender/Youth Impact 2: Sustainable gains in restoration and landscape management are made  
because women and youth are enabled and motivated to adopt best practice  
Impact Indicator: Targeted women and youth report an improved enabling environment for their participation in forest management and restoration  
Gender/Youth Outcome 2: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage in forest management and 
restoration  
Outcome Indicator: Equal participation by gender groups in forest lan dscape management and restoration  
G2. 2.2.2.15 & 3.1.1.11 Develop 
and implement strategy (including 
social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth benefit from 
forest restoration projects   
Women and youth have 
the capacity, motivation, 
and opportunity to 
participate and benefit 
equitably in  restoration  
programs. Programs will 
actively seek out direct 
participation  of and 
benefits for women and 
youth through paid labor 
and direct involvement.  % Women 
beneficiaries  
% Youth 
beneficiaries  50% of beneficiaries are 
women  
50% of beneficiaries are 
youth2 
 
 Y1 
Strategy 
Y2-5 
Implemen
tation  PMU, 
Women/Yo
uth NGOs 
(TBD)  $37,735  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods  
 
2 The total number of beneficiaries will be determined at project onset


---
*Page 215*
---

43 
 
 
 
 Gender/Youth Impact 3: Women, marginalized and youth are empowered to actively participate in green jobs  
Impact indicator: Target groups perception of economic empowerment  
Gender/Youth Outcome 3: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capa city to engage in green jobs  
Outcome Indicator: Number of new women, youth and marginalized households that have engaged in green jobs  
G3. 3.2.1.2 Develop and 
implement strategies to ensure 
that women,youth, and other 
marginalized groups benefit from 
rural livelihoods and financial 
services  
 Women and youth have 
the capacity, motivation, 
and opportunity to 
participate and benefit 
equitably i n rural 
livelihoods and financial 
services  % Women 
beneficiaries  
% Youth 
beneficiaries  50% of beneficiaries are 
women  
50% of beneficiaries are 
youth3 
 
 Y1 & Y2  RFA & 
CORDAID  $53,053  
G3. 3.2.3.2 Organize 
Microenterprise training and 
develop and implement green 
grants programs targeting landless 
youth and poor, as well as women 
who are unable to access direct 
benefits from land -based project 
activities.  Landless poor, youth, 
and women have 
enterprise skills and 
grants to engage in 
green value chains  # of 
enterprises 
formed, 
beneficiaries 
disaggregate
d by gender 
and social 
class  5,600 beneficiaries of which at 
least 50% are women  
500 off -farm jobs created  
in production quality  
control  
 Y2,3 & 4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $66,398  
G3. 3.3.2.2 Provide 
organizational/technical/financial 
capacity building to women, youth, 
and CSOs (such as cooperatives 
or VSLA) with focus on financial 
literacy and provide long -term 
coaching to beneficiaries  
 Women and youth 
groups have the 
organizational, technical 
and financial skills to 
receive support from 
project  # 
CSOs/VSLAs 
trained  
# beneficiaries 
receiving 
coaching  300 CSOs/VSLAs  
6,900 of which 40% youth  
50% women  Y2,3 & 4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $30,040  
 
3 The total number of beneficiaries will be determined at project onset


---
*Page 216*
---

44 G3.3.3.2.3. Support women, youth, 
other marginalized groups 
strengthen savings and loan 
groups and register for MFI 
accounts  
 Men, women and youth 
have access to thriving 
financial services  # people with 
new 
bank/MFI  
accounts  50% women  Y2,3,4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $13,713  
 
 
 
 
 
Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation  
Gender/Youth Impact 4: Women and youth benefit from an adaptively managed program  
Impact indicator : Reported attitudes, confidence, and a sense  of empowerment towards engaging in climate programming  
Gender/Youth Outcome 4: Disaggregated and specialized mo nitoring generates data showing whether and how women, youth and 
marginalized people are benefiting from adaptive management systems  
Outcome indicator: Gender and youth disaggregated participation data  
G4. 4.1.1.4: Develop an 
overarching gender and youth 
program unit within the GCF 
Project to ensure the project uses 
adaptive management to ensure 
strong inclusion of women, youth, 
and marginalized households such 
that equitable benefits are shared 
across the communities.  Gender/Youth program 
unit provides oversight 
and support to ensure 
gender/ youth targets are 
met N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $3,380  
G4. 4.1.1.5: With the local 
government, project partners, and 
Youth CSO leaders, identify key 
male and female youth leaders in 
each project village to be project 
champions  Key youth leaders are 
identified and engaged  Youth 
leaders 
identified  2 Youth leaders ( 50% male, 
50% female) per targeted 
village. 4 
 
 
 Y1 PMU, 
Youth 
NGO 
(TBD)  $88,68 3  
 
4 The number of targeted villages will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of youth leaders to b e reached. 50% male and 50% female youth leaders will be targeted per 
village.


---
*Page 217*
---

45 
 
 
 
 G4. 4.1.1.6: With local 
government, project partners and 
women’s civil society, identify key 
women leaders amongst project 
beneficiaries to be project 
champions  Key women leaders are 
identified and engaged  Women 
leaders 
identified  2 women leaders per village  5 
 
 Y1 PMU, 
Women's 
NGO 
(TBD)  $87,903  
G4. 4.1.1.7: Engage Youth & 
Women’s NGOs  to build 
leadership and coaching skills of 
identified project champions and 
facilitate their project involvement 
in order to advance project goals  
of greater participation amongst 
marginalized groups amid greater 
community -wide support for their 
participation  Leaders are equipped 
with skills and financial 
resources to build 
empowerment and 
facilitate women and 
youth  
engagement in the 
project  # of wo men 
and youth 
trained in 
coaching and 
leadership 
skills  
 
 200 (50% women, 25% male 
youth leaders, 25% female 
youth l eaders) women and 
youth leaders trained as 
trainers  Y1-2 PMU  $6,660  
G.4. 4.1.1.8: Overarching social 
behavior change communications 
strategy and materials are 
developed to overcome barriers 
and enhance motivations for 
women, youth and marginalized 
people to participate in program 
activities  Gender sensitive and 
responsive 
comm unications 
programming supports 
new norms for social 
inclusion in project 
activities  # programs/ 
materials 
delivered in 
communities  At least 10 materials 
developed and distributed 
annually  Y1-5 PMU  $97,552  
 
5 The number of targeted villages will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of women leaders to b e reached. 100% of women leaders will be female


---
*Page 218*
---

46 G4. 4.1.1.9: Informational 
campaigns on equity (land rights, 
access to resources, and decision -
making) and programmatic 
opportunities to showcase the 
benefits of everyone (women, 
young men/women, marginalized) 
participating in programming to 
improve lives  Gender sensitive and 
responsive c ampaigns 
and informational 
material on inclusion of  
different social categories 
is developed and 
disseminated  # of people 
reached by 
campaigns  At least 200,000 (50% female, 
50% male)  
people reached by campaigns 
over 5 years  Y1-5 PMU  $17,030  
G4. 4.1.1.10 Engage men's NGO 
to roll out programming for men as 
allies in women's economic 
empowerment and sexual/gender 
based violence reduction 
programming  Men in target areas 
participate in masculinity 
sessions to improve 
gender equity in program 
particip ation and benefits  # men 
participating 
in training 
sessions  At least 200 men participate in 
masculinity sessions each 
year from Y2 -5 Y2-5 PMU  
Men's 
NGO  $115,57
4 
G4. 4.1.2.2 Identify and train men 
and women (adults and youth) to 
implement key M/E tools in their 
communities  Women and youth are 
active participants in M/E 
at central, sectoral, and 
community level  # Women 
and Youth 
trained on 
M/E tools  At least 5 women, 5  men and 
5 youth (15 people total) per 
district  
are trained6 
 
 Y1-5 PMU  $3,380  
G4. 4.1.3.2 Engage youth leaders 
in designing and monitoring targets 
for youth engagement, 
participation, and outcomes  Youth targets are 
identified and 
incorporated into M/E 
system  N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $ 16,533  
G4. 4.1.3.3 Engage women 
leaders in designing and 
monitoring targets for women 
engagement, participation, and 
outcomes  Women targets are 
identified and 
incorporated into M/E 
system  N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $ 
16,533  
 
6 The number of targeted districts will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of women, men and youth to be trained.  The target for the number of ind ividuals trained overall is 
50% female, 50% male.


---
*Page 219*
---

47 G4 .4.1.3.4: Monitor program using 
Gender Checklist to ensure gender 
is integrated in programming, HR, 
policy, and activity performance  Project has a strong 
gender monitoring 
program  -Project
gender
checklist
developed
-Annual
checklist
scoresProject scor es on gender 
checklist increases  
yearly  Y1-5 PMU  $ 16,533  
G4. 4.2.2.1 Project partners 
(government and NGOs) are 
trained on gender -sensitive 
approaches  Project staff have skills to 
monitor inclusion of youth 
and women into 
programming  # staff trained  100% of M/E focal points from 
participating 
organizations/entities are 
trained  Y1-5 PMU  $25,780 
Project Gender and Youth staff time is incorporated into ea ch activity cost  
Total Estimated Cost for Implementation of GAP:  $ 759,452  
__________


---
*Page 220*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
23 – 26 October 2023  
Tbilisi , Georgia  
Provisional agenda item 12 GCF/B.3 7/02/Add. 08 
2 October 2023  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum  VIII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 217 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to 
Climate Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and Landscape 
Restoration "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Indepen dent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 221*
---

 
       GCF/B.37/02 /Add.08  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  140 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  141 
Secretariat’s assessment  144 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   161 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  172 
Gender documentation  173


---
*Page 222*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project title:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Country(ies):  Rwanda  
  
Accredited Entity:  Ministry of Environment  
Date of first submission:  2022/02/25   
Date of current submission  2023/09/11  
Version number  V.6


---
*Page 223*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 1 
 
  
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G  GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H  ANNEXES


---
*Page 224*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 2 
 
  
(a) PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)   
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   GCF  
contribution  Co-financiers' 
contribution  
Mitigation total  8 % 0 % 
☐ Energy generation and access  0 % 0 % 
☐   Low-emission transport  0 % 0 % 
☐   Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  0 % 0 % 
☒ Forestry and land use  8 % 0 % 
Adaptation total  92 %  100 %  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  13 %  49 %  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  2 % 0 % 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  0 % 0 % 
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services  77 %  51 %  
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome        1,084,291 tCO2eq  A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  Direct 
Beneficiaries:  
1,254,242 
(654,404 
females)  Indirect 
Beneficiaries: 
9,260,745 
(4,769,284 
females)  
30.9 % of the 
CND population  69.9% of 
Rwanda’s 
population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  50,000,000 USD  
A.9. Project size  Small (Up to USD 50 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  39,056,421 USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  ☒  Grant  39,056,421 USD   
☐  Loan  - 
☐  Guarantee  - ☐  Equity       - 
☐     Results -based payment    - 
A.11. Implementation 
period  5 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
 
TBD 
 A.14. ESS category   
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☒    No ☐M 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence   
Yes ☒    No ☐


---
*Page 225*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Rwanda Forestry Agency (RFA)  
Country of Registration: Rwanda  
Ownership Type: Government agency.  
A.21. Executive summary  
Rwanda’s Congo -Nile Divide (CND), an area of 444,600 hectares, is a high -elevation landscape of remnant 
natural forest reserves embedded in a mosaic of intensively managed smallholder farms and commercial 
plantations. Extending along a north -south ridge with an altitudinal gradient from 1,900m to 4,507m, the CND 
separates the drainage basins of the Congo and Nile Rivers. It is part of the Albertine Rift, which is one of 
the most biologically rich regions in Africa and “ one of the most important regions for conservation” on the 
continent1, containing more than half of Africa’s birds and 40% of its mammals.  At its highest elevations, the 
region is crowned by the Volcanoes, Gishwati -Mukura, and Nyungwe National Parks, con taining Rwanda’s 
only remaining montane forests, one of the most biodiverse ecosystems on the African continent, with high 
levels of endemism (species found nowhere else on Earth) and dozens of threatened species, including 
populations of mountain gorillas  and chimpanzees. Nyungwe has been recognized as one of the six highest 
priority protected areas in the Albertine Rift due to its high endemism and globally threatened species 
(Plumptre et al 2016). Though covering barely 5% of the country, this archipelag o of protected forests is of 
critical importance for:  
● Its globally recognized high biodiversity values2,3, 4, 5; 
● Its role in Rwanda’s acclaimed ecotourism offerings serving as the primary source of Rwanda’s 
foreign revenue and as a major economic devel opment driver6, 7; 
● The ecosystem services provided for surrounding subsistence farmlands, as well as for commercial 
tea and coffee plantations offering employment opportunities for women while providing the 2nd and 
3rd highest sources of foreign revenue8,9;   
● The regulation of water capture and release to growing urban centers on the CND periphery10, the 
nation’s extensive river network, and downstream hydroelectric operations11; and  
● The sequestration and storage of nearly 60% of Rwanda’s national carbon stocks12. 
These values and services are already compromised by a combination of anthropogenic and climatic factors; 
they will be much more severely threatened by the potential negative feedback loops associated with 
projected climate change  impacts. The Project will promote an ecosystem -based approach to forest 
protection and restoration and will enhance the extent and resilience of forest ecosystems and species, 
including functionally linking currently isolated forest fragments. Through the se approaches, the Project will 
protect, restore and rehabilitate forest ecosystems, enhancing biodiversity and reducing key threats, while 
 
1  Plumptre, A.J., et al. 2007. The biodiversity of the Albertine Rift. Biological Conservation 134:178 -194. 
2  Plumptre, et al. 2016. Conservation Action Plan for the Albertine Rift. Wildlife Conservation Society  
3  UN/CBD. 2020. Rwanda 6th National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity  
4  2012. .Eastern Afromontane Biodiversity Hotspot. Critical Ecosystems Partnership Fund.  
5  2023. Nyungwe National Park. BirdLife International. www.birdlife.org.  
6  RDB. 2021. Rwanda Development Board Annual Report  
7  2010. In the Kingdom of Gorillas . Weber & Vedder.  
8  Andrew, G., Masozera, M. 2010.  Payment for Ecosystem Services and Poverty Reduction in Rwanda . Journal of 
Sustainable Development in Africa (V12, No.3)  
9  RDB. 2021. Annual Report . 
10  Karamage, F., et al., 2017. Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water 2017, 9(2), 14.  
11  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2009. Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report, 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.  
12  Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. N at. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w


---
*Page 226*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 4 
 
 increasing the provision of critical ecosystem services to strengthen adaptation of vulnerable communities.13 
14 
The CND landscape supports nearly one -third of Rwanda’s population on barely one -fifth of its land base. 
Average population density is 736 people/km2, with some districts now exceeding 1,000 people/km²15. The 
highest rates of rural poverty in the country are reported from the CND, including its most vulnerable 
subsistence farmers. While high rainfall has historically permitted generally sufficient food production, the 
region’s rugged topography requires farming on extremely steep slopes. With more frequent extreme rainfall 
events in recent years, this agricultural landscape is recognized as the region of Rwanda most vulnerable to 
floods and landslides16. Between 2013 -2016 heavy rains generated landslides that killed at least 174 people 
and destroyed  the homes of more than 5,000. Many of these landslides caused flooding of highly productive 
raised -bed cultivation systems in the CND’s many valleys and surrounding bottomlands and many hectares 
of crops being washed away annually17. An estimated 1.5 mill ion tons of fertile soil are lost annually to 
erosion18. 
CND forests are essential to the region’s climate resilience. Since independence, the total natural forest 
cover has declined 40%, from 219,000 ha to 130,700 ha, mostly from episodic planned excision s as well as 
uncontrolled incursions. The loss around the Gishwati and Mukura core forest area has been most extreme. 
Of the original 32,098 ha in the 1980s, now only 3,460 ha remains as natural forest: almost a 90% loss (see 
Annex 2). In comparison, the V olcanoes and Nyungwe boundaries have been stable for decades. The recent 
creation of the Gishwati -Mukura National Park is an important step toward halting and partly restoring this 
forest, particularly for its land stabilization and other ecosystem service s within the CND’s most vulnerable 
lands and dependent communities.  
IPCC models predict rising temperatures and increasingly intense precipitation events for the CND through 
the rest of this century. The rainfall implications are especially threatening for  smallholders farming on steep, 
heavily deforested slopes, where they are most exposed to landslides, leading to loss of crops, homes, and 
lives. Yet their adaptive capacity is low because crop yields are vulnerable to rainfall variability and because 
high population density severely limits their options for relocation in the event of disaster. This is particularly 
true for women who, until very recently, had fewer legal land rights than men. The expected 2 ℃ increase in 
temperature would further result in a  more than 470m rise in vegetation zone elevations, impacting traditional 
crop selection and management practices for future farmers. An increase of this scale would also 
dramatically alter the optimal ranges for tea and coffee production, introducing pote ntial competition between 
these important export crops and alternative land uses.  
This Project is designed to sustain and expand critical forest ecosystem functions in the CND, and ultimately 
enhance the resilience of the vulnerable communities who depend on them. This will be done by 
strengthening government capacity for spatial planning, resulting in institutional and regulatory policies to 
promote and integrate climate adaptation strategies, based on the latest science, through coordinated 
planning at th e national and district levels. It will also protect, restore and expand natural forest in and around 
 
13  2003. Interlinkages Between Biological Diversity and Climate Change. CBD Technical Series Number 10 . 
14  2022. Ecosystems and ecosystem services Sectoral Guide. Green Climate Fund. 
15 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR); The Fifth Rwanda Population and Housing Census, Main 
Indicators Report, February 2023  
16  https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/National_Risk_Atlas_of_Rwanda_electronic_version_0.pdf  
17  Nsengiyumva JB, et al., 2018  Landslide Susceptibility Assessment Using Spatial Multi -Criteria Evaluation Model 
in Rwanda. International Journa l of Environmental Research and Public Health. 15(2):243. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15020243  
18  Bizimana, H.; Sönmez, O. 2015 Landslide Occurrences in the Hilly Areas of Rwanda, Their Causes and Protection 
Measures.  Disaster Sci. Eng. 2015, 1, 1 –7


---
*Page 227*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 the core national parks; consolidate and expand some smaller but critical "stepping stones"19 of remaining 
natural habitat between these national parks (m ainly small forest patches and wetlands/ riparian areas); 
improve the landscape linkage function of key high altitude landscape linkages between the protected areas, 
while at the same time securing ecosystem services through afforestation and improved nati ve species mix 
for plantation forests on steep slopes; silvopastoral interventions on cultivated pasture; and agroforestry 
interventions in regenerative agricultural areas. Complementary activities will address key drivers of 
deforestation while creating a lternative livelihood pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and 
income -generating, climate -resilient crops, as well as strengthening supportive financial services.  
Project interventions will include 10,000 ha of land (including both forest and si lvopastoral sites) under 
improved, climate -resilient management; and improve agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of on -farm 
plantations, directly benefiting 1,254,242 people (654,404 women) in CND with more climate resilient 
livelihoods from reduced expos ure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and more knowledge on climate 
risks, value of forests and forests ecosystems, climate adaptation options, access to indigenous and 
agroforestry quality materials and improved ecosystem services. The project will a lso indirectly benefit 
9,260,745 people  nationally mainly from the education and outreach program on climate change and gender 
issues, climate risks, value of forests and forest       ecosystems, climate adaptation options , and will create 
approximately  24,212 job opportunities in CND forest -dependent communities. The total mitigation impact 
from reduced deforestation, forest restoration introduction and adoption of improved cookstoves is estimated 
to be      1,084,291 t CO 2-eq by 2043.  
 
(b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1 (a). Climate context  
This section draws from the Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment presented in Annex 2.1, where more 
comprehensive elaboration can be found. Discussion on climate predictions is based primarily upon multi -
model means from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project’s sixth phase (CMIP6)20, used in the Sixth 
IPCC Assessment Report. Results are shown for paired Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) and 
Representative Concentration Pathway (RC P) emission scenarios; for some variables emphasis is placed 
on a “pessimistic” high SSP -high RCP scenario (SSP5 -8.5), for greater distinction between present day and 
future conditions as a consequence of anthropogenic climate change. Specialized modeling performed at 
ultra-high resolution for the East African Great Lake Environments project (EAGLE)21, and findings from 
scientific literature are utilized as well. Key findings are outlined in Table 1, and each climate component 
theme is discussed in the sect ion on projected climate change impacts below.  
 
19  Bagchi, R., et al. 2018. Forecasting potential routes for movement of endemic birds among important sites for 
biodiversity in the Albertine Rift under projected climate change.  Ecography. 41: 401 -413. 
20  Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6. Link 
21  Grim, J. A., Pinto, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon , A., 2020:  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset. Link


---
*Page 228*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 Table 1.  Principal Climate Hazards of the Congo Nile Divide through Mid -century  
Climate 
component  Character of 
change  Level of 
confidence  Near -term 
concern  Mid-century 
concern  Project Response  
Temperature  Upward trend 
from global 
greenhouse gas 
emissions and 
land-use change  Very high for  
+2.6 °C net 
increase 
1970 -2040  Elevational 
range of biota 
including   
pests and 
pathogens 
increasingly out 
of balance  Major uphill 
displacements 
of biota 
including 
cultivars due to 
~470 m rise in 
thermal 
conditions  Promotion of agroforestry 
practices : contribute to the 
conservation of soil moisture 
and its recharge through the 
infiltration of rainfall and runoff 
water, the creation of sheltered 
microclimati c conditions, and 
the inclusion into the soil of 
organic matter that contributes 
to moisture retention.  
Promotion of silvopastoral 
practices : Improve soil 
properties due to greater 
uptake of nutrients from deeper 
soil layers, enhanced 
availability of nutr ients from 
leaf-litter and increased 
nitrogen input by N2 -fixing 
trees.85 Moreover, 
silvopastoral systems enhance 
the resilience of the soil to 
degradation, nutrient loss, and 
climate change, while 
enhancing water holding and 
infiltration capacity of the s oil 
which contributes to the 
regulation of the hydrological 
cycle by reducing runoff 
intensity22,23.  
Protective restoration 
measures at erosion -prone 
areas :  Reduce exposure to 
soil erosion and floods of 
communities and their assets 
living in the road and  river side.  
Restoration  of degraded 
natural forests in protected 
areas  
Improve protected areas 
management to reduce 
potential human threats (forest 
encroachment , mining, fire).  
The project will support 
activities aimed at  
(1)promote alternative 
livelih oods that are resilient to 
climate change  
(2) decrease of demand and (3) 
increase of wood supply 
capacity. Dissemination of 
Improved Cook Stoves  
The project will support the 
development of an integrated Annual 
precipitation  Increasing totals  Moderate, 
but 
considerable 
model 
variation  Low concern, 
with natural 
interannual 
variability still 
dominant  Moderate 
concern, with 
majority of 
models showing 
upward trend  
Precipitation 
intensity  Increasing short -
period rainfall 
and storm totals  Almost 
certain to 
occur  Severe 
landslide 
hazard already 
present and 
increasing, 
building flash 
flood potential  Extreme hazard: 
widespread and 
frequent 
landslides and 
flash floods  
Cloud base 
height  Rising cloud 
base and levels 
of fog immersion 
in forests  Likely 
ongoing, will 
continue with 
temperature 
increase  Already 
significant in 
deforested 
highlands with 
some loss of 
moisture 
provision  Of major 
concern to forest 
ecology in 
protected 
landscapes  
Drought/dry 
spells  Increasing 
intensity  Moderate  Some increase 
in vegetation 
desiccation 
potential, 
possibly 
enhancing fire 
risk Sustained risk of 
increase in 
desiccation and 
fire risk, possibly 
offset by rainfall 
increases  
Wildfire  Increasing 
occurrence and 
extent in 
forested areas  Low Relatively 
random 
occurrences, as 
in the recent 
past, that could 
be managed by 
improved 
vigilance  If rainfall 
increases do not 
occur, increased 
vegetation 
desiccation 
would intensify 
risk for 
widespread fire  
Climatic 
seasonality  Disappearance 
of mid -year dry 
season  Low, but 
explicitly 
shown in 
some models  No concern  Increasing 
convective 
storm 
occurrences in 
June -Aug may 
eliminate dry 
season


---
*Page 229*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
land use plan at landscape 
level  that identifies and 
integrates the trade -offs 
necessary to improve delivery 
of ecosystem services, 
conserve natural resources and 
sustain economic growth.   
● Climate baseline and current impacts  
The climate of western Rwanda and its CND landscape features conditions highly supportive of tropical 
montane forests, rich biodiversity and human activities alike.  Despite being located deep in the tropics just 
south of the equator, the elevated terrain of the CND landscape, mostly above 2,000 meters, ensures 
relatively cool temperatures through the year ( Figure 1 ).   
 
 
 
Figure 1 (left) Topographic map of Rwanda with riverine drainage channels overlaid. Source : Rwanda (2019)24; (right) Congo Nile 
Divide, identified by the 1,900 m elevation contour and showing the presence of natural and plantation forests.  
Rainfall is abun dant for nine out of 12 months, and a reliable mid -year dry season adds dynamic character 
to phenological cycles, pollinator activity and agricultural practices ( Figure 2 ). Prior to landscape conversion 
for agricultural purposes, continuous dense forest co ver yielded augmentation of precipitation through fog 
interception in tree canopies, and near -daily cloud immersion sustained cloud forest ecosystems and species 
assemblages. The forests also maintained slope stability in steep terrain and yielded percolat ion and 
groundwater recharge rather than direct runoff of heavy precipitation.  Such conditions are now constrained 
to within the CND’s protected forests within national parks, covering just 30% of the CND landscape and just 
5% or Rwanda’s total land surfa ce. These are Rwanda’s only remaining montane forests yet represent 
 
22  Ibrahim M, Guerra L, Casasola F, Neely N, 2010.  Importance of silvopastoral systems for mitigation of climate 
change and harnessing of environmental benefits. In: Abberton M, Conant R, Batello C (Eds) Grassland carbon 
sequestration: management, policy and economics. Proceedings of the workshop on the r ole of grassland carbon 
sequestration in the mitigation of climate change. Integrated Crop Management, Vol. 11. FAO, Rome, Italy. 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1880e/i1880e09.pdf .  
23  Jose S., 2009. Agroforestry for ecosystem services and environmental be nefits: an overview. Agroforest Syst 76 
(1):1 –10. 
24  Vital Signs, 2019: Rwanda Atlas. Environment, Agriculture and Livelihood Options . Vital Signs and WCS Rwanda. 
Link.


---
*Page 230*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
58.7% of national tree carbon stocks25 and are imperiled by intense population pressures, with 30.7% of the 
country’s population residing within the CND landscape districts.  
   
 
Figure 2. Annual ( left) and monthly ( right ) rainfall (mm) climatology over Rwanda (period of record: 1981 –2017), based on 
algorithms that calibrate satellite -based rainfall estimates with surface observations.  Source : Jonah et al., 2021.26  
A reconstructi on of temperatures for the past 140 years for Rwanda, based on quality controlled instrumental 
records and centered on Kigali, shows that global climate change already has strong local expression. Rapid 
temperature increase commenced in the 1970s, with a n et gain of approximately +1.1 °C since 197027 
(Figure 3 ). 
 
25   Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.o rg/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
26  Jonah, K., Wen, W., Shahid, S., Ali, M.A., Bilal, M., Habtemicheal, B.A., Iyakaremye, V., Qiu, Z., Almazroui, M., 
Wang, Y. and Joseph, S.N., 2021. Spatiotemporal variability of rainfall t rends and influencing factors in Rwanda.  Journal of 
Atmospheric and Solar -Terrestrial Physics , 219, p.105631.  
27  Berkeley Earth (website): Rwanda Country Profile. www.berkeleyearth.org


---
*Page 231*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 3. Berkeley Earth temperature reconstruction based on instrumental measurements for Kigali in central Rwanda. The 
“Climate Stripes” offers a visual display that effectively communicates bot h individual year temperature anomalies and the overall 
multi -decadal trend behavior. Source: Berkeley Earth Rwanda Country Profile. www.berkeleyearth.org   
The regional warming of the climate over the past half -century coincided with widespread forest conversion 
to farmland along the CND. As a consequence, at fine spatial scales climatic conditions across the CND at 
present mimic the landscape mosaic, whereby onl y the protected forests will retain much of the past climatic 
character while converted landscapes are likely to be significantly warmer by day, have reduced cloud cover 
and higher cloud bases, and experience slightly reduced rainfall as well.  Due to the increased moisture 
carrying capacity of warmer air (7% increase per °C of warming)28, ongoing climatic warming promotes 
increasingly intense short -period rainfall, which acts synergistically with landscape conversion on steep 
slopes to cause quickflow runo ff, yielding large increases in landslide occurrence and soil erosion more 
generally ( Figure 4 ). With its high topographic relief, the CND is highly susceptible to soil erosion. 
Throughout Rwanda, soil erosion has increased by 54% since 1990 with the bulk of the increase 
experienced and highest erosion levels over western Rwanda.29 Between January and June in 2018, 
landslides caused more than 200 mortalities, and in May 202030, 65 deaths from landslides and flash flooding 
occurred during a single night of s torms focused on the eastern slopes of the CND.31   
 
28  Trenberth, K.E., 2011. Changes in precipitation with climate change. Climate Research , 47, pp.123 -138. 
29  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2019: Rwanda Natural Capital Accounts -Ecosystems. p. 23  
30  Reuters 2018. https://www.reuters.com/article/us -rwanda -floods -idUSKBN1I81I  
31  Associated Press 2020. https://apnews.com/article/b7658b76a403fd9bc8cba249f9d484fd


---
*Page 232*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 4.  (left) Intensity of soil erosion in Rwanda assessed for the year 2015. Source: NISR: National Institute of Statistics of 
Rwanda, 2019. ( right ) Observed landslide occurrences in Rwanda against a topographic background, showing intense clusters 
along both the east and west sides of the CND landscape. Source : Nsengiyumva et al., 2018.32 
Wildfire occurrence in forested lands exacerbated by climatic  warming is a rapidly mounting concern globally, 
and montane forests of the CND carry increasing vulnerability to loss from burning. Absence of fire -adapted 
flora in CND highland forests, however, suggests that fire has not been a major selective force wit hin the 
forest ecosystem. The 1997 visitation of weeks -long uncontrolled wildfires in the Nyungwe forest had an 
ecological imprint that remains evident 25 years later, as burned areas revegetated with dense ferns rather 
than replacement forests,33 represen ting a net loss of 12% of Nyungwe’s forest cover and corresponding 
loss of its carbon endowment.  Despite increased propensity for drying of vegetation as the climate warms, 
forests remain sufficiently moist such that fire causing forest losses are infrequ ent, and when they occur are 
usually tied to anomalous dry spells paired with human ignition, as was the case in 1997.34  
Cloud base altitude, which is highly influential in CND montane forest ecology and species composition, is 
likely rising above recent past conditions due to both climatic warming and conversion of forests to 
agricultural lands. Fog interception by vegetation augments montane forest precipitation in central African 
highland forests by an estimated 10%35, so highland forest loss by human a ction therefore represents a local 
reduction to the ecosystem service of rainwater provision).  
Projected climate change impacts  
Temperature increases . Localized projections for the CND landscape of climatic changes for coming 
decades, generated for the mo st recent IPCC assessment, present a strong consensus on temperature 
increase for the next two decades. The magnitude of net temperature change by late -century, and the 
tendency of warming to accelerate, hold steady, decelerate or even begin an overall tem perature decline is 
unknowable at present, but a large number of climate model simulations show common patterns, whereby 
divergence in possible temperature outcomes will only become apparent around 2040 ( Figure 5 ).  These 
 
32  Nsengiyumva, J.B., Luo, G., Nahayo, L., Huang, X. and Cai, P., 2018. Landslide susceptibility assessment using 
spatial mu lti-criteria evaluation model in Rwanda.  International journal of environmental research and public health , 15(2), 
p.243.  
33  Masozera, A.B. and Mulindahabi, F., 2012. Post -fire regeneration in Nyungwe National Park -Rwanda. WCS White 
paper report.  
34  Seimon, A., 2012: Climatology and Potential Climate Change Impacts of the Nyungwe Forest National Park, 
Rwanda. WCS White paper report, Wildlife Conservation Society, New York, USA, 44 pp.  
35  Bruijnzeel, L.A., Mulligan, M. and Scatena, F.N., 2011. Hydromet eorology of tropical montane cloud forests: 
emerging patterns.  Hydrological Processes , 25(3), pp.465 -498.


---
*Page 233*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
results are also consistent with o utputs from the previous CMIP5 model suite for western Rwanda (e.g., 
IFAD report 2020)36. As such, using the consensus values of such models is a sensible choice for 
environmental planning, with a +2.0 °C increase over the IPCC -referenced 1995 -2014 baselin e conditions 
offering a representative value for warming by mid -century. However, the observed warming of +0.6 °C 
registered between 1970 -95 prior to the IPCC baseline period must be recognized as well, suggesting net 
warming of +2.6 °C from a more represe ntative 20th century baseline.   
 
Figure 5 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble predictions for mean annual temperature over western Rwanda across the 21st century 
under a variety of SSP -RCP combinations. Source : World Bank37  
Annual mean precipitation changes. The CMIP6 results for precipitation changes over coming decades 
are less consistent than the temperature projections. Recent studies focused in East Africa have identified 
limitations to global model utilization for regio nally specific predictions, such as failure to represent observed 
precipitation magnitude and distribution in the present, and reliance on approximations (i.e., 
parameterizations) that inadequately represent the role of convective storms in precipitation d elivery38. The 
CMIP6 ensemble means for annual precipitation over western Rwanda have a baseline value of 
approximately 2,000 mm per year, which is considerably higher than actual values ( Figure 6 ; compare 
values with Figure 2 above). The higher emissions scenarios show increasing totals over time, which is 
plausible given the increasing water vapor carrying capacity of the warming atmosphere. Strangely, the most 
optimistic scenario (SSP1 -1.9) shows strongly varying trends at decadal scales, increasing far more rapidly 
 
36  Hunter. R., Crespo. O., Coldrey , K, Cronin, K, New, M. 2020. Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future 
Crop Suitability in Rwanda. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome.  
37  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
38  Wainwright, C.M., Marsham, J.H., Rowell, D.P., Finney, D.L. and Black, E., 2021. Future changes in seasonality in 
East Africa from regional simulations with explicit and param eterized convection.  Journal of Climate , 34, pp.1367 -1385.


---
*Page 234*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
in the near -term than other scenarios. Such inconsistencies reduce confidence in the overall product suite 
for precipitation predictions.  
 
 
Figure 6 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble prediction for mean annual precipitation over western Rwanda across the 21st century under 
a variety of SSP -RCP combinations. Left -axis scale is thousands of mm per year.  Source : World Bank39 
There is also major inconsistency between CMIP model suites. As assessment for western Rwanda from 
CMIP5 under RCP 8. 5 comparing historical and mid -century outputs suggested rainfall decreases of 5 -10% 
in most months, with net annual decrease of 86 mm 40; the baseline time periods and geographic domains 
of these two CMIP ensemble compilations for western Rwanda differ, b ut the reversal from drier to wetter 
gives low confidence in the utilization of precipitation predictions specific to the CND if derived from global 
models.  
To generate more refined results, Grim et al., (2020)41 performed regional simulations of East African climate 
at ultra -fine, convection -allowing scale (WRF model at 3.3 km model resolution); these were based off the 
global CESM2 model (part of the CMIP6 suite) boundary conditions under the high emissions RCP8 .5. The 
regional model was configured to optimize parity with regional climate station data. The resulting high spatial 
resolution output suggests a strongly amplified rainfall signal over the 21st century over western Rwanda 
relative to the CMIP6 ensemble  mean for RCP 8.5 ( Figure 7 ). Also notable is that the rest of Rwanda exhibits 
 
39  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
40  Hunter. R., Crespo. O., Coldrey, K, Cronin, K, New, M. 2020. Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future 
Crop Suitability in Rwanda. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome.  
41  Grim, J. A., P into, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon, A. (2020).  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset (NCAR Technical Note TN -563+STR).  Link


---
*Page 235*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
far smaller increases, suggesting that the CND’s hydrological significance as a water tower for the nation 
will be reinforced over time.  
 
Figure 7.  EAGLE projects high -resolut ion WRF simulation of annual mean precipitation ( left) and difference between end of century 
and recent past ( right ) across East Africa, where values are in mm per year. The CND landscape and Lake Kivu show comparable 
increases to eastern Lake Victoria, an d represent the largest rainfall increases across the modeled domain.  Source : Grim et al. 
(2020)42 
Precipitation intensity changes . Due to well -understood physical properties of the atmosphere, as 
warming progresses short -period rainfall rates and individ ual storm totals, especially for the fraction of 
higher -end events that can cause flash flooding and promote landslides, will increase and should amplify 
very significantly over time43. The CMIP6 ensemble means for monthly counts of days with heavy 
precipi tation suggest an upward trend is now underway ( Figure 8 ). Forthcoming increases are most 
pronounced for November through January. Such increases in heavy precipitation events are to be expected 
under a warming climate and are of major social and ecologica l concern, being a driver of landslide 
occurrences and major contributors to soil erosion intensity.  
 
42  Grim, J. A., Pinto, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon, A. (2020).  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset (NCAR Technical Note TN -563+STR).  Link 
43  Fowler, H.J., Ali, H., Allan, R.P., Ban, N., Barbero, R., Berg, P., Blenkinsop, S., Cabi, N.S., Chan, S., Dale, M. and 
Dunn, R.J., 2021. Towards advancing scientific knowledge of climate change impac ts on short -duration rainfall extremes. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A , 379(2195)


---
*Page 236*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 8 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble prediction for monthly changes in the number of days with rainfall >20 mm over western 
Rwanda across the 21st century under RCP8.5. Source : World Bank44 
Drought/dry spells.  Warming will also increase the propensity for vegetation to desiccate during dry spells, 
intensifying wilting of natural vegetation and cultivars. The capacity of air to extract moisture from landscapes 
through direct evaporation and evapotranspiration of vegetation will also increase exponentially as 
temperatures rise. This means that land surfaces and vegetation will dry out more quickly between rainfall 
episodes in the future than in the pas t. It also means that to maintain hydrological balances that natural and 
human systems depend upon, total rainfall must increase in proportion to intensifying evaporation rates. The 
CMIP6 ensemble results for the CND region suggest such a favorable balance  may indeed be maintained 
through at least mid -century ( Figure 9 ). Under the full range of emissions scenarios considered, there is 
almost no change in ensemble means through mid -century.  
 
Figure 9.  Western Rwanda CMIP6 model -model ensemble mean time series of the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration 
index (SPEI) for a range of climate change scenarios across the 21st century. The SPEI is a measure of the integrated water deficit 
 
44  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link


---
*Page 237*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
in a locati on, taking into account the contribution of temperature dependent evapotranspiration of a 12 -month period. Source : World 
Bank45  
A more useful variable for assessing drought potential at daily -seasonal times scales is the Vapor Pressure 
Deficit (VPD). This  is an absolute measure of the difference between the water vapor content of the air and 
its saturation value, and as such, represents a direct metric of the ability of the atmosphere to extract 
moisture from the land surface46. High resolution VPD predictions for present day, mid -century and late -
century under boundary conditions prescribed by the CESM model under the high emission RCP 8.5 
scenario are shown in Figure 10 . Annual cycles of VPD for model grid points high in the N yungwe Forest 
and at lesser elevation in Kigali east of the CND both show remarkably little variation in VPD over the course 
of the century. Owing to the cool, persistently moist highland climate that characterize the CND landscape, 
the VPD values are cons istently low in Nyungwe throughout the year for the three decadal time periods 
2009 -18, 2055 -64 and 2090 -99. This contrasts significantly with results from Kigali, where VPD registers 
four times higher than in Nyungwe during the mid -year dry season (20 vs.  5 hectopascal pressure deficit). 
This represents a favorable outlook over several decades to come for the CND in terms of limiting desiccating 
conditions that would elevate fire potential, stress crops and rapidly draw down hydrological resources.  
Importa ntly, however, not clearly evident in these model outputs is that rising cloud bases and associated 
warming temperatures increase the rate of drying of vegetation, increasing wildfire risk during rain -free 
periods, especially in lower reaches of forested t errain bordering settled areas where risks of anthropogenic 
ignition are highest.  
 
  
Figure 10.  Modeled Vapor Pressure Deficit (VPD) on slope of Mt Bigugu in the Nyungwe Forest ( left) and Kigali ( right ) for the recent 
past (2009 -18, blue, mid -century (20 55-64, green) and late -century (2090 -99, red). Source : EAGLE project47 
Precipitation seasonality.  The annual cycle of climate along the CND sees abundant rainfall for much of 
the year interrupted by a marked dry season in the June -August months when rainfa ll becomes light and 
sporadic, and during which hydrological deficits develop as evaporation far exceeds precipitation and 
resultant runoff. While highland orography largely explains the enhanced rainfall along the CND, the 
 
45  World Bank  Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
46  Seager, R., Hooks, A., Williams, A.P., Cook, B., Nakamura, J. and Henderson, N., 2015. Climatology, variability, 
and trends in the US vapor pressure deficit, an important fire -related meteorological quantity.  Journal of Applied 
Meteorology and Climatology , 54(6), pp.1121 -1141.  
47  East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) project. Link


---
*Page 238*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
occurrence of the dry seasons oc curs region wide irrespective of terrain elevation ( Figure 11 ). This finds 
explanation in the seasonal north -south migration of a pan -equatorial band of enhanced cloudiness and 
rainfall known as the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)48. The slight reduction in rainfall experienced 
over several weeks along the CND in January and February reflects much more pronounced dryness to the 
north in Uganda; conversely, the more defined mid -year dry season along the CND spanning June through 
Augus t is associated with enhanced southeasterly airflows that effectively push the zone of atmospheric 
convergence promoting rainfall across the equator into Uganda.  
In this light, an unusual finding from the EAGLE project’s high -resolution modeling studies i s that the CND 
landscape has a heightened risk of major change in climatic seasonality. By the 2055 -64 period: the mid -
year dry season effectively disappears. Being the output of a single model run under a high -end greenhouse 
gas emissions scenario may mak e this seem implausible; It is highly dissimilar from mid -century predictions 
of the consensus of global models, which sustain the dry season. It finds corroboration, however, in a new 
study on East African rainfall, which found that the parameterization o f convection in global models may be 
a source of uncertainty for projections of changes in seasonal timing, and that potentially impactful changes 
in seasonality are therefore quite plausible49. Such an eventuality is exceptionally difficult to plan for, a nd 
since it would only come to fruition well after the project period, if at all, additional studies could be conducted 
to provide needed guidance.  
 
  
Figure 11 . (left) The average number of “wet” days in Rwanda with rainfall exceeding 3 mm for the month s of June -August. The 
wettest parts of the CND only receive significant rainfall on ~10% of days during the dry season. Source : Meteo Rwanda50: (right ) 
Annual cycle of rainfall rate (mm/day, note logarithmic scale) at Nyungwe Forest National Park showing d aily means (thick lines) 
and extremes (thin lines) for 10 -year time periods centered on 2014 (blue), 2060 (green) and 2095 (red). The dry season evident in 
the 2014 mean reaching below 1 mm/day, effectively disappears by the 2060 time period.  Source : EAGL E project51  
 
48  Siebert, A., Dinku, T., Vuguziga, F., Twahirwa, A.,  Kagabo, D.M., delCorral, J. and Robertson, A.W., 2019. 
Evaluation of ENACTS ‐Rwanda: A new multi ‐decade, high ‐resolution rainfall and temperature data set —
Climatology.  International Journal of Climatology , 39(6), pp.3104 -3120.  
49  Wainwright, C.M., Marsham, J.H., Rowell, D.P., Finney, D.L. and Black, E., 2021. Future changes in seasonality in 
East Africa from regional simulations with explicit and parameterized convection.  Journal of Climate , 34, pp.1367 -1385.  
50  ENACTS online tool  at Meteo Rwanda. Link 
51  EAGLE project: Link


---
*Page 239*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
● Climate risks, vulnerability and impacts  
Without strategic actions to confront mounting stresses borne by climate change interacting with 
unsustainable land -use practices, the CND would doubtless undergo a profound transformation over coming 
decades with significant loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services, reducing agricultural potential, severe 
hazards to humanity and loss of livelihoods. Temperature increase and loss of fog immersion will cause 
desiccation of the lower margins of protected forests promoting die -offs, arrival of pests, pathogens and 
invasive species, and increasing fire ignition potential. Current cultivation practices of both subsistence crops 
and valuable cash crops like tea and coffee will be drawn uphill, adding  to pressure to convert protected 
forests to farmland. Whereas climatic changes will act as inexorably mounting stressors, unsustainable land 
surface conversion and land use practices will greatly exacerbate their impacts. The steep hillsides that 
characte rize much of western Rwanda will experience intensifying erosion and risk of landslides, while built 
infrastructure such as road and bridges will be overwhelmed since they were engineered to withstand rainfall 
intensities expected under past climatic condi tions that are sure to be exceeded, and with increasing 
frequency, as time progresses and temperatures steadily increase.  Precipitation intensity will increase for 
short -period rainfall rates and individual storm totals, especially for the fraction of hig her-end events that can 
cause flash flooding and promote landslides. This is certain to occur, is probably already discernible, and 
likely to amplify very significantly over time as warming progresses. This ties directly to landslides in 
particular, which already cause high mortality and significant destruction each year, and the CND’s elevated 
vulnerability due to high topographic relief and deforested slopes makes this hazard of paramount concern 
to address ( Figure 12 ).  
 
Figure 12 . Rwanda landslide susceptibility map showing past observed landslides. Source:  Nsengiyumva et al., 2018.52 
Significant temperature increases are almost certain to continue for decades to come, and will have mounting 
impacts on both natural and human syste ms along the CND, and some are already discernible. Over 
equatorial Africa observed environmental lapse rates feature temperature decreases by approximately 
5.5 °C per kilometer of elevation increase53, so 2 °C of warming expected by mid -century translates  to a 
vertical rise on the order of 473 meters, promoting large uphill displacements of a wide range of organisms, 
 
52  Nsengiyumva, J.B., Luo, G., Nahayo, L., Huang, X. and Cai, P., 2018. Landslide susceptibility assessment using 
spatial multi -criteria evaluation model in Rwanda.  International journal of environmental research and public healt h, 15(2), 
p.243.  
53  Camberlin, P., 2018. Climate of Eastern Africa. In  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science . Link


---
*Page 240*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
ecological processes, cultivars and human activities.  While temperatures over the CND region are not 
expected to rise to levels for heat stre ss to elevate mortality54 or reduce labor productivity, the indirect effect 
of rising temperatures through increased disease incidence is substantial55.   
Western Rwanda is the most productive region in the country for the cultivation of both tea and coffe e, where 
conditions are optimized on the CND’s sloping terrain. Both are cash crops with high export value, and are 
the target of active expansion through both governmental programs and private enterprise. Intensifying 
environmental stresses from climate c hange particularly due to thermal increases and the arrival of invasive 
pests from lowland regions, present challenges both for current plantings and in planning for expansion to 
new areas; the same concerns apply to other cultivars.  
Cloud base altitude, w hich is highly influential in montane forest ecology and species composition, is likely 
already elevated above recent past conditions due to conversion of forests to agricultural lands, and certain 
to rise further in proportion to the degree of warming ove r coming decades. Ecosystems and species 
assemblages in the lower reaches of protected forests may already be out of balance with this important 
environmental variable, and this imbalance will only increase over time, promoting rapid species turnovers, 
enhancing potential for invasives, and act as a strong driver of upward range extensions. Rising cloud bases 
in concert with warming temperatures also increase drying of vegetation, enhancing wildfire risk during rain -
free periods. Fog interception by vegetat ion also augments montane forest precipitation by an estimated 
10%, so rising cloud bases will act to remove this important hydrological input too. Highland forest loss 
therefore represents a local loss to the ecosystem service of rainwater provision that could be partially 
restored through reforestation.   
Such challenges highlight how essential highland forests are to the climatic resilience of CND communities, 
for the ecosystem services and products they provide for both the region’s vulnerable communiti es and the 
national economy. They also recharge aquifers; regulate water flow; control flooding; retain soil; provide 
wood fuel energy and timber; underpin the country’s tourism, which provides the largest contribution to 
Rwanda’s foreign exchange earnings56; and provide wider benefits of atmospheric pollution control that 
sustain the country’s economy and the wellbeing of its people57.   
Forest conversion to farmland in the CND highlands has until recently served as a release valve for lowland 
population p ressure at the expense of drastically reduced national carbon stocks, diminished resilience to 
climate change, enhanced potential for destructive outcomes, reduced ecosystem service provision and 
disrupted biological connectivity. The resultant loss of eco system services and functioning and intensifying 
environmental stresses borne by climate change now require redirection towards forest restoration and other 
actions to ensure a sustainable future. Safeguarding the Congo -Nile Divide’s remaining highland for ests, 
and setting long -term goals of reforesting functional linkages connecting them, therefore serve Rwanda’s 
national long -term interests on lessening the severity of impacts of climate change and sustaining critical 
ecosystem services both locally and d ownstream, while contributing to global efforts to draw down 
greenhouse gas concentrations.  
B.1 (b). Summary of spatial biodiversity assessment  
The majority of Rwanda’s remaining montane forests are restricted to the national parks, which support a 
variety of threatened and endemic species. A few fragmented forest patches are situated outside of the 
National Park boundaries. Landcover change (espe cially for widespread smallholder agriculture), fuelwood 
 
54  Asefi -Najafabady, S., K. Vandecar, A. Seimon , P. Lawrence and D. Lawrence, 2018: Climate change, population 
and poverty: vulnerability and exposure to heat stress in East Africa. Climatic Change , 148, 561 -573. 
55  World Bank, 2022: Rwanda Country Climate and Development Report. World Bank, Washington  DC. Link 
56  Rwanda Development Board 2017 Annual Report Link 
57  Andrew, G. and Masozera, M., 2010. Payment for ecosystem services and poverty reduction in Rwanda.  Journal 
of sustainable development in Africa , 12(3), pp.122 -139.


---
*Page 241*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
harvesting, and human -induced fires, coupled with climate change impacts, especially landslides, erosion 
and downstream flooding, have compromised the delivery of critical ecosystem services derived from these 
forests. A detailed spatial analysis of biodiversity in the Congo Nile Divide was conducted to delineate priority 
areas for the long -term conservation and restoration of forests, and the sustainable management of 
landscapes, in order to secure t he ecosystem services needed to improve the resilience of vulnerable 
communities to climate change impacts.  
The spatial biodiversity assessment for Rwanda’s Congo -Nile Divide (CND) (see details in Annex 2 and 
Annex 2.2) is based on a rapid systematic conse rvation plan, using MARXAN decision -support software. 
The key analyses involved identifying and mapping the remaining areas of natural forest and other 
ecosystem types, modeling bioclimatic change and identifying climate change refugia, a Condatis landscap e 
connectivity and bottlenecks analyses, and evaluating ecosystem threat and protection levels. The analyses 
thus build in landscape connectivity, climate change refugia, biodiversity values, ecosystem services and 
social costs.  
The final outcome of the MARXAN and Condatis connectivity analyses split the CND domain into four major 
landscape categories with a set of priority implementation areas, each with their own place -bound project 
interventions. Interventions range from the restoration of natural forest, establishment and improvement of 
protective forest on steep slopes and along riparian areas; and to implement biodiversity -friendly 
agroforestry to reduce landslides, erosion and downstream flooding. Over and above these place -bound 
interventions a re a variety of other mechanisms for promoting the sustainability of rural livelihoods and 
protecting montane forest in Rwanda’s CND landscape.   
The Systematic Conservation Plan analyses covered a range of biodiversity features, including:  
● Terrestrial ecosystems, including their IUCN Red List threat status and protection level. The analysis 
focussed on identifying priority remaining intact areas, based on the development of a map of 
ecological condition.  
● Protected Areas, Protected Forests an d Protected Wetlands. All the identified ecosystems to be 
gazetted for protection are included.  
● Climate change refugia based on projected changes in bioclimatic envelopes under a range of 
climate change scenarios.  
● Identification of key landscape linkage ar eas and bottlenecks.  
● Hydrological process areas – Rivers and Streams, including buffers.  
● Hydrological process areas – Wetlands and Lakes, including buffers.  
● Hydrological process areas – Areas with high rainfall.  
● Landscape process areas - Steep slopes (over  55%) which are most important for minimizing erosion 
and landslide risk.  
Individual species were not separately considered in the assessment as all key species are tightly linked  
to their underlying intact habitat (in particular intact forest patches as w ell as wetlands and riparian areas); 
and available distribution data for species was much broader than the ecosystem data. In selecting priority 
conservation areas, the SCP methodology always attempts to be spatially efficient by meeting conservation 
targe ts in as small an area as possible, while avoiding conflict with other land users, at the lowest possible 
cost for other sectors. The following was taken into account in the prioritization:  
● Urban and dwellings, tea, roads, plantations, cultivated pasture, coffee, bamboo and agriculture.  
● Areas of greatest population density.  
● Areas with highly impacted land cover classes.


---
*Page 242*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Results of the MARXAN spatial analysis:  
The MARXAN landscape prioritization ( Figure 13 ), which builds in landscape connectivity, climate change 
refugia, biodiversity values, ecosystem services, and social costs (in terms of avoiding, where possible, 
areas with highest population density, agriculture etc), splits the landscape into four key planning categories 
(Figure 14 ): 
● Core Protected Area (PA) Nodes:  National Parks comprise the “Core PA Nodes” that need to be 
secured and well managed, which include Volcanoes, Gishwati -Mukura and Nyungwe National 
Parks. Priority activities include strength ening PA management and sustainability, rehabilitation and 
restoration of natural forests, other conservation -oriented land use activities that reduce stress on 
PAs and natural forests (e.g. improved wood stove efficiency to reduce pressure on natural fore sts) 
and supporting sustainable biodiversity compatible activities (e.g. improved beekeeping). These 
nodes also include buffer areas around the National Parks.  
● Stepping Stones:  These are priority nodes outside of the current National Parks that are critica l for 
maintaining landscape connectivity, consisting of small, isolated patches of forest, at Dutake and 
Karehe -Gatuntu Protected Forests and the extensive Gishwati Pastures. These areas would be a 
sensible focus for some (patches of) forest restoration an d protection, beekeeping and energy 
efficient stoves. The Gishwati Pastures are a focus for agroforestry on pastoral land to increase the 
coverage of native trees to secure reasonable landscape connectivity for forest species.  
● Landscape linkages:  These are  key landscape linkages and knickpoints in the farming landscape 
that require afforestation on steep slopes and riparian areas to link the CND at a landscape scale. 
Compatible land use activities include agroforestry, increasing the use of native species, reforesting 
steep slopes, beekeeping and energy efficient stoves. Note that the analysis is based on some 
level of improved connectivity via patches of protective forest and riparian strips, as well as 
overall improved species composition and tree coverage  (within mixed agroforestry 
systems). It does not imply a continuous natural forest corridor; as this potential no longer 
exists, and its creation would not be possible in this highly used landscape without 
unacceptable impacts on livelihoods.  
● Broader Far ming Mosaic:  These are broader areas of moderate priority where conservation 
interventions can support broader sustainable landscapes and ecosystem service delivery but are 
likely to be beyond the scope of most project interventions except for those linked  to land use 
planning.


---
*Page 243*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 13. The MARXAN irreplaceability map for the Congo Nile Divide showing the landscape prioritization, ranging from high 
priority in red to low priority in green.  
To aid prioritization and description of the landscape categories above, the four categories were further split 
into specific planning areas, referred to as “Landscape Implementation Sectors”, as shown Figure 14  and 
in Table 2  with a description of each pl anning category and associated ideas, required outcomes, core 
benefits and associated benefits in Table 3.


---
*Page 244*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
Table 2.  Summary table of landscape categories and associated implementation sectors for the CND.  
Landscape Category  Landscape Implementation Sector  Area (ha)  
Core PA Nodes  Volcanoes NP and “Buffer”58 
Nyungwe NP and Buffer  
Mukura NP and Buffer59 
Gishwati NP and Buffer59 19 487,0  
116 794,9  
4 713,5  
4 013,7  
Stepping Stones  Gishwati Pastures Stepping Stone  
Karehe -Gatuntu Stepping Stone  
Dutake  Stepping Stone  15 547,4  
401,1  
903,0  
Landscape Linkages  Nyungwe NP to Mukura NP Linkage  
Gishwati NP to Volcanoes NP Linkage  
Mukura N to Gishwati NP Linkage  23 375,4  
5 014,8  
7 823,7  
Broader Farming Mosaic  Nyungwe to Mukura Broader Farming Mosaic  
Volcanoes Broader Farming Mosaic  
Mukura Broader Farming Mosaic  
Gishwati Broader Farming Mosaic  
Nyungwe Broader Farming Mosaic  21 164,4  
11 694,4  
4 814,0  
28 433,2  
11 437,0  
Priority Areas for Implementation Activities:  
Specific priority areas for a range of interventions were spatially identified, including:  
● Natural forest rehabilitation and restoration with the National Parks (and their buffers) and in the 
Stepping Stones.  
● Protective forests for steep slopes and riparian areas, particularly in the L andscape Linkages.  
● Agroforestry interventions in key highland Landscape Linkages.  
● Specific agroforestry priorities on pastoral land (silvo -pastoral practices).  
● Indigenous shade trees for tea and coffee plantations.  
● Beekeeping in National Park buffers and S tepping Stone buffers.        
 
 
58Note that buffers refer to both the specific legally designated buffers around Nyungwe and Gishwati -Makura NPs, as well 
as broader buffer areas adjacent to all these NPs, as well as Volcanoes NP.  
59In order to allow for specific landscape description, we s eparately refer to Gishwati NP and Makura NP where necessary, 
even though these areas are managed as Gishwati -Makura NP.


---
*Page 245*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 14. The four major landscape categories (Core PA Nodes, Stepping Stones, Landscape Linkages and the Broader Farming 
Mosaic) were split into specific areas to aid prioritization and description.


---
*Page 246*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Table 3.  A description of the four key landscape planning categories and associated ideas, required outcomes, core benefits and 
associated benefits.  
Landscape 
Component  Core PA Nodes  
The National Parks  Stepping Stones  
Priority nodes 
outside of current 
Pas Landscape 
linkages  
Key landscape 
linkages and 
knickpoints in the 
farming landscape  Broader Farming 
Mosaic   
The broader 
landscape mosaic  Institutional 
issues 
Description  The current core 
national parks and 
protected forests.  Critical pieces of 
biodiversity 
outside of the PAs 
required for 
landscape 
connectivity, 
maintenance of 
biodiversity and 
delivery of 
ecosystem 
services.  The parts of 
landscape within 
identified key 
corridors, where 
functional 
connectivity and 
ability to deliver 
ecosystem serv ices 
needs to be urgently 
maintained or 
improved.  Remaining farmland 
areas of the CND.   The non -geographic 
specific elements of 
the CND system  
Key ideas  Protect and 
manage for climate 
resilience.  Restore and 
protect to ensure 
landscape 
connectivity and 
ecosystem 
service delivery.  Functional linked 
farming landscapes 
delivering ecosystem 
services.  Diverse climate 
change resilient 
farmland delivering 
ecosystem 
services.  Strong, well -
capacitated and 
equitable 
environmental 
governance and 
land use planning.  
Required 
Outcome  PAs effectively 
protect and 
manage natural 
forests improving 
resilience to climate 
change impacts 
and risks.  
Natural forests 
protected, 
connected, more 
resilient to climate 
change impacts 
and risks.  Critical landscape 
nodes / stepping - 
stones are 
secured and 
where necessary 
restored to a 
natural state.  Priority portions of 
the farming 
landscape are 
specifically managed 
to improve overall 
connectivity and 
ecosystem service 
delivery.  Sustainably 
managed farmland 
landscape is  more 
biodiverse, supports 
delivery of 
ecosystem services 
and is resilient to 
climate risk.  Government and 
civil society are well 
capacitated to 
ensure robust 
landscape planning 
that supports 
climate resilience.  
Core benefit  Maintain globally 
significant, 
species -rich natural 
forests.  
Core areas secure 
best possible 
source and/or 
refuge areas for 
species under 
climate change.  Biodiversity value 
of critical 
landscape nodes 
is maintained.  
Landscape 
connectivity 
supported 
through retention 
of key stepping - 
stones for species 
movement across 
the landscape.  Improved 
connectivity of the 
landscape ensures 
long term climate 
resilience.  
Value of core PAs 
and priority nodes is 
retained (i.e. the 
inevitable 
degradation of sites 
due to isolation is 
avoided) .  Generally improved 
farmland 
management 
ensures rural 
sustainability and 
supports 
livelihoods.  Integrated land use 
plans, with 
community 
participation and 
spatial planning 
tools/ monitoring  
Associated 
benefits   Improved delivery 
of ecosystem 
services (especially 
water) and support 
of rural economies 
and livelihoods.  Improved delivery 
of ecosystem 
services 
(especially water) 
and support of 
rural economies 
and livelihoods.  Improved delivery of 
ecosystem services 
(especially water) 
and support of  rural 
economies and 
livelihoods.  Improved delivery of 
ecosystem services 
(especially water) 
and support of rural 
economies and 
livelihoods.  Cross sectoral 
planning and 
management.  
This study was a rapid assessment to support project proposal development and does not replace a full 
conservation planning process. There are significant additional steps which are required to develop a 
product that is useful for land use planning during project implementation. These changes include a robust 
stakeholder engagement process, at a national, district and local scale; incorporation of issues relating to


---
*Page 247*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
land use rights, both of landowners and farm tenants; incorporation of issues relating to so cial safeguards, 
especially for marginalized groups; inclusion of issues related to planning processes and strategies, at a 
national and local scale; finer scale planning (ideally at a 1:50 000 scale); and improved biodiversity data, 
including revised data  on forest degradation, validation of the ecological condition map, and specific species 
data where possible.      
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  
The theory of change for this Project is founded on several key principles. Central to all, the CND represents 
a complex landscape – a geospatial mosaic of forest and farming patches, each dependent on the other. 
These coupled, biological and socio -economi c systems are under great strain due to intense land pressure, 
which has resulted in a negative cycle of natural resource degradation that undermines the well -being of 
both natural and socio -economic systems. The advent of climate change is a forceful driv er that intensifies 
this cycle of degradation, with the resultant loss of key ecosystem services that importantly link forests and 
people. This cycle must be disrupted in order to chart a path toward climate resilience for natural and human 
systems. Ecolog ical connectivity must be established within this mosaic of land uses to promote landscape 
heterogeneity to help build resilience to climate change of forest ecosystems and people who depend on 
them. The approach to be taken by this Project is therefore based on principles of ecosystem -based 
adaptation: that healthy and resilient ecosystems form an essential foundation for adaptation to climate 
challenges60. Climate -aware management of both natural and human -dominated ecosystems – interacting 
and integrat ed at a landscape level – can break the cycle of degradation and instead lead to a positive 
sequence of mutually reinforcing, climate -smart, sustainable, and resilient benefits..  
In sum, the goal statement of the Project is:  
IF Rwanda’s CND landscape of native forests and neighboring farmlands is effectively managed for climate 
resilience  
THEN  the CND will comprise an interconnected  and interdependent set of globally significant, species -rich 
natural forests  in a matrix of sust ainable farmlands , acting as buffers against damage from extreme weather 
events : assuring  landscape integrity, stability and adaptability,  providing  vital ecosystem services and 
improving livelihoods for vulnerable people and the nation at large and contributing importantly to the 
conservation of biodiversity, the national economy, and mitigation of GHGs  
BECAUSE  building the capacity and management of integrated, climate -resilient forest and farming systems 
will ensure natural forest perpetuity and b reak and reverse the climate change -induced intensifying cycles 
of drought, flooding, and landslides that lead to degradation of livelihoods and resultant increased pressure 
on forest resources.  
The status and future of the CND’s forests and people are tig htly intertwined: both heavily dependent on the 
natural resources and processes that provide a foundation for their ability to thrive. They represent ecological 
and socio -economic systems that are importantly coupled in a complex landscape, linked in parti cular by the 
ecosystem services that flow throughout these systems (hydrological and microclimate regulation, soil 
conservation, and nature -based tourism). At present these services, and the consequent relationships 
between forests and people – especially those who are most vulnerable in Rwandan society – are deeply 
 
60  Scarano, F.R. et al, 2017 . Ecosystem -based adaptation to climate change: concept, sustainability and a role for 
conservation science,  Perspectives in Ecology & Conservation 15(2), 65 -73.


---
*Page 248*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
strained61. Forests have been reduced in extent, fragmented, and degraded by fire62, overuse of resources63, 
and introduction of exotic species64. The sharply sloped rural lands of the CND have been farmed more and 
more extensively and intensively on steeper and steeper slopes65,66 and throughout riverine bottomlands, 
further reducing tree cover outside forest blocks: thereby further compromising the ability of the land to retain 
soils67, avoid f looding68, provide consistent and healthy water44, ameliorate microclimate49, store carbon69, 
and remain productive. The coupling of these stressed systems has led to a negative feedback cycle of 
insecurity and constrained the well -being of farmers. Having little access to alternative sources of livelihoods 
or capital to enable change70, smallholder farmers have consequently increased pressures on natural forests 
for land, fuel, and other forest resources46. Such pressures in turn cause furth er forest loss and degradation 
and decline in biodiversity – reducing their ability to provide essential ecosystem services to people living in 
the landscape and across the nation, including tourism revenues and employment that are of national import. 
Thus , these systems are caught in a negative cycle that has proven difficult to break, despite significant 
sector -specific efforts. One such pressure – demand for fuelwood – is quite substantial given that a recent 
Government of Rwanda (GoR) census found that 77% of Rwandan households use wood as their primary 
fuel for cooking71. 
With the advent of climate change, these already strained systems are showing clear signs of breakdown. 
Increased variability in the timing and intensity of rains along with rising tem peratures are causing increased 
landslides72 and soil erosion50, increased desiccation and drought50, and unpredictable timing for agricultural 
plantings and harvest73. This is reducing farm productivity and security, driving even greater pressures on 
the remaining forested estate, thereby compromising further the essential ecosystem services that are 
necessary to such well -being. At a larger scale, climate -induced forest degradation and decline of 
biodiversity in the CND compromise national -level benefits of water provision and quality1, nature -based 
tourism74, the supply of hydroelectricity,7,75 and carbon storage10 [see diagram A below].  
 
61  Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows and potential 
supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.  
62  Masoz era, A.B., Mulindahabi, F., 2007. Post-Fire Regeneration in Nyungwe National Park , Rwanda. Wildlife 
Conservation Society.  
63  Republic of Rwanda, 2011. Green Growth and Climate Resilience: National Strategy for Climate Change and Low 
Carbon Development . 
64  USAID, 2019. Rwanda Tropical Forests and Biodiversity Analysis . 
65  Camberlin, P., 2018. Climate of Eastern Africa . In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science.  
66  Seimon, A., 2022. An Overview of Climate Change and its Impacts along the Congo -Nile Divide in Rwanda . 
67  World Bank, 2019. Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic . 
68  Karamage, F., et al., 2017. Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water  2017,  9(2), 14.  
69   Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M.,  Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
70  Clay N., King B., 2019. Smallholders' uneven capacities to adapt to climate change amid Africa's 'green 
revolution': Case study of Rwanda's crop intensification program . World Dev.  
71   Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.  
72  Uwihirwe, J., et al., 2020 . Landslide precipitation thresholds in Rwanda . Lan dslides.  
73  World Bank; CIAT. 2015. Climate -Smart Agriculture in Rwanda . CSA Country Profiles for Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America and the Caribbean Series. Washington D.C.: The World  Bank Group.  
74  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2015 . Rwan da State of Environment and Outlook Report.  
75  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2009 . Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report , 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.


---
*Page 249*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
 
 
This context calls for new mechanisms of land -use planning and management that are based on 
consideration of the C ND as a landscape, consisting of an inter -dependent mosaic of forests and farms, the 
management of each determining the health of the whole. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination 
across geographic and sectoral boundaries, while mainstreaming cli mate risks into management planning 
will be key – and the foundation for a paradigm shift. Use of this framework to design and apply practical, 
precedent -setting Project actions in -forest and on -farm is expected to shift mindsets and management 
systems. Th is, in combination with establishing durable sources of financing, is thereby intended to shift the 
natural and human ecosystems themselves toward sustainable climate resilience. [see diagram B above, 
and the ToC (Theory of Change) diagram below.


---
*Page 250*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 
Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 15. Theory of change


---
*Page 251*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 29 
 
  
Outcome 1. Landscape planning, policies and management are effective and coordinated across 
sectors and scales to address climate risks and adaptation benefits.  Major barriers currently stand in 
the way of moving in this direction, as outlined in the ToC diagram. Awareness, understanding, attention, 
and action regarding climate risks to natural resources are currently insufficient . Planning and 
adaptation to climate impacts are constrained by a lack of information, site -focused modeling, spatial 
analysis, and real -time monitoring. Where some capacity exists, it operates within sector initiatives rather 
than across them . It also proceeds largely within governmental programs, with mechanisms for inclusive 
land-use planning inadequate , not fully engaging rural peoples – particularly women and youth. Because 
of these barriers, coordination of landscape planning and management is weak across governmental and 
non-governmental sectors (agriculture, forestry, national parks, economic development), scales (local, 
district, natio nal), and actors (women, youth, smallholder farmers, commercial businesses, as well as 
governmental agencies). Activities outlined in Component 1 , aimed at integrated landscape land -use 
planning and the capacity for effective management, are intended to he lp ensure ecosystem services persist, 
and thereby align the ties between forests and people as they are faced with climate challenges. Activities 
under this component will provide the government and public with up -to-date information on climate 
adaptation (1.1.1), build agency capacities for incorporation into land -use planning – particularly spatial 
analysis and forest monitoring (1.2.2, 1.2.3), establish mechanisms for integrated landscape planning – 
including public participation and operations of an int er-agency task force (1.1.2, 1.2.1), and facilitate the 
creation of a climate -smart, integrated CND land -use plan (1.1.2).  
Outcome 2. Natural forests are protected, connected, more resilient to climate impacts and risks.  
Particular to the CND, another key barrier is that natural forests are as yet undervalued and under -
resourced  despite the fact that they play vital roles in stabilizing natural and human CND ecosystems76,77. 
The national parks of the CND (Volcanoes, Nyungwe, and Gishwati -Mukura) are globally significant 
regarding their outstanding species richness, levels of endemism, and presence of endangered and rare 
species78. Although these are well -recognized for their  tourism potential, and strong governmental policy and 
practice exists to protect them, barriers to their full valuation remains: their ecosystem services are yet to 
be fully recognized  or financially supported, and their support is vulnerable to global to urism trends  
(with COVID -reduced tourism as a current example). As climate change considerations enter into landscape 
management, the values of these natural forests for fog interception, precipitation infiltration, soil retention, 
drought mitigation, and hydrological balance are only now becoming more prominent. In order to provide 
such services into the future, Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura NPs are in need of restoration and 
connection79,80. Yet the understanding and capacity for recovering their richness and function is nascent at 
best, particularly in light of climate change. Activities outlined in Component 2  are therefore designed with 
forest sustainability at the core. To build climate considerations into forest planning and management, the 
Project will facilitate revision of park management plans (2.1.1) that enhance dimensions of fire prevention 
and management (2.1.3), and will support in -park forest restoration (2.2.2). Establishment of restored forest 
at park boundaries (2.2.2), riparian linkages outside the parks (2.2.2), and forested “stepping stones” that 
 
76  Gatwaza O.C., Wang X., 2021 Mapping of biodiversity hubs and key ecosystem  services as a tool for shaping 
optimal areas for conservation.  PLOS ONE 16(8): e0253151  
77  Andrew, G., Masozera, M., 2010. Payment for Ecosystem Services and Poverty Reduction in Rwanda . Journal of 
Sustainable Development in Africa (V12, No.3).  
78  This a rea is also significant for global biodiversity – with the Albertine Rift being one of the most biodiverse regions 
within Africa, including conservative estimates of at least 980 endemic species, 15 Critically Endangered species, 34 
Endangered species, and  99 Vulnerable species. Source: Plumptre, A.J., et al. 2016. Conservation Action Plan for the 
Albertine Rift . Wildlife Conservation Society.  
79  Nyandwi, E., Mukashema, A., 2011. Excessive Deforestation of Gishwati  Mountainous Forest & Biodiversity 
Changes . Participatory Geographic Information Systems (P -GIS) for natural resource management and food security in 
Africa.  
80  Ordway, E., 2015. Political shifts and changing forests: Effects of armed conflict on forest co nservation in Rwanda . 
Global Ecology and Conservation.


---
*Page 252*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 allow for forest species to move between parks (2.2.1, 2.2.3) is intended to enhance biodiversity and forest 
functions across th e CND landscape.  Fundamental to forest sustainability as well is sustainable long -term 
financing, which will be addressed by providing technical support from the Project to RBD and REMA to 
assess various financial instruments (conservation and/or water fu nds, bonds, revenue streams) to be 
employed for revenue generation post -GCF (2.1.2).  
Outcome 3. Vulnerable rural livelihoods are more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable 
and nature -positive.  The sustainability and climate resilience of th e agricultural matrix of this landscape is 
challenged by additional, multiple barriers. Rural agricultural practices and livelihoods are constrained by 
the very small size of landholdings (avg. 0.3 ha81), creating intense pressure to utilize all arable lan d for food 
and near -term income -generating products56, thus creating reluctance to incorporate trees or other soil 
conservation measures on the land82. The resultant lack of fuelwood in turn continues to drive 
deforestation of natural forests12, and occupi es important time for women and youth  who could 
instead be engaged in productive and empowering roles. Overall, local communities and extension 
services83 have limited skills, information and knowledge to design and implement farming methods  
that would enh ance their capacity to mitigate the impacts from climate -induced soil erosion, flooding and 
droughts. Farmers also lack access to financial know -how56 and capital, proven alternative livelihoods, 
and markets  that could incentivize and enable change12. They  are therefore caught in a cycle of immediate 
need that – without alternatives – forecloses options that could recover and sustain benefits from improved 
ecosystem services, other forest functions, and new livelihoods. Component 3  aims to redress these 
conditions via activities that will demonstrate, incentivize, facilitate, and support actions that maintain and 
recover ecosystem services, benefit from forest functions and provide alternative on - and off -farm based 
incomes that reduce pressure on forests. T o these ends, the Project will support reafforestation on steep 
slopes (>55%), on both public and smallholder private lands (Activity 3.1.1). It will develop farm -based 
agroforestry for climate -resilient species that produce fuelwood and/or market products , while conserving 
and enriching soils (3.1.2, 3.2.1). The Project will complement land -based production with a scaling -up of 
alternative value -chain products for smallholders that are nature -positive, including but not limited to tourism -
based income, bee keeping, and improved cooking stoves (3.2.2, 3.2.4). Central to these activities will be 
facilitation of access to market chains (3.2.3) and financial mechanisms for establishing and maintaining 
businesses (3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3). Given that these activities  are designed at the core to be profitable and 
promote financial sustainability, it is intended that they be replicable, and sustained once GCF funding 
expires.  
Assumptions . Success in achieving Project outcomes will depend on important assumptions being m et, 
among them that governmental and non -governmental actors will be willing to work in collaboration across 
sectoral and geographic boundaries; rural adoption of alternative farming and off -farm revenue generation 
can be scaled up to drive a landscape -level transition to sustainability; financing and revenue -generating 
mechanisms will be established that assure continuance of initiated actions; and governmental commitment 
to natural forest restoration and ecosystem -based adaptation continues in national st rategies and in meeting 
global commitments.  
The pathways summarized in this ToC are expected to contribute to the overall goal and outcomes of the 
Project : natural forests  and vulnerable communities  will be more resilient and sustainable despite climate 
impacts, with effective, coordinated management across the CND landscape. In doing so, important co -
benefits will accrue. Intentional, inclusive engagement in management coordination will empower women 
and youth  in environmental thinking and decision making.  Forest conservation and restoration, along with 
agroforestry, will contribute to greater carbon sequestration and storage, while fire management and 
greater cooking efficiency will reduce GHG emissions . The globally unique, endemic biodiversity of 
 
81  USAID, 2017. LandLinks Country Profile: Rwanda. https://www.land -links.org/country -profile/rwanda/   
82  Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority, 2017. Forest Investment Program for Rwanda . 
83  Foster & Graham, 2014. Connectivity and the Tea Sector in Rwanda: Value Chains and Networks of Connectivity -
Based Enterprises in Rwanda.


---
*Page 253*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 31 
 
 Rwanda’ s forests, from great apes to rare orchids, will recover on the basis of healthy, more connected and 
resilient forest habitat.   
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low- 
emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliance
s MRA 4  
Forestry 
and land 
use ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communitie
s ARA 2  
Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructur
e and built 
environmen
t ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1. 
Landscape 
planning, policies & 
management 
effective & 
coordinated across 
sectors and scales 
to address climate 
risks & adaptation 
benefits  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 2. Natural 
forests protected, 
connected, more 
resilient to climate 
impacts & risks  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 3. 
Vulnerable rural 
livelihoods more 
climate -resilient, 
diverse, 
economically 
sustainable & 
nature -positive  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
Co-benefits 
number  Co-benefits  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1 : 
Globally unique, 
endemic 
biodiversity 
maintained  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2 : 
Women and 
Youth 
empowered  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
       
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Rwanda’s CND region is a complex, naturally integrated landscape. Its diverse high elevation forests capture 
and store water resources, releasing them in a sustained manner throughout the year to surrounding steep 
hillside and bottomland farms and plantati ons, before feeding into the national network of wetlands, rivers, 
and lakes. The Rwanda portion of the CND runs from the Virunga Mountains and Volcanoes National Park 
(VNP) on the border with Uganda in the north, down through Gishwati Mukura National Park  (GMNP), to the 
south end of Lake Kivu and Nyungwe National Park (NNP) on the southern border with Burundi. These three


---
*Page 254*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 32 
 
 national parks contain the country’s only remaining montane forests. The boundaries of the CND landscape 
are defined as all areas greate r than 1900m in elevation.  
Administratively, the CND overlaps three Provinces (Western, Southern, Northern) and ten Districts 
(Karongi, Musanze, Ngororero, Nyabihu, Nyamagabe, Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru, Rubavu, Rusizi, Rutsiro).  
 
 
Figure 16. Map of CND Landscape


---
*Page 255*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Map of CND Landscape drainage basins  
 
To address the present and intensifying threats from climate change requires that this region also be 
managed as an integrated and ecologically connected system. This need is recognized in several key 
policies and plans enacted in recent years by the Rwandan government. However, implementation and 
integration84 of these have lagged, their decentralized application on the ground is largely unrealized, and 
climate -related technic al capacity remains limited in key institutions at all levels. This Project is designed to 
increase the climate resilience of the CND. Its intended outcomes are:  
● The development and implementation of effective landscape planning, policies, and management, 
coordinated across sectors and scales, to address climate risks and adaptation benefits;  
 
84   Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows and 
potential supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.


---
*Page 256*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 34 
 
 ● Improved protection, restoration, and connection of existing natural forests, with enhanced resilience 
to climate impacts and risks; and  
● The transformation of vulnerab le rural livelihoods to be more climate -resilient, diverse, economically 
sustainable, and nature positive.  
The Project has three main components directly targeting vulnerabilities within climate impact chains. 
Detailed analyses of the underlying rationale are provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2). Please see 
section 4.1 of that study, for a list and descr iption of relevant existing and previous projects in the region.    
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning   
There is an urgent need for more effective collaboration among Rwandan government agencies, civil society, 
private sector, and diverse partners to balance difficult -yet-inevitable land use trade -offs that will have 
profound impacts on the climate resilience of both natural systems and people. The GoR recognizes that a 
piecemeal approach to decision mak ing has exacerbated competition over scarce land resources and 
reduced the adaptive capacity of both ecosystems and rural populations85. Rwanda’s Baseline Climate 
Change Vulnerability Index (2015) recommends establishing a multi -ministry technical climate resilience 
coordinating committee, including NGOs86. In 2017 the MoE developed the Strategic Programme for Climate 
Resilience (SPCR), to focus on three cross -cutting priorities to achieve climate change resilience: (a) 
technical capacity building and stren gthening institutional coordination; (b) integrated land use and spatial 
planning; and (c) climate services and disaster risk management87. The SPCR is a key step towards ensuring 
inter-ministerial and multi -sectoral collaboration and integration of climat e resilience considerations into 
development plans and actions. However, there remains a need to comprehensively implement the strategy 
and mainstream climate change adaptation at the sub -national level, engaging a diverse set of actors and 
sectors and emp owering women to provide input into decision making at district and community levels.  
Output 1.1: Landscape -wide land -use plan developed for climate -resilient livelihoods and forest 
ecosystems, integrating district strategies.  
The GoR completed a National Land Use and Development Master Plan (NLUMP 2020) to guide land use 
planning and regulate permitting processes. However, effective and strategic land use has yet to be applied 
at a local and district level, and the conversion of plantation and riparian for ests to agriculture continues and 
development projects are approved without sufficient knowledge of climate change risks or the value of 
existing forests for ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA)88. The Project will add climate -change  resilience and 
adaptation content to central government efforts such as NLUMP and the SPCR process by acquiring, 
synthesizing, and disseminating key information on climate trends, the importance of remaining natural 
forests, and the value of ecosystem services. This information wil l also be shared at district and community 
levels through var ious outreach networks and workshops, with particular attention to reaching disadvantaged 
women, youth and vulnerable groups.  
Building on the information base outlined above, the Project will wor k with the National Land Authority (NLA) 
to establish a working group, with participation from relevant ministries, agencies, and districts, including 
representatives of women, youth, and vulnerable groups interests, to develop a climate -resilient land -use 
 
85  National Land Use Management Plan.  
86  United Nations, 2015. Economic Commission f or Africa; Rwanda Environment Management Authority. Baseline 
climate change vulnerability index for Rwanda. Kigali. Rwanda Environment Management Authority.  
87  Rwanda’s Green Fund (FONERWA), 2017. Strategic Programme for Climate Resilience (SPCR) Rwanda - 
December 2017. Link. 
88  Scarano, F.R. et al, 2017 . Ecosystem -based adaptation to climate change: concept, sustainability and a role for 
conservation science,  Perspectives in Ecology & Conservation 15(2), 65 -73.


---
*Page 257*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 35 
 
 plan for the CND landscape. At the national level each relevant ministry and government agency will select 
and appoint a working group member while at the district level, participants will be selected from the Joint 
Action Development Forum (JADF). JADF i s a multi -stakeholder platform meant to facilitate and promote 
the full participation of citizens in the decentralized and participatory governance and improve service 
provision processes with representatives from the public sector, private sector and civi l society. The following 
stakeholders will form the basis of the collaboration: a) the Ministry of Environment represented by four of 
its agencies: the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA); the National Land Authority (NLA), 
Rwanda Water Board (R BA) and the Rwanda Forest Authority (RFA); b) the Ministry of Agriculture, including 
the Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB);  c) the National Agriculture Export Board (NAEB) d) Ministry of Local 
Government; e) Rwanda Development Board (RDB); f) Gender Monitori ng Office (GMO); g) Districts 
Decentralized Structures – the District Administrative Units, which supervise several technical and 
administrative activities; h) civil society, international organisations, academia and community based 
organizations. This lis t will be discussed during the inception period and expanded as necessary. From this, 
a spatial framework for district level land use planning will be developed that accounts for current and future 
climate risks, reconciles cross -sectoral land -use conflict s, and guides development decisions. All the 
activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forest Authority in collaboration 
with National Land Authority, and districts.  
Activity 1.1.1.  Synthesize and disseminate informati on on value of natural forests and ecosystem services  
This activity will involve conducting a stakeholder mapping & consultation exercise in order to better 
understand the use of climate adaptation data in existing sectoral planning processes, and identify  cross -
sectoral linkages or conflicts. These results, along with a comprehensive literature review, will inform the 
design of high -level information packages that will synthesize information on climate risks for various sectors 
(e.g. agriculture, forestry)  and highlight the value of forests for increasing resilience of local communities. An 
information dissemination program (e.g., presentations, workshops, and newsletters) will be implemented to 
share this knowledge among key ministries as well as governmen t, non -government and community 
organisations. The Project will use JADF as a platform to disseminate information to key stakeholders. 
Particular attention will be paid to ensure women, vulnerable and youth groups from Ubudehe categories c, 
d and e are rep resented . In addition, the program will use mass media in the form of a radio program and 
complementary community action campaigns to improve community, women, youth, other vulnerable groups 
knowledge on climate information, climate risks and climate adap tation options. This will stimulate discussion 
on issues pertaining to climate risks and other social issues locally and support engagement of each in 
responding effectively to climate adaptation and resilience options.   
Cross -sectoral tradeoffs and climate adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral implications will also be 
highlighted, in order to begin promoting the benefits of integrated land -use planning. To complement the 
high-level information dissemination program, a suite of technical training materials will also be developed 
for delivery to district technical staff. These materials will provide training on climate risks & the need to 
incorporate climate adaptation into land -use planning, with a focus on the technical skills required for climate -
sensitive planning (e.g. sourcing climate data, mapping ecosystem services).  
Sub-activities will include:  
1.1.1.1 Map the sectors involved in land -use planning in the CND and review how forest ecosystem services 
and climate resilience are incorporated in to each sector’s planning process


---
*Page 258*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 36 
 
 1.1.1.2 Conduct comprehensive literature review & stakeholder consultation to collect & synthesize 
information on climate risks for various sectors (e.g. agriculture, forestry), the value of forests for increasing 
resilien ce of local communities, and highlight adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral implications.  
1.1.1.3 Host workshops & presentations with key ministries, government organizations, NGOs and 
community organizations to disseminate high -level knowledge on valu e of forests for increasing resilience 
of local communities.  
1.1.1.4 Develop guidelines for integrating climate risk into land use planning and cross sectoral planning  
1.1.1.5 Develop outreach materials on climate and related risks in the CND and the value  of forest 
ecosystems for increasing resilience  
1.1.1.6 Implement outreach program tailored to different stakeholders (local government, civil society, 
communities, women, youth) to enhance capacities for land -use planning, funding mobilization, and delive ry 
of climate adaptation actions  
1.1.1.7 Conduct climate literacy seminars for local government and civil society organizations, aimed at 
increasing women and youth participation.  
1.1.1.8 Provide financial and logistical support to trained organizations in grassroots mobilization to increase 
women and youth participation in climate adaptation planning.  
1.1.1.9 Introduce social safeguards at a high level at each meeting, including the GRM, FPIC, and Access 
Restrictions Mitigations as safeguar ds to be in place for work with local communities.  
Activity 1.1.2.  Develop climate -resilient landscape land -use plan  
This activity aims to ensure that climate change adaptation requirements are fully integrated into planning 
processes at local, district a nd national scales. This will involve i) participatory scenario analysis to 
understand the problems local communities and district officials face in terms of natural disasters (flooding, 
soil erosion, forest loss/degradation) and climate change, as well as  the future land use plans of the districts, 
including an assessment of the national consequences of these problems in terms of ecosystem service 
delivery and climate change resilience and adaptation capacity; ii) risk assessment to estimate the impacts 
of the planned land use changes, as well as climate change, on flood risk, soil erosion, forest 
loss/degradation and the well -being of local people, especially any disproportionate impacts on women, 
youth and vulnerable groups; iii) climate change adaptation  and mitigation measures development to decide 
possible climate actions for both adaptation and mitigation and prioritize these actions according to their 
feasibility and urgency in consultation with local communities, district leaders, and other stakehold ers; and 
iv) land use plan development based on the recommendations from the previous 3 steps. A comprehensive 
consultation and feedback process will be undertaken to incorporate views of stakeholders at all levels (e.g. 
civil society; men, women, youth, a nd historically marginalized people in local communities; district & national 
government), upon which the plan will be finalized and approved by the Government of Rwanda.  
Sub activities will include:  
1.1.2.1 Engage district officials, Joint Action Develo pment Forums (JADF), and community members in the 
CND (especially women) in reviewing and interpreting the National Land Use and Development 
Management Plan (NLUMP), to ensure the plan accounts for current and future climate and related risks, 
while buildi ng local support for climate sensitive planning


---
*Page 259*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 37 
 
 1.1.2.2 Conduct participatory land -use planning process in communities from village to district level to 
support integrated climate resilient land use planning  
1.1.2.3 Develop Integrated Land -use Plan that su pports Resilient Livelihoods and Ecosystems in the CND, 
ensuring alignment with National Land Use and Development Master Plan and ensuring the CND plan guides 
the district plan  
1.1.2.4 Develop and roll out a series of trainings (virtual sessions and online  modules) on gender sensitivity 
and mainstreaming women and youth into planning  
1.1.2.5 Assess specific climate impacts on historically marginalized and Category c,d,e populations through 
a participatory NR process to ensure the Project components address their needs for adaptation  
Output 1.2 Local and national institutional capacities strengthened to integrate biodiversity and 
climate risks into land use planning and management  
Forest data in Rwanda has historically been generated in an ad -hoc fashion89 through the support of external 
agencies. This precludes comprehensive consideration of forest and biodiversity data in land -use planning 
processes. As Rwanda moves to achieve the goals outlined in the Green Growth and Climate Resilience 
Strategy and the Nat ional Land -Use Development Master Plan, building governmental capacity in generating 
and utilizing spatial data to inform decision making is essential. The activities under this output will involve 
recruiting experts in mapping, remote sensing and ecosyste m service modeling, in order to establish a formal 
spatial planning unit within government. These experts will also lead a formal information dissemination and 
capacity building program, in order to i) promote the importance of considering forest & climate  resilience 
into land -use planning, and ii) deliver detailed training to technical staff on forest mapping, climate and 
ecosystem service modeling. The Project will also increase the understanding of the importance of forest 
landscape restoration in securi ng ecosystem services for local economic development and resilient 
livelihoods. It will ensure that the public, decision -makers and other stakeholders in the CND landscape have 
a high level of awareness of the risks to the economy and livelihoods associate d with deforestation under 
current and possible evolution of these risks with the changing climate, and the benefits of reforestation in 
an integrated landscape approach.  
Women’s land rights need some key consideration for an effective integration of wome n in land use planning 
and management, among which include advocacy for women’s knowledge of their rights, women’s 
confidence in the dispute resolution process and outcomes, men’s respect of women’s rights, and modest 
improvements in physical and social ac cessibility of the local justice system for women are most critical 
avenues for success. These factors will be considered throughout project implementation of the activities 
proposed within this project using a gender -responsive, participatory and fully tr ansparent approach. For 
example, under the project trained institutions will hold meetings to train women, youth and marginalized 
people on forests and mobilize them to participate in planning processes and local institutions will be trained 
to build capac ity of rural people, specifically women and youth, to participate in climate adaptation processes 
Program Staff and government officials will be trained understand gender barriers, understand how to 
mainstream gender equality principles into planning  and  support women, youth and marginalized 
participation in meetings.  
Furthermore, the Project will support dialogue with the private sector and planning processes needed to 
mainstream climate change and biodiversity in the tea sector. Projected climate chang es predict significant 
elevation rises in CND agro ecological zones, including the potential for tea cultivation at much higher 
 
89   Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change  in Western Rwanda during periods of wars and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).


---
*Page 260*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 38 
 
 elevations than at present. This is unlikely to threaten Rwanda’s existing montane forest parks, as foreign 
revenues from touris m in these reserves far surpass those from tea. However, tea remains a significant 
source of foreign revenue and a government target for expansion. Any increased tea production in the CND 
would therefore most likely affect lands outside of parks: smallhold er, cooperative, and district holdings, 
many of which might also be targets for reforestation, agroforestry, and biodiversity stepping stone initiatives 
under this Project. The integrated land use planning included in this Project design, will bring togeth er tea 
industry, agriculture, forestry, biodiversity, and tourism interests to identify and reduce such potential 
conflicts over use of the CND’s limited land resource base. Through this integrated land use planning we 
aim to establish a formal public -private sector forum at the landscape level to help improve communication 
across sectors, appreciation of environmental issues, and increase synergies between interventions to avoid 
conflicting targets and indicators between sectors.  
This output will comprise the following activities and sub activities which will be executed by the Rwanda 
Forestry Agency (RFA) in collaboration with key government agencies, private sector and civil society 
organizations.  
Activity 1.2.1 Create interagency taskforce institutionali zing integrated landscape planning and policy  
Insufficient mechanisms for integrated land use planning constitute one of the key barriers for sustainable 
natural management in Rwanda. Planning processes within government agencies are carried out in silos 
without paying attention to the impacts a certain land use activity or project will have on other sectors of the 
economy. This Project aims to facilitate improved collaboration among government agencies by 
strengthening the government’s existing cross -secto ral planning task force. The existing task force was set 
up to support cross -sectoral implementation of the National Strategy for Economic Transformation, but it 
suffers a number of weaknesses, including: i) a lack of official mandate for the task force to  carry out 
activities; ii) irregular attendance of members; and iii) lack of clear and regular funding to facilitate meetings. 
This activity will review the mandate and structure of the cross -sectoral task force and promote solutions for 
strengthening its operation to RFA (the task force coordinator). It will also facilitate quarterly meetings of the 
task-force, in particular between institutions in charge of agriculture and agroforestry, to encourage synergies 
and avoid overlapping mandates and redundancy in different climate resilience interventions. The involved 
staff at both national and local levels shall be empowered to readily share information and activity plans, and 
will be offered technical support to generate materials that can inform decision -making (e.g. policy briefs, 
map, presentations). The Project will support collaborative integrated landscape planning, which secures 
climate resilience undertaken with appropriate social safeguards.  
Sub activities will include:  
1.2.1.1 Review & strengthen operationalisation of the current cross -sectoral task force  
1.2.1.2 Hold quarterly sectoral planning meetings with both national and district administrations in CND and 
the private sector involved in mining, agriculture, and livestock production in the landscape  
1.2.1.3 Facilitate discussions and provide technical  support (e.g. policy briefs) in decision -making for cross -
sectoral actions around climate adaptation and forest resilience in the CND  
1.2.1.4 Continue to introduce social safeguards at each meeting including the GRM, FPIC, and Access 
Restrictions Mitigati ons as safeguards to be in place for work with local communities. For those at the district 
or community level, provide options for feedback on the process and best ways of communication with local 
partners.


---
*Page 261*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 39 
 
  
 
Activity 1.2.2 Build capacity for spatial plan ning in national agencies re climate change  
Spatial planning is emerging as a valuable tool for the development of evidence -based land use and climate 
resilience strategies90. This subcomponent will develop capacity within the Rwanda’s university network a nd 
the MoE to use remot e sensing, ecosystem service modeling and spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, 
InVEST, RIOS, SWAT and other open access tools such as Open Foris) to inc orporate climate risks and 
climate resilience strategies into development plans and to readily identify and reconcile land use conflicts. 
A prime example of the latter is the potential for climate -driven shifts in optimal elevation zones for coffee 
and tea cultivation conflicting with current subsistence agricul ture in the case of cof fee, and key remaining 
natural forest fragments with regard to any upward migration of tea. These spatial planning tools will be 
procured by the project and will be made available to the spatial planning unit.  
The Project will assist the GoR in developing  a dedicated spatial planning unit (SPU) within an appropriate 
ministry or cross -cutting agency. The appropriate hosting institution will be determined during the project 
implementation in consultation with key government agencies operating under the Minis try of Environment.  
This will include support for training high level Rwandan specialists to provide the technical expertise needed 
to process and integrate spatial planning into decision -making within and across secto rs. A specific 
contribution of this S PU in coordination with appropriate governmental and non -governmental partners is 
the development and operationalization of an innovative, scientifically credible, scalable system for 
monitoring trends in natural forest cover and forest types at multiple s cales. This SPU will also allow Rwanda 
to measure and report on the land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector as part of a national 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory (GHG -I). This system will build on the national FMES that was established with 
the sup port from ENABEL.  
Capacity building is essential for execution of the Project; even more so for the sustainability of Project 
elements in the long run. To improve Rwanda’s collective ability to integrate land use planning in support of 
climate change resi lience and delivery of ecosystem services, these sub -activities are planned:  
1.2.2.1 Recruit spatial planning expert/s to support spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.2 Assess and identify the institutional home and operationalize the spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.3 Conduct a capacity needs assessment and identify the appropriate tools for spatial planning to fit the 
Rwandan context and conduct familiarization  
1.2.2.4 Led by the spatial planning unit, develop capacity within the University of Rwanda and the MoE to 
use remote sensing, ecosystem service modeling and spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, InVEST, RIOS, 
SWAT) to incorporate climate risks into land use planning processes  
1.2.2.5 Deliver training workshops on utilization of earth system models for land use pl anning purposes, 
utilization of remote sensing resources (lightning, satellite radiances) for hazards detection and climate 
monitoring and on regional climate monitoring and applications.  
Activity 1.2.3 Develop an effective forest monitoring system to unde rpin forest management decisions  
 
90  Mathias S., et al, 2019. The Spatial Development Framework to facilitate urban management in countries with 
weak planning systems, Internatio nal Planning Studies, 24:3 -4, 235 -254, DOI: 10.1080/13563475.2019.1658571


---
*Page 262*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 40 
 
 Within Rwanda, forest -related data is limited in scope and generally outdated91. Consequently, the current 
state and trends of Rwanda’s forests are not well understood. Efforts to improve the situation through 
individual st udies have been valuable but have not led to systematic increases in spatial information on 
trends in different forest cover types and resilience at the scales at which land use decisions are being made. 
For example, the FMES software focuses on forestry a nd plantation forests, but does not address natural 
forests. This activity will update and monitor forest cover data in different ecological zones and forest types 
using high resolution satellite imagery, field work, and remote sensing techniques. In addit ion to remote 
sensing techniques,  the Project team, once selected, will meet with government and international partners 
to assess best monitoring tools and platforms, including Open Foris. Close attention will also be given to the 
system used by Mugabowind ekwe et al (2023)92 for the most recent, highly detailed forest inventory from 
2007 imagery. RFA will recruit a Rwandan expert who will work with WCS experts in applying spatial planning 
and forest monitoring tools in support of  government agencies during  the project implementation  to  
strengthen the capacities of RFA, NLA and  GIS Center at the University of Rwanda.  
An adaptive forest, climate change and land use monitoring system will be established to support climate 
resilient forest management decisio ns through the following:  
1.2.3.1 Recruit Forest ecologist or remote sensing expert to support the design and implementation of 
indigenous forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.2 Review existing forest mapping data and monitoring software, and assess utility for generating 
quantitative assessments of indigenous forest cover from local to national scales  
1.2.3.3 In collaboration with REMA, MINAGRI, RAB, RDB, RISA, MoE and affiliated agencies and University 
of Rwanda, design structure and operation of fo rest monitoring system, including required inputs (data, 
computing, personnel), desired outputs, and operational structure (e.g. location, reporting structure, funding)  
1.2.3.4 Purchase and install 2 new weather automatic stations in the CND  
1.2.3.5 Establ ish & operationalize forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.6 Generate updated maps & statistics for indigenous forest cover, forest type etc. using forest 
monitoring system  
1.2.3.7 Develop capacity within hosting institution for continued operation of forest moni toring system  
Component 2: Forest and landscape management and restoration  
The GoR has prioritized forest management and restoration – including natural forests in protected areas – 
as a key component of climate change adaptation strategies for the CND landscape.93 Natural forests within 
the national park system have been generally well protected and managed in recent years, earning high 
marks for biodiversity conservation while also developing a high quality – and quite lucrative – set of 
ecotourism att ractions. Current park management plans, however, include little attention to the potential 
effects of projected climate change. Outside of parks, few areas with natural forest cover remain and forest 
management and restoration approaches are not being imp lemented at the scale required to significantly 
improve forest climate resilience. Where forests are restored, most use exotic species and mono -specific 
 
91  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017. Analysis of forests and climate change in Eastern 
Africa.  Forests and Climate Change Working Paper 16.  
92  Mugabowind ekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al.  Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang.  13, 91–97 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
93  IUCN, 2014. Forest landscape restoration opportunity assessment for Rwanda . Link.


---
*Page 263*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 41 
 
 plantations that are generally incompatible with mixed agricultural uses; they are also vulnerable to d iseases 
and pests with climate warming.  
In this component, targeted interventions will integrate climate change awareness and adaptation into 
national forest park planning, policies and management, as well as restore degraded areas within those 
parks. Thes e efforts will help sustain the forests’ rich biodiversity, the lucrative tourism revenues that flow 
into local and national economies, and the ecosystem services needed for climate resilience of vulnerable 
communities. This suite of activities will also i dentify priority areas outside of parks – in remnant natural 
stands, around wetlands, and along streams – for protection and restoration as “stepping stones” and  
linkages for long -term climate change connectivity.  
Output 2.1 Protected Area management effec tiveness improved re climate risks and adaptation  
The remnant natural forests of the CND harbor globally significant biodiversity across multiple taxa, from 
primates to birds and orchids. More than 10% of these species are regionally endemic94 – 47 flowering plants 
are endemic to Nyungwe Forest alone95. Though each has suffered from significant past habitat loss, the 
Nyungwe and Volcanoes National Parks have been generally well -managed under the Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB), with assistance f rom NGOs, PPPs, and the private sector. Rwanda’s reputation 
for ecotourism and nature tourism attractions is world class. It has also earned conservation recognition for 
the dramatic recovery of its endangered mountain gorillas, sustained protection of its  remaining biodiversity, 
and creation of a significant revenue -sharing program with parks -adjacent communities. The recent addition 
of Gishwati -Mukura National Park to this mountain forest network underscores the government’s 
commitment to conservation, th ough both forest blocks require significant restoration for the purposes of 
biodiversity conservation, connectivity, and ecosystem services enhancement.  
In contrast to Rwanda’s areas of conservation success, relatively little attention – and less action – has been 
focused on climate change and its potential impacts on habitats and biodiversity, especially in the climate -
adapted mountain forests of the CND. The investment required to build and sustain the institutional and 
human capacity to achieve Rwanda’s recent conservation success now needs to be joined with a parallel 
investment to ensure that PA management plans, policies, and actions address the realities of climate 
change both within and outside of their boundaries.  
Activity 2.1.1 Facilitate revision of PA management plans to address climate risks  
Climate change is increasingly recognized as not only a major future threat to protected areas, but one that 
will also exacerbate existing threats and vulnerabilities96. This is particularly true for the thre e national parks 
of the Congo Nile Divide landscape that are surrounded by a large number of smallholder farmers who are 
dependent on natural resources for their livelihoods. The park planning processes need to be expanded to 
best meet challenges posed by climate change as well as ensure full incorporation of buffer zone and 
landscape linkage requirements, and the ability to engage with the larger CND and district landscape 
management planning processes. The revised management plans will aim to:  
● Develop spe cific goals and objectives for improving climate resilience  
● Identify areas and species of particular importance to climate adaptation, mitigation and resilience  
● Identify and prioritize threats that exacerbate climate impacts  
● Identify and prioritize critical actions for strengthening resilience  
 
94  CBD. 2020. Rwanda 6th National Report to the Convention on Biodiversi ty 
95  Fischer, E. and Killmann, D., 2008. Illustrated field guide to the plants of Nyungwe National Park Rwanda . 
University of Koblenz -Landau.  
96   World Bank, 2019. Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.


---
*Page 264*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 42 
 
 ● Identify areas important for climate change adaptation and mitigation into protected area zones and 
regulations  
● Develop indicators of climate resilience  
To this end, the Project will undertake these sub -activities:  
2.1.1.1 Review and update existing national park management plans to ensure climate and related 
landscape changes, risks, impacts and required management responses are integrated  
2.1.1.2 Provide technical and financial suppo rt to planning, research and monitoring as well as community -
based conservation units within RDB in managing the parks as part of larger CND landscapes  
2.1.1.3 Train PA staff to integrate gender and social inclusion into programming  
2.1.1.4 Train PA staff on integrating needs of women, youth, historically marginalized and Ubudehe 
Categories c,d,e populations into climate adaptation risks and responses  
2.1.1.5 Train PA staff on SEAH, GRM, FPIC, and Access Restriction Mitigation Processes to ensure NP 
climate  change responses are undertaken in a way which supports social inclusion and equity  
Activity 2.1.2 Establish long -term plans for CND financial sustainabilit y post -GCF 
Rwanda has recently developed a Biodiversity Finance Plan97 through support from BIOFIN.  This plan has 
identified a number of financing solutions that will not only contribute towards improved biodiversity 
protection in Rwanda, but also aligns with Rwanda’s sustainable development and green growth objectives. 
These solutions include:  
● Introdu ce a Biodiversity Conservation Fund into Rwanda’s National Fund for the Environment 
(FONERWA) to help streamline and attract domestic and international sources of finance to support 
conservation investments and thereby reduce transaction costs to increase conservation benefits.  
● Improve efficiency and effectiveness of environmental fees and fines to strengthen the effectiveness 
of the regulatory environment that will ultimately improve ecosystem and biodiversity conservation 
goals.  
● Water User Fees for Catchm ent Management to secure the financial resources necessary for 
effective water catchment management.  
● Pilot Business Plans for Selected Wetlands to enable the sustainable development of wetlands for 
ecotourism and biodiversity -friendly enterprises such as handicrafts, fisheries, and sustainable 
agriculture.  
● Promote biodiversity -friendly enterprises in the transition to a green economy and accelerate the 
transition to a green economy by incentivizing and supporting businesses to adopt sus tainable 
practices and attracting investments in new conservation enterprises.  
● Strengthen the tourism revenue sharing scheme to improve biodiversity outcomes and effectively 
address conservation -development objectives  
● Develop a Protected Area Finance Strat egy to support the goal of increasing the financial and 
ecological sustainability of Rwanda’s Protected Area System (PAS)  
There are also new emerging solutions such as the Wildlife Conservation Bond (WCB) which essentially is 
a payment for performance -base d financial instrument that channels investments to achieve conservation 
outcomes – measured in this case by specific conservation targets that could be set (e.g., hectares of native 
forest restored, or an increase in umbrella species populations). In the case of Rwanda, gorillas and 
 
97  BIOFIN Rwanda – Biodiversity Finance Plan, REMA, 2019.


---
*Page 265*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 43 
 
 chimpanzees are considered umbrella species that play a crucial role in shaping entire ecosystems on which 
countless other species depend. For the WCB, a grants -based, outcome payer is needed, which could be 
the GCF. Through th e WCB, and in collaboration with the World Bank (WB), the WB could issue bonds and 
investors could support the financing of activities to protect and grow a critically endangered species with 
clear conservation targets, contributing directly to biodiversit y and bringing jobs to local communities through 
the creation of conservation -related employment in rural areas of the CND. A third -party, independent verifier 
is also needed to evaluate whether conservation targets have been met. A meeting is planned with  the WB 
in the second half of February 2023 in Rwanda to determine the scale and feasibility of the WCB in the CND. 
The South African Rhino Bond has already attracted foreign investment, and it is a good model Rwanda 
could emulate98. The Government of Rwan da, represented by the Rwanda Development Board, is in 
advanced stages of negotiation with the World Bank for establishing a wildlife Bond. There is, therefore, 
clear interest in the bond which suggests that investors still see value in investing in such a n instrument.  
A technical advisor will be recruited by this project to provide technical support to RDB, REMA, MINECOFIN 
and MoE and explore these various solutions to identify financial instruments that could be employed for 
revenue generation post -GCF for sustainable management of the CND landscape. The technical advisor will 
work closely with the NSC to facilitate buy-in from stakeholders such as RDB and MINECOFIN into 
compliance with environmental laws through greater emphasis on the links to climate resilience and N DC 
objectives . 
Activity 2.1.3 New fire management curriculum developed and operationalized Given the expected increase 
in drought, and the natural forest vulnerability already demonstrated in the past, the capacity for effective 
fire prevention and managem ent in core PAs and adjacent landscapes will be increased.  
While current climate projections call for increased rainfall in the CND, they also project higher temperatures 
and a rise in elevation of the natural forests’ cloud cover zone  (Annex 2.1). The com bination of the latter two 
trends raises the potential for increased fire risk. In order to sustainably address the threat of fire to the 
natural forests and regenerated areas in particular, this project will increase the capacity of RDB in the area 
of fire prevention, with emphasis on education and outreach, monitoring of fire danger conditions across the 
parks, response plans, and fire suppression.  A collaborative effort in fire management planning and 
implementation in CND districts will be carried out, facilitated by a fire management expert. Based on training 
needs, the project will also carry out RFA district and sector foresters’ training in Integrated Forest Fire 
Management approaches and activities and firefighting; they will then build the capacity  of community fire 
brigades.  
Sub-activities include:  
2.1.3.1 Develop a curriculum tailored to needs and capacities of different stakeholders  
2.1.3.2 Build the capacity of RDB to manage fire in National Parks  
2.1.3.3 Build the capacity of RFA, local authori ties and communities to collaboratively manage fire in forests 
outside Pas  
2.1.3.4 Implement a “fire wise” outreach and awareness program for communities and local government 
(district, sector, cell), as well as Rwanda Forest Authority, surrounding natural  forests to reduce the incidence 
of human -caused fires.  
 
98  World Bank, 2022. Wildlife Conservation Bond Boosts South Africa’s Efforts to Protect Black Rhinos and Support 
Local Communities.  Press Release NO: 2022/059/AFE.


---
*Page 266*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 44 
 
 Output 2.2: Natural Forest cover restored, biodiversity connections established.  
The natural forests of the CND exist as an archipelago of isolated islands within a surrounding matrix of 
intensive human land use. Although some have raised the possibility of reconnecting these islands, it is 
important to understand that their isolation is not a recent phenomenon (with evidence of the initial isolation 
of the main forest blocks from the pre -colonial era). Furthermore, large -scale proposals for landscape 
linkages have thus far failed to provide alternatives for the tens of thousands of rural smallholders who would 
be displaced by such schemes. However, important actions can be taken to restore  degraded natural forest 
lands and protect or reestablish natural “stepping stones” and ensure a functional level of ecological linkage  
between the existing parks.  
In some areas where natural forests have been cleared, the Project will work to restore fore st cover. This 
will be done primarily around the Gishwati and Mukura reserves, using native species and building on 
nursery and planting techniques already tested in Rwand a. New techniques may need to be developed to 
expand reforestation to degraded lands on steep slopes and along waterways and wetlands. Tree species 
will be carefully selected considering the following attributes: pioneer species which grow in full sun, fast 
growing (height and canopy width), and animal pollinated and dispersed. These “tree  islands” serve several 
purposes. First, by growing quickly and providing canopy cover, they shade out competing vegetation and 
change the soil microclimate (very important for later successional species establishment). Site -generalist 
native species such as Albizia, Dombeya, Macaranga and Polyscias  respond to these characteristics. 
Secondly, they entice a variety of animal species into the expansion area, thereby dispersing seeds. In 
certain areas the Project will favor natural regeneration from seed banks .  
All work outside of protected areas will require careful attention to private land ownership claims and related 
social and gender equity issues. Part of the communities’ responsibilities will be afforestation of the degraded 
forest with indigenous trees  and clearing invasive species from the natural forests and buffer zones. Part of 
the benefits for the communities will be harvesting of non -timber forest products (NTFPs) from the natural 
forests, under sustainable use plans. The project will provide trai ning on improved harvesting techniques, 
processing, packaging and marketing, to those engaged in NTFP value chain (financed under outcome 3).  
Activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from WCS.  
Activity 2.2.1 Secure key remaining natural areas outside PAs  
Outside of current protected areas, the Project will identify remaining natural areas and seek to secure their 
continued protection within district management plans or through other means. These are mostly small 
stands of natural vegetation on rocky outcroppings or strips  of forests along the CND’s myriad of waterways. 
Although these will not permit large mammals (e.g. elephants or mountain gorillas) to migrate betwee n the 
forested parks, these small remaining natural areas provide critical intermediate stepping stones for the 
broader biodiversity elements of the CND forest ecosystems.  For the CND’s rich assemblage of bird species, 
these vegetated patches and gallery g roves could prove to be essential stepping stones for connectivity 
under changing conditions. Small mammals and insects are likely to also directly benefit. And most 
importantly, the movement of birds and small mammals will support the transfer of seeds be tween forest 
patches, greatly improving the ability of forest ecosystems to adapt to changing climates, and continue 
supplying key ecosystem services to the people of the CND.  
Sub-activities include:  
2.2.1.1 Raise awareness on remaining protected natural f orests in CNDL to secure their protection


---
*Page 267*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 45 
 
 2.2.1.2 In collaboration with RFA, REMA, districts identify and implement actions that support conservation 
and management of remnant protected natural forests in CNDL  
Activity 2.2.2 Restore natural forest cover in  and outside Protected Areas including riparian linkages  
While the boundary integrity of the Nyungwe and Volcanoes NPs has been maintained for several decades 
now, internal degradation has occurred. Prior to 2004, approximately 12% of Nyungwe National Park had 
been affected by wildfire, including a catastrophic fire during a period of prolonged drought in 1997.99 The 
natural vegetation was quickly replaced by a carpet of invasive ferns. In recent years, teams of local 
community workers led by W CS have demonstrated that careful removal of the fern cover reveals still viable 
native tree seeds and seedlings that respond to this exposure by rapid growth and the formation of new 
forest stands. The project will expand this labor -intensive process of a ssisted regeneration to the remaining 
4,500 ha of burned lands within  the NNP, restoring forest values and generating significant employment for 
local rural communities.  
For the Gishwati Forest, restoration with native species will take place on adjacent, previously cleared lands. 
This and other restoration efforts should benefit from tree nursery techniques and planting trials already 
initiated by RFA, RDB, and NGO partners around Nyungwe, Volcanoes, and Gishwati itself. The project will 
work with the Nati onal Tree Seed Centre to provide training on tree propagation and supply of quality 
seeds/seedlings/propagation materials, especially of indigenous species and plantation species not being 
sourced locally.  
A special element within the CND landscape is its dense network of waterways. Historically forested riparian 
habitats along these streams and rivers, however, have been largely cleared of their forest cover. Riparian 
reforestation efforts will restore an important erosion control factor as well as recreat e important biodiversity 
connectivity along linear corridors. RWB will co -finance these riparian restoration efforts. With support from 
district and sector leaders as well as community representatives, community members will be hired from 
neighboring villa ges to the project sites. The project will make efforts to recruit the most vulnerable 
community members in category c,d and e, women, young landless, and others to carry out these activities.  
Key sub -activities include:  
2.2.2.1 Review mapping of degraded natural forest areas in core NPs, stepping stones, and unprotected 
riparian lands using updated imagery and ground truthing  
2.2.2.2 Identify parcels for restoration in core PAs, stepping stones, and riparian lands using desktop and 
field-based assessment  
2.2.2.3 Establish indigenous tree seed nurseries in the CND to serve core PAs, stepping stones, riparian 
land restoration and promotion of indigenous trees on farms and in protective forests  
2.2.2.4 Recruit, train (in forest restoration methods), and equip community workers to be involved in core 
PAs restoration and riparian linkages  
2.2.2.5 Assisted rehabilitation of 4,500 ha of indigenous forest in NNP  
2.2.2.6 Active restoration of natural forest on 500 ha Gishwati Mukura National Park  
2.2.2.7 Restore 1,500 ha of riparian lands  
 
99  Masozera, A.B., Mulindahabi, F ., 2007. Post-Fire Regeneration in Nyungwe National Park, Rwanda.  Wildlife 
Conservation Society.


---
*Page 268*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 46 
 
 2.2.2.8 Using permanent plots sampling, collect field monitoring data on tree species recruitment and growth 
for estimation of biomass, species richness, etc. in restored parcels in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura 
National Pa rks as well as on riparian lands to assess success of initiatives, then replicate or adapt as needed  
2.2.2.9 Perform Environmental and Social Screening on all positions being created by the project  
2.2.2.10 Establish a grievance process for laborers  
2.2.2. 11 Update emergency and preparedness plan including risk mitigation guidance to local conditions at 
restoration sites  
2.2.2.12 Train all workers on their rights and how to access the GRM  
2.2.2.13 Provide code of conduct and emergency preparedness and safet y training for all laborers  
2.2.2.14 Hire and train labor and safety leads at each site to provide guidance to staff, be available for 
grievance issues, and monitor health and safety conditions for workers  
2.2.2.15 Develop and implement strategy (including  social marketing) to ensure that women and youth 
participate and benefit from forest restoration projects  
 
Activity 2.2.3 Promote silvopastoralism with indigenous trees around Gishwati  
Roughly 80% of Rwandans own livestock of some sort. While it is govern ment policy to expand this 
percentage, conflicts over competing land uses are inevitable, especially for the country’s most vulnerable 
rural populations. In the area around the protected forest of Gishwati, the presence of many slopes greater 
than 55% open s the possibility for reforestation of larger blocks with tree species compatible with an 
undergrowth of grass or other forage. In addition, some existing pasturelands could be enriched with tree 
species. These areas could then provide critical off -farm fo dder for goats, sheep, and perhaps even cows, 
while also serving vital ecosystem services.  
Plans for tree planting/restoration on pasture lands will be elaborated in collaboration with the local 
communities and technical (extension and local government) s ervices. Areas meant to produce fodder and 
for water retention will be demarcated during community consultations for action plans. Already, important 
forage grasses, such as Brachiaria  grass known to increase milk production while reducing methane 
emission  from cattle, have been identified while tree fodder such as Calliandra, Leucaena, Acacia, Gliricidia  
are well accepted but not widely adopted due to local capacity barriers. Improving adoption of better 
management practices will require technical assistan ce considering needs of cattle owners, local milk 
cooperatives, and traders.  
Beneficiaries of these activities will be pasture land owners and cattle keepers in the Gishwati area. They 
will be identified in collaboration with district and sector leaders, RFA, EE and representatives of pasture 
lands and cattle owners. Special attention will be paid to specific groups such as women -headed households, 
youth, and historically marginalized groups if they own grazing land in the Gishwati area and for paid work. 
Awareness and consultations with these pastoral communities will be conducted during project inception to 
ensure farmers' involvement in identifying and selecting key areas for restoration, suitable species to grow 
in their pastoral areas, capacity barrier s, and associated technical assistance to be provided to adopt better 
management practices.  
Key sub -activities include:


---
*Page 269*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 47 
 
 2.2.3.1 Assess the status of pasture lands in the Gishwati area and identify key areas for restoration and the 
potential to introduce in digenous species  
2.2.3.2 In collaboration with landowners, identify suitable indigenous species for fodder trees, shrubs, 
grasses, and herbaceous legumes that have potential to improve rangelands and increase their climate 
adaptive capacity  
2.2.3.3 Produce  and disseminate fodder trees, shrubs, grasses, and herbaceous legumes to project 
beneficiaries  
2.2.3.4 Train beneficiaries on improved livestock and pasture management  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient  livelihoods  
Increasing the extent of protective forests, enhancing and restoring forest plantations, and increasing 
agroforestry tree cover are key steps to restoring ecosystem function and services identified in the National 
Forest Policy Report (NFPR 2017), especial ly i) reducing the risk of flooding, landslides and soil erosion 
from extreme climate events and ii) increasing long -term supply of wood fuel resources (the primary energy 
source for 77% of Rwandans100). Together with fuel efficient cookstoves, these trees will provide a 
sustainable source of fuelwood and reduce the amount of time women spend collecting fuelwood, enabling 
them to participate in other economic activities and programmatic opportunities. These outputs (cookstoves, 
plantation restoration, and ag roforestry) will deliver carbon sequestration benefits totaling 522,606 tCO 2eq 
over 20 years.  
In working to develop a comprehensive land use plan that incorporates climate adaptation, and while 
ensuring Rwanda’s forest ecosystems are strengthened through f orest management and restoration, 
attention must be paid to people who live next to the forests and those who are the most prone to causing 
degradation of these forest systems. In particular, this includes people who either do not have access to 
land or wh ose land holdings are insufficient to meet their daily needs. These people are most likely to enter 
into and unsustainably use protected and protective forests to help meet their daily needs. Thus, this Project 
component targets these vulnerable households  – youth, people from historically marginalized groups, and 
farmers with insufficient holdings – to build their capacity in financial literacy and enterprise, in order to 
strengthen their resilience to economic and climate shocks.      
Also, to maximize the  opportunities from improved silvicultural practices, it is necessary to improve business 
practices and market linkages for farming communities. More specifically, organizing and linking farmers to 
local and national wholesale traders will enable them to s ell their produce more efficiently, maximizing profit 
and reducing wastage. To facilitate these linkages, this component will also build the business capacity and 
market linkages necessary to support the transition of farmers and their communities away fro m 
unsustainable practices that magnify their vulnerability to climate change and towards more secure 
livelihoods and expanded income opportunities. This includes strengthening capacities, developing inclusive 
business models, and developing market value ch ains for livelihoods that do not depend on traditional 
smallholder farming.  
The project will develop alternative sources of income to improve living conditions for people in the CND 
who depend for a large part of their income on exploitation of the forest and natural vegetation. This 
approach, focusing on vulnerable groups, aims at real economic empowerment of the concerned families 
through the realization of their own business plans. Several promising activities related to the use of the 
forests aside  from wood -gathering (such as beekeeping, extraction of essential oils, herbs, and other forest 
 
100  Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020 . National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.


---
*Page 270*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 48 
 
 products) will be analyzed. These business plans, tailored to individual circumstances, will be realized with 
support and tools provided by the project.  
From the sec ond year onwards, these vulnerable groups will become members of existing cooperative 
organizations that will be supported by the project, particularly in value chains important for forest 
conservation, such as production and export of honey and the extrac tion of essential oils. These 
cooperatives provide various services (e.g., information on markets / export, input supply, aggregation of 
commodities, etc.) and they also play a role in the protection of the interests of their members.  
The project will deve lop the private sector strategy (which will include engagement of impact investors 
interested in conservation -friendly commodities) for livelihoods implementation in the target areas through 
the identification of new livelihood opportunities for the CND. W e will establish relationships with several 
buyers fitting our selection criteria, and engage partners such as Blue Ventures to expand market 
opportunities for products that meet international or local market opportunities. On the producer side, we will 
build strong relationships with other projects and programmes that support private sector engagement with 
community organizations, and producer associations to pursue promising market opportunities (local and 
international, as appropriate).  
For component 3 and the project overall, the eligibility criteria for selecting beneficiaries will be:  
● Households with limited access to financial resources for implementing climate adaptation measures 
as determined by Local Authorities  
● Women -headed households.  
● Households in the CND living in key areas such as those surrounding PAs, identified stepping -stones, 
landscape linkages, and broader farming mosaic with exposure to erosion.  
● Most vulnerable households including people with disabilities  
● Land owners where the project intervention will have to intervene  
These criteria will be further refined by the p roject EE in consultation with key stakeholders (MoE, Districts 
and community representatives) once the project is approved.  
Output 3.1 Farming methods enhance productivity, reduce erosion and flooding risks, contribute to 
ecosystem services, and support c onnectivity  
Soil degradation and loss, largely from the cultivation of steep slopes in the western highlands of the CND, 
has caused declines in agricultural productivity and serious downstream problems of siltation and flooding. 
While the former means that smallholder  farmers in the hills increasingly struggle to feed their families, the 
latter poses a threat to the long term v iability of water provision services in municipal areas and hydro -power 
generation101, which is a key pillar for Rwanda’s low carbon growth strategy.   
This Project will support smallholder farmers in high erosion risk areas to implement Sustainable Land 
Management (SLM) practices techniques and the active restoration  of degraded forest lands. By targeting 
high risk areas the Project can have a significant impact to reduce soil erosion, improving the resilience of 
agricultural livelihoods in the highlands, wh ile having a positive impact on water flow and water quality in the 
lowlands.    
 
101  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) , 2009. Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report, 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.


---
*Page 271*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 49 
 
 In each selected priority site, the Project will support the implementation of the full range soil erosion control 
best practices including agroforestry. While the erosion cont rol practices may vary (e.g. radical vs 
progressive terracing), agroforestry practices will be established across the entire 3,346  ha. RFA will mobilize 
participating landowners on whose lands soil erosion control best practices including agroforestry shal l be 
implemented. Landowners willing to participate will sign a consent form allowing project activities on their 
land and will be grouped in vigilance committees. These vigilance committees will sign MoU with Districts 
and RFA as a commitment to participa te and manage sustainably their land and trees with clear role and 
responsibilities of each (farmers, districts and RFA) specified. The consent forms will be granted to RFA and 
Districts where landowners are located. The vigilance committee will be respons ible for ensuring the 
sustainability of project interventions implemented on community land. The MoUs signed by Districts, RFA 
and the vigilance committee will not be legally binding but rather to establish certain understanding in the 
implementation of th e project.  
Interventions will be made in collaboration with district officials, according to agreed priorities and objectives, 
and involving local farmers and contracto rs. Table 29 in the feasibility study (FS) provides a preliminary list 
of the fuelwood, fodder, timber and fruit tree species that have been identified as suitable for agroforestry 
systems in the CND, based on their resilience capacity against climate -driven temperature and precipitation 
changes, as well as community preferences - particularl y the needs of women farmers, historically 
marginalized households, and youth. They also concur well with recommended species for the North and 
Western Province as described in the Agroforestry Technical Guide102.  
Activity 3.1.1 Restore high slope areas (> 55%) as protective forests  
In Western Province, a major part of the CND landscape, 80% of the increase in tree -planting in recent years 
has come from private landowners seeking to earn revenue or increase their access to wood -based fuel103. 
Beyond this utilitarian interest, however, the NFPR 2017 calls for increasing the extent of protective forests 
and enhancing and restoring forest plantations as key steps to restoring ecosystem function and services, 
especially i) reducing the risk of fl ooding, landslides and soil erosion from extreme climate events and ii) 
increasing long -term supply of woodfuel resources (the energy source for 77% of Rwandans104), providing 
biodiversity habitat, and sequestering 193,472 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
The curren t land use master plan discourages cultivation on slopes greater than 55% and encourages 
protection of existing vegetation and afforestation with indigenous species. This Project will promote 
indigenous species in rehabilitating existing forests and establ ishing new ones on bare lands . This activity 
will result in highly productive, climate -resilient woodlots and forestland with fully restored ecosystem 
services and significantly increased long -term carbon sequestration. It will afforest/restore 2,500  ha of  
degraded private smallholder land and district/state land by restoring existing degraded tree stock, 
afforesting bare areas, promoting good silvicultural practices, and facilitating the adoption of Simplified 
Forest Management Plans (SFMPs), as recommende d by 2013 forest law. In the priority regions selected 
for afforestation/restoration, awareness and capacity building activities will be undertaken to build support 
and understanding of the PFMU approach.  The objective of PFMUs is to combine economic profi tability, 
preservation of environment, and improvement of living conditions of the local population, as well as to apply 
a gender -responsive approach to wood resource management.  For privately owned land, only small -scale 
individual private landowners will  be included, and this activity will not involve restoration of private 
institutional plantations.  RFA will mobilize participating private landowners on whose lands afforestation 
 
102  Ministry of Environment. 2018. National Agroforestry Strategy.  
103  Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change in Western Rwanda during periods of war s and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).  
104  Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.


---
*Page 272*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 50 
 
 trees shall be planted. Landowners willing to participate will sign a consent  form allowing project activities 
on their land. Following this, private woodlot owners will then be organized into local groups (around 40 -50 
ha of woodlot per group), PFMUs (Private Forest Management Units) and assisted to form and register as 
cooperativ es and elect among themselves two cooperative committees: Administrative committee made of 
5 persons (President, Vice president, Secretary and two Advisors); supervisory committee made of 3 
persons (President, vice president and secretary). Note that gende r consideration is mandatory (at least 
30% women).  
When the cooperative committees are elected, they are mandated to represent forest landowners at different 
events and fulfill their interests, especially in seeking the best market for their forest product s and seeking 
for other income generating opportunities. RFA will sign MOUs with different cooperatives specifying each 
party’s respective role and responsibility.  
Experiences from pilot PFMUs established under the FMBE project in the districts of Gicumbi , Gakenke and 
Rulindo Districts of the Northern Province and Rwamagana District of the Eastern province have 
demonstrated that this approach is helping to achieve economic profitability, preservation of environment 
and improvement of living conditions of t he PFMU members. Forests are sustainably managed, and all 
PFMU members respect the management plan and planned harvesting period. All silvicultural practices are 
properly followed because cooperatives supervise all activities with technical guidance from t he district 
technicians. The forests within a PFMU are economically attractive to potential buyers due to good stock at 
harvesting time. PFMU members have access to small loans while waiting for the forest to mature. This 
shows that PFMUs established in th ese areas are also serving as demonstrations to other forest owners 
supported by other projects in the country. Green AMAYAGA and Green Gicumbi, and TREPA Projects are 
scaling up this approach in other parts of the country.  
On public land, forests will be  organized into state/district FMUs to be managed by professional private 
companies through long -term concession agreements in line with the government strategy. While a 
concession agreement will be signed between the private forest companies and the MoE, the Project will 
only support the design of the forest management plans and development of contracting documents. 
Registration of restored forest parcels will be guided by well -trained district forest officers and forestry sector 
extensionists, assisted by  the new FMES software and related GPS/tablets, which will provide automatic 
statistics, maps and register owners. For each FMU, a SFMP , reviewed or developed through a participatory 
process , will outlin e the basic information of the site (e.g. owner, spec ies etc.), as well as a harvesting plan 
and schedule for silvicultural operations (thinning, pruning etc.). However, some areas of the state 
plantations that are vulnerable and exposed to high risk of degradation (high slopes) will require setting up 
speci al protective measures. Restoration on identified vulnerable areas will be done by establishing 
appropriate tree plantations that will offer a better protection and conservation of biodiversity while providing 
other ecosystem services incl uding tree specie s that improve forage for bees . The choice of tree speci es 
planted will take into consideration women’s participation, use and priorities. The project will further strive 
and advocate for gender equity for selection of plots which will be done in consultat ion with communities.   
Sub-activities include:  
3.1.1.1 Introduce and raise awareness of indigenous species to target stakeholders in CND  
3.1.1.2 In consultation with RFA, National Land Authority, districts and communities, determine fragile areas 
(steep s lopes > 55%) to be allocated for protective forests and their ownership  
3.1.1.3 Assess the current status of the indigenous tree species in selected areas for protective forests and 
select indigenous tree species appropriate to CNDL


---
*Page 273*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 51 
 
 3.1.1.4 Develop restora tion plan for protective forests  
3.1.1.5 Build capacity of local stakeholders (men and women) on PFMU approach and methods  
3.1.1.6 Design and approve SFMPs of private FMUs  
3.1.1.7 Ensure consent of smallholders prior to planting trees  
3.1.1.8 In collaboration with smallholders reforest/restore 2,500 ha of public or private land with slopes >55% 
and ensure sustainable management under private FMUs according to approved SFMPs  
3.1.1.9 Support monitoring and evaluation of restored private FMUs  
3.1.1.1 0 Assess impacts of exotics on neighboring lands and mitigate their negative impacts  
3.1.1.11 Develop and implement strategy (including social marketing) to ensure that women and youth 
participate and benefit from forest restoration projects  
3.1.1.12 Asse ss the benefits and costs of each proposed tree and plant species and how those benefits 
affect different population segments  
Activity 3.1.2 Develop on -farm agroforestry for high -caloric and indigenous tree species  
The extreme land scarcity of the CND precludes smallholder farmers – many of them among the most 
vulnerable and land -poor of the region – from dedicating any significant proportion of their holdings to tree 
production. However, the use of certain agrofores try species that both enrich the soil and control erosion 
when interplanted with ground crops can greatly reduce this conflict.  
Under this activity, the Project will facilitate the production of on -farm afforestation plans with action plans 
for implementa tion. Formulation of the forest landscape restoration plans will follow the methodology 
introduced by the World Resources Institute (WRI) and IUCN and already tested in the country by the former 
Ministry of Natural Resources, as recently modified and appli ed for the Gatsibo Forest Landscape 
Restoration baseline conditions assessment. The methodology will involve three simple steps: a) Geospatial 
analysis to map degraded land that presents an opportunity for forest and landscape restoration (FLR), which 
will highlight areas with best potential for restoration; b) economic analysis to model the costs and benefits 
of degraded and restored land); and c) designing a restoration/afforestation action plan, based on an in -
depth assessment of the conditions required to implement the FLR in the selected sectors.  
For selected areas where Project activities may lead to reduced access to resources, the Project will 
undertake an in -depth Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) in the first year of 
implementation and design an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to guide 
implementation. This ESMP will include an access restriction mitigation plan, if deemed necessary. The 
matter of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) will be explored during the ESIA  and the approach applied 
if deemed appropriate. These documents will be based on materials contained in Annex 6.  
Drawing on experience with high -elevation species identified both in Rwanda and across East Africa, the 
Project will support the following su b-activities:  
3.1.2.1 Identify sub -areas of intervention for agroforestry dissemination in the CND  
3.1.2.2 Introduce and raise awareness of agroforestry in target communities  
3.1.2.3 Develop the capacity of extension agents at district/sector level and NGO s to support adoption of 
agroforestry technologies


---
*Page 274*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 52 
 
 3.1.2.4 Establish agroforestry/fruit tree nurseries to facilitate access to quality planting material  
3.1.2.5 Promote sustainable land management practices by stabilizing existing terraces, and plant high 
calorific agroforestry species to provide a sustainable source of fuelwood for energy -efficient cookstoves to 
protect sloping land against severe soil erosion.  
 3.1.2.6 Train RFA, extension agents, Project participants and community members on specific tec hniques 
for identification of and management of invasive pests and pathogens  
Participants in sub -activities 3.1.2.3 and 3.1.2.6 will be selected by districts, JADF, RFA and farmers 
representatives. Special attention will be given to youth, women and other  vulnerable groups. RFA and RWB 
will co -finance bub -activities 3.1.2.4 and 3.1.2.5.  
Output 3.2 Rural livelihoods generate alternative incomes & reduce pressure on forests  
To respond to the growing pressure on natural resources and increase the local commun ity's resilience to 
climate change in the CND landscape, the Project will address key drivers of deforestation by creating 
alternative livelihood pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and income -generating, climate -
resilient crops, as well as str engthening supportive financial services.  
The setup of interventions in this output will focus on enhancing on -farm production capacities in market -
facing promising value chains in agroforestry (especially avocado, macadamia and short -duration crops) for 
immediate income and beekeeping taking advantage of the agroforestry and the crops; the combination of 
these will promote ecotourism as supplementary income (avocado, macadamia, forestry, agroforestry, short -
term crops, and honey). This output will als o provide solutions to the growing households' energy poverty 
which has exerted pressure on natural resources and eventually exacerbated the local community's 
exposure to the stress of climate change in the CND landscape.  
This project will employ a ma rket systems development approach that encompasses business coaching, 
value chain development, and access to finance. This entails multi -stakeholder collaboration with business 
service providers, financial institutions, community -based enterprises, value c hain actors, and farmer 
cooperatives.  Ultimately, this project will develop and or promote a financial model that enhances the private 
sector ecosystem collaboration and partnership to stimulate finance in forestry and agroforestry sectors and 
support mark et-oriented access to energy -efficient cook -stoves to reduce pressure on forests.  
The value chain development for potential revenue generating streams such as honey, ecotourism, and 
efficient cookstoves requires grant support of GCF grant to finance the activities that are important for the 
most vulnerable, as well the drivers for the M SD to take root; these include the development of the identified 
revenue generating streams, strengthening access to market information, and improving quality of the 
products and produce aggregation.  
To target the poorest and most vulnerable, and empo wer women and youth towards meeting inclusive 
development goals, critical support at the nascent stages is essential. The GCF grant will facilitate the 
integration of the poorest and most vulnerable women and youth in the CND and position for private secto r 
investments that will build a firm back base for sustainable community development. The GCF grant will not 
only provide financing support but will be critical in creating enabling opportunities for market development 
beyond the project to catalyze privat e investments.  
While promoting the above -mentioned households cooking solutions and income streams, the selection of 
the beneficiaries will follow the government' procedures, and in the case of CND will focus on the vulnerable 
groups of youth, women, and historically marginalized people and will be selected based on an assessment


---
*Page 275*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 53 
 
 of poverty levels (also known as Wealth Categories) conducted by the government to ensure the most 
vulnerable are selected. Selection criteria will further take into account s ocial and cultural factors such as 
gender and age which intersect to predispose some groups more to vulnerability than others.  
                                             .     .                                                                                           .                                                                                                                     
Activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from CORDAID.  
Activity 3.2.1 Develop agroforestry related value chain for m arkets access.  
Most traditional tree farming in Rwanda is linked to fuel production in terms of firewood, charcoal, and timber 
for construction. However, to further strengthen community resilience to climate change, there is a need to 
introduce fruit and n ut trees that have high economic value in the agroforestry system to generate more 
income for smallholder farmers but also increase its adoption, especially women -headed households. 
Though women -headed households face the same issues and challenges as male -headed households, they 
are less likely to be included in income -generating activities and are disproportionately impacted by climate 
change because of prevalent gender inequality issues. In the Feasibility Study, avocado and macadamia 
have been identifie d as high economic value crops with high market potential, and the economic benefits of 
identified fruit trees is paramount to increase farmer adoption and buy -In. Since fruits and nuts take time to 
mature, short -term crops like chili and French beans will  be promoted to support smallholder farmers with 
limited land resources (less than 0.4 ha) to create additional, more quickly generated income and incentivize 
adopting agroforestry practices. Regular income will help vulnerable communities to cope with cli mate 
variabilities and shocks.  
The identified agroforestry value chains have market potential and potential for intercropping with short -term 
horticultural vegetables and fruits while providing further impacts on carbon sequestration, nutrition value, 
and market access in the CND. Selected fruit trees are expected to meet the dual purpose of soil protection 
and climate impact while generating long -term economic benefits to the most vulnerable community 
members of the CND region.   
For each crop value chain i dentified, specific bottlenecks will be addressed while focusing on specific 
product -place combinations within the CND. Especially, attention will be on enhancing the quality and 
quantity of production in sync with particular demands from market niches, de velopment of various models 
to improve access to finance together with financial institutions, and exploration of market opportunities that 
can generate off -farm jobs to absorb a good number of landless and other vulnerable groups of youth and 
women.   
Thes e priority crops are:  
● Macadamia: a low -volume, high -value export crop; in -country processing creates jobs for women and 
youth. Two hundred and four trees cover one hectare, and one mature tree produces up to 60 kg of 
macadamia nuts per year with an income of 25,000 FRW per kilogram. Furthermore, every tree must 
be separated from the next by 7 meters; thus, many other commercial and consumable crops may 
be planted and harvested while waiting for macadamia's fruiting maturity.105 The global demand for 
macadami a outweighs the available supply, which presents a huge business opportunity for 
macadamia farmers in Rwanda. For example, the current macadamia supply meets only 48% of 
global demand and the global market for macadamia is expected to further expand from $ 1.17 billion 
to $2.36 billion  by 2027. The project will build on the government export initiatives to promote 
 
105  DAPP Malawi, Odetta Chimwaza – Macadamia Nuts project . Link.


---
*Page 276*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 54 
 
 macadamia farming in CND areas through National Export Board (NAEB) and Rwanda Environment 
Management Authority (REMA) to include macadamia in its tree planting drive in the CND.  
● Avocado: The extensive penetration of avocado cultivation amongst smallholder farmers (SHFs) and 
the favorable growi ng conditions lead to avocado yields (21MT/ha) that are nearly double those of 
Kenya. The increasing demand for export, and cash yield/ha are higher than maize or Irish potato. 
Through linkage to local avocado private value chain actors, packaged avocados will be exported to 
the European Union, where the channel price for avocados is  $1.75 per kilogram, providing an 
estimated 32% margin.106 Avocado production presents numerous opportunities to smallholder 
farmers in CND: for example, earnings from avocado ex ports have been increasing from $1.6 million 
in 2020/21 to  $4.5 million  in 2021/22 and product ion increased from 1,000 tonnes to 2, 500 tonnes 
in 2021/22. According to the NAEB, the production is set to double this year and generate $8 million 
from exports. To further strengthen its avocado exports the government has launched sea freight, 
which wil l not only increase export volumes but also make them competitive in terms of pricing.   
● Avocado is projected to be the second most traded tropical fruit, after bananas, by 2030.The United 
States and the European Union, where consumer interest in avocados is fuelled by the fruit’s health 
benefits, are expected to remain the main importers, wit h 40% and 31% of global imports in 2030, 
respectively107. The project teams in CND will work closely with private sector partners and 
communities to develop value chain analysis, business development strategies, and business 
planning. The team, led by our L ivelihood Specialists, will work with these private sector partners to 
prepare action plans detailing technical services we will provide to train producers to supply 
commodities to markets.  
● Vegetable crops such as French beans and chili: It has been demons trated that these crops can 
double the income per hectare of maize and potatoes and employ a good percentage of the 16% 
reported unemployed women and youth108. Commercial farm wage reported labor in postharvest 
production handling at 72% women, 20% youth (s ee Annex 2.3). French beans can potentially deliver 
a gross margin of 22,040Rwf per acre and a return on labour of 2,755Rwf per day, while chili can 
offer a gross margin of 46,384Rwf per acre and a return on labour of 7,731Rwf per day.109 
The Project will a lso enhance ecotourism and honey value chains. Particularly in areas close to national 
parks, the potential business development of ecotourism can go hand in hand with honey and wax product 
development. Our analysis shows that the honey value chain already  has a sizable production history in 
Rwanda. Various initiatives exist that have encouraged farmers to invest in modern hives. However, the 
current sector is constrained by a perception of limited profitability due to low prices, gender patriarchy due 
to male dominance, and limited market access. The honey (and various by -product) value chain shows a 
wide range of different consumer target groups, whereas honey is too often marketed as a generic product. 
This is a crucial bottleneck: while the value chain a ctors engage in the business, there needs to be more 
incentives to invest financial resources to improve production or quality, such as through modern beehive 
technology. It will be essential to link ecotourism destinations and agro -tourism to enhance the potential for 
an improved business case and help beekeeping cooperatives enhance their processing, quality 
management, and marketing processes with large scale buyers and exporters such as Api Business 
Development Company (ABDC) and create a sustainable an d expanded source of income especially for 
 
106  Karuiru, M., 2018. Value chain management and the performance of avocado fruit small scale farmers in Kanda ra 
sub county, murang'a County, Kenya.  International Journal of Physical and Social Sciences , 8(10), pp.24 -40. 
107 OECD - FAO Agricultural Outlook. https://www.fao.org/3/cb5332en/cb5332en.pdf  
108  Rwanda Development Board, 2020. Labour Market Trends Analysis Brief 2016 -2020. https://rdb.rw/wp -
content/uploads/2022/07/Labour -Market -Brief-2020.pdf  
109  Van Keulen, Rik, Rumenera, P., Banjara, G., Colantuoni, M. and Muthamia -Mwenda, J. 2022. Horticulture value  
chain analysis – Opportunities for youth employment in Rwanda. Rome, FAO. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb8266en


---
*Page 277*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 55 
 
 women.  Api Business Development Company has applied for EU certification in order to export honey to 
international markets. Nevertheless, the company –which has a capacity of handling 120 MT of honey per 
year–still faces the challenge of low production, inadequate even in meeting local demand.  
Rwanda has a well -established record of generating off -farm benefits from its protected area ecotourism 
programs. The Project will build on this by supporting sustainable to urism activities around and between the 
Gishwati and Mukura Forests, as outlined in the GMNP Tourism Master Plan.110 New trails and base camps 
outside of the parks will generate employment and income opportunities for rural women and youth, as well 
as attra ct tourism revenue to help support forest protection and management. In addition, this Project will 
initiate and train Community Freelance guides to mutually benefit the parks and local communities 
neighboring Mukura -Gishwati NPs. A freelance system suits the seasonality of tourism, and the demand and 
sourcing of guides from the local communities stimulates economic empowerment among the young and 
unemployed living in rural areas around protected areas. This initiative will enable community members to 
provi de a service and generate income, and benefit from the growing tourism industry in Rwanda, which in 
turn supports conservation over the long term.  
In collaboration with district authorities in the CND, who will provide a list of existing cooperatives, the  project 
will select cooperatives based on value chains, number of women and youth, number of members with 
vulnerabilities and membership size. Furthermore, we will assess selected cooperatives using the 
Cooperative Assessment Matrix tool (CAM) to identify  capacity gaps. Selected cooperatives, participating 
financial institutions (PFIs), and value chain actors/small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) (including 
seedling producers, aggregators, traders, etc.) will receive capacity -building to improve their busi ness skills 
and access to finance, and to strengthen value chains.  
Women play a crucial role in balancing household demands with market production. This is why it is so 
important to give women access to financial and value chains related services. The proj ect aims to reach at 
least 50% of the women beneficiaries in the project area.  In areas where women are under -represented in 
value chains, the project will identify and address gender -specific challenges and barriers related to the 
different value chains and promote increased female representation and active participation in Producer 
organizations by creating gender committees that will recruit more women, and support women to be part of 
the leadership committees.  
Key sub activities are:  
3.2.1.1 Identify and map of vulnerable groups of youth and women within the community  
3.2.1.2 Develop and implement strategies to ensure that women, youth, and other marginalized groups 
benefit from rural livelihoods and financial services.  
3.2.1.3 identify farmers and coo peratives involved in selected value chains in consultation with district/local 
authorities in CND.  
3.2.1.4 Assess capacity gaps of identified farmer organizations to strengthen their capacities  
3.2.1.5 Identify and develop Nature -based tourism value chain as a means to generate viable economic 
alternatives for local people living near areas of high biodiversity in the CND.  
RDB will co -finance sub -activity 3.2.1.5.  
 
110  Rwanda Development Board (RDB), Rwanda  Environmental Management Authority (REMA), 2018. Tourism 
Development Master Plan for Gishwati - Mukura National Park. Link.


---
*Page 278*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 56 
 
 Activity 3.2.2 Facilitate and s cale up climate -resilient value chain products  
The project will conduct deep analysis for identified value chains, namely macadamia, avocado, chili, and 
French beans. Such analysis will provide evidence of the opportunities and constraints in the selected value 
chains and will involve mapping out chain operators and service providers at each segment of the value 
chain to identify existing capacity gaps and orient overall value chain interventions in the project. 
Furthermore, value chain analysis wi ll enable the project to clearly understand the characteristics of the 
selected value chain with attention to smallholder farmers, women, youth and vulnerable groups.  
To build strong and sustainable value chains, the project will improve information flows within the chain, by 
strengthening coordination among value chain actors and supporters. This will involve creating value chain 
platforms in the CND region to increase transparency and fair business relations. The project will focus on 
activities that stre ngthen and scale up value chains: for example, by organizing business -to-business (B2B) 
events, establishing district value chain interprofessional/platforms, and promoting business development 
services such as swift, cost -effective, and accessible product  certification for agribusiness. The project will 
play an active role by introducing key supporting functions such as financing, value chain information, 
certification services, etc., and advocate for fair business relations to ensure farmers are active pl ayers in 
value chains and not passive beneficiaries. The project will help strengthen the capacity of producer 
organizations in selected value chains. Often farmers fail to participate and benefit in value chain activities 
due to weak and poor organization , resulting from poor managerial skills and weak internal financial 
management. The project will use different capacity assessment tools like CAM and Scope insight to identify 
capacity gaps and develop capacity -building plans to ensure that producer organi zations are strong and 
professional and capable of serving their members and building sustainable value chains.  The capacity -
building trajectory will also focus on encouraging participation by women, youth, and vulnerable groups and 
increase their access to services. Activities to strengthen farmers and producer organizations will be based 
on farming as a business (FAAB) concept to orient farmers toward business -oriented agriculture. Synergy 
will be built with projects such as KIIWP2  (Kayonza irrigation and integrated watershed management), a 
project funded by IFAD where this module is being applied.  
In the selected valu e chain quality standards are an integral element of the core interventions, due to export 
market requirements. The project will strengthen the capacity of farmers to increase production in terms of 
volume and quality but also adhere to market standards (f or example, global GAP, maximum residual limits 
(MRLs), etc.) Another challenge affecting the selected value chains in the CND region is access to inputs, 
especially seeds, and pesticides. This is exacerbated by the international market which requires cert ain seed 
varieties and types of pesticides. The project will strengthen the input supply system in collaboration by 
National Agricultural export board (NAEB) and selected off takers by establishing and supporting agro -
dealers and nursery production through  technical support and access to finance, to further access to input 
the project will also focus on building business models that help farmers access inputs via credit guarantee 
schemes. The project will create strong linkage and business relations between  input suppliers, 
farmers/producer organizations, and markets/buyers to enhance flow of information among value chain 
actors. Based on experience, the project will ensure that processors/buyers have a say or influence on type, 
variety, and quality of input s used by producers to ensure produce marketability. Furthermore, the project 
will collaborate with other projects like PSAC  (promoting smallholder agro -export competitiveness project) 
and NAEB (National agriculture export board) to further build a sustainable input supply system. Most value 
chains are not well developed or are still nascent in the CND region, based on our  experience with 
agroforestry value chains with the TREPA project for instance. In such situations, off -takers, processors, and 
traders are few and poorly organized, with minimal outreach to farmers. They normally experience 
challenges in understanding and  meeting market standards (i.e., sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) 
standards, Global GAP, hazard critical control point certification (HCCP), etc.) which limit their


---
*Page 279*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 57 
 
 competitiveness and market scope. The project will improve their capacity to meet these sta ndards, provide 
other support to access and integrate cold chains, especially for avocado and French beans, and build out 
grower schemes in which off takers/exporters play a vital role. For MSMEs and start -ups, the project will 
strengthen their managerial capability for running successful, efficient businesses. Through organizing value 
chain linkage events (B2B, market linkage sessions, etc.) the project will enhance buyers to reach more 
farmers and producer organizations.  
Addressing rural poverty and food insecurity using agriculture requires investments in off -farm agricultural 
activities to complement primary production.111 Synergies will be created to reinforce direct linkages of small 
producers to other value chain actors with inputs (seeds and seedlings , fertilizers) and outputs (processors, 
wholesalers, and retailers).  
The project will use the Market Systems Development (MSD) model to enhance value chain development. 
This will entail multi -stakeholder collaboration with business service providers, fina ncial institutions, 
community -based enterprises, value chain actors, and farmer cooperatives. In -depth target area 
assessments will be conducted to tailor business cases for the selected value chains, particularly focusing 
on identification and engagement of existing farmer organizations and cooperatives, youth and women -
owned businesses, and local small and medium enterprises (SMEs, value chain actors) with the capacity for 
production aggregation, value addition, and market potential to absorb production f rom smallholder farmers' 
cooperatives. This localized stakeholder and value chain exploration will serve as a basis for the organization 
of market linkages to help value chain actors better understand the market, challenges, and opportunities.  
Regarding ho ney value chains, the project will estimate the number of beekeeping cooperatives operating 
in the targeted region or its surroundings. Members of these cooperatives will be trained in improved honey 
production techniques and adding value through wax -based  products. This will involve establishing honey 
and wax storage stations and associated processing facilities. Cooperatives will also be an important vehicle 
for fostering tree growing for improved bee forage. The project will foster interactions between t he 
cooperatives and private companies through business roundtables, trade fairs, and similar events focused 
on honey and beeswax products and this activity will be co -financed by RDB.  
This activity includes in -depth target area assessments to tailor busine ss cases for the selected value chains, 
particularly focusing on identification and engagement of existing farmer organizations and cooperatives, 
youth and women -owned businesses and local small and medium enterprises (SMEs, value chain actors) 
with capaci ty for production aggregation, value addition, and market potential to absorb production from 
smallholder farmers' cooperatives. This localized stakeholder and value chain exploration will serve as a 
basis for organization of market linkages to help value chain actors better understand the market, challenges 
and opportunities.  Key sub -activities are:  
3.2.2.1 Analyze identified value chains and promote them among the CND stakeholder networks  
3.2.2.2 Strengthen the capacity of producer organizations to impro ve managerial capacities, farming 
practices, and gender inclusion in their organizations  
3.2.2.3: Establish and strengthen relevant value chain platforms in the CND area and promote business 
development services to enhance value chain coordination.  
 
111  Selasi, J., 2012. Making Small Scale Farming Work in Sub -Saharan Africa . In Global Forum on Food Security and 
Nutrition "FSN Forum", FAO.


---
*Page 280*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 58 
 
 3.2.2.4 : Build and strengthen the capacity of off -takers (MSMEs, SMEs, and off -takers aggregators) to 
increase their competitiveness and comply with various standards  
3.2.2.5: Facilitate and strengthen access to quality inputs for farmers and producer organizatio ns in the CND 
regions  
3.2.2.6: Establish “CND brand” for honey and wax products  
Activity 3.2.3 Facilitate access to output markets for vulnerable farmers  
Lack of access to the market is a challenge to smallholders: only  4.2% of agricultural households have  
access to contract farming ( Agric HH Survey, 2017 ). Limited access to markets for smallholder farmers is 
mainly attributed to lack of access to market information, failure to meet market requirements, or 
undeveloped value chains. Some of the challenges also stem from po or quality and poor produce 
aggregation. The project will strengthen the capacity of farmers and producer organizations to improve 
quality and aggregation capacity, and in creating market linkages with off -takers or buyers through market 
information. The p roject will promote contract farming and out -grower schemes, where farmers are required 
to practice market -oriented farming, with the main objective of establishing long -term business relationships 
with markets/buyers. A focus on financial literacy and com munity initiatives will also mobilize domestic 
investment and expertise, facilitate access to financing, incentivize the private sector to create innovative 
financial products, and support improved data collection and measurement of outcomes.  
Furthermore, through producer organizations, the project will develop an inclusive business model to 
improve produce aggregation and supply coordination and to increase farmers’ bargaining power and 
influence in formal value chains, particularly for remote/hard -to-reach women, youth, and vulnerable groups. 
To further strengthen market access, the project will develop innovative market access approaches such as 
“it takes two to trade”, which focuses on understanding the challenges and weaknesses that limit demand 
(trader s) and supply (farmers). The project will create interventions to eliminate challenges and improve 
weaknesses to build sustainable market access. The project will also build on the national digital agriculture 
strategy (NDAS) to introduce digital market ac cess, where farmers access market information through their 
mobile phones through USSD or IVR interactive voice response.  A similar intervention is currently being 
implemented in the Kayonza district through an IFAD -funded project: Strengthening Agricultu re Resilience 
through Learning and Innovation  (STARLIT ). This approach is particularly customized to poor, rural, and 
hard-to-reach farmers who  do not own smartphones.  
To implement this, the project will identify and select two buyers/off -takers for each selected value chain 
based on market needs and link them to farmers and farmer organizations. The eligibility criteria for 
buyers/off -takers wil l be developed by RFA in collaboration with CORDAID during the implementation. The 
project will organize periodic market linkage events and business -to-business (B2B) workshops through 
established value chain platforms. Additionally, the project will creat e a clear link between market access 
and other value chain supporting functions, such as value chain finance, to ensure that farmers have access 
to working capital for aggregation and marketing. Various models will be developed including tripartite 
agreeme nts (buyers, producer organizations, and financial institutions) to increase confidence among 
partners and financial flow.  
The activity will work to scale up the market system developed using the Output 3.2 inception report on 
beneficiary persona and stakeholder engagements to facilitate market system growth within the selected 
value chains, including bee products, and other w omen and youth -focused sectors. The activity will work to 
scale up the market system developed using the Output 3.2 inception report on beneficiary and stakeholder


---
*Page 281*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 59 
 
 engagements to facilitate market system growth within the selected value chains, including b ee products, 
and other women and youth -focused sectors such as adoption and sales of fuel -efficient cookstoves.  
The project will also build strong business relationships and linkages between input suppliers, markets, and 
farming cooperatives. This will bui ld common understanding and smoother flow of information to ensure that 
input suppliers and farming cooperatives respond swiftly to what markets need. The activity will train 
vulnerable groups and farming cooperatives on “farming as a business” concepts.  
Finally, trade agreements will be created between cooperatives and relevant national and regional 
companies that buy and sell such products. The Project will support and ensure protection of the interests 
of the cooperatives and their members while negotiat ing and signing relevant agreements for win -win 
situations.  
Key sub -activities:  
3.2.3.1 Develop an inclusive business model to Integrate vulnerable farmers into formal markets   
3.2.3.2 Organize microenterprise training and develop and implement green gran ts programs targeting 
landless youth and poor, as well as women who are unable to access direct benefits from land -based project 
activities.  
3.2.3.3 Facilitate market access for women, youth, and historically marginalized communities through market 
linkage  sessions  
3.2.3.4 Provide technical support on market standards, contract farming, and financial connectivity.  
3.2.3.5 Develop various market access channels including digital market access for rural farmers, especially 
women and marginalized groups  
 
Activ ity 3.2.4 Scale up use and sales of clean fuel -efficient cookstoves  
The project will actively promote the use of energy -efficient cookstoves to benefit the 90% of households in 
the CND that depend primarily on firewood to meet their cooking energy needs an d thus contributing to 
accelerated      forestry resources degradation while       causing profound health hazards to the already 
impoverished community.      .  
This intervention will reduce pressure on forests and farmland by raising household awareness of the 
differences between high and low efficiency stoves and by collaboration with the local TVETs institute to 
manufacture affordable efficient stoves that will  address       the limited availability of high -efficiency stoves in 
rural markets. Promoting the local fabrication will reduce dependency on cookstoves made outside the 
country and therefore make them affordable. Also, promoting locally made cookstov es designed to address 
local needs will lead to full adoption of improved cookstoves and will contribute to sustainable biomass 
resource use and prevent overexploitation of forest resources, thereby ensuring the success of the forest 
landscape restor ation activities described in Outputs 2.1, 2.2, and 3.2 above.  
The project will adopt a market -oriented approach to strengthen the cookstove supply chain in the CND and 
create strong linkages and business relationships with several ecosystem including the TVET center for 
training of youth and women SMEs on cookstove manufacturing  and repairing           , and microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) to ensure sustainable access and finance of cookstoves  business . 
As mentioned above,      to ensure  product quality and affordability to drive       uptake, scalability, and business 
growth and expansion      , the project will partner with integrated polytechnic regional colleges to develop a


---
*Page 282*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 60 
 
 Tier 2 (for emissions) prototype compatible with rur al settings and affordable to rural communities. Youth -
led SMEs will be trained on how to manufacture cookstoves and contracted to produce them  as well as 
operating sales points within the community       
The cookstove pricing and financing modality      will take into account      vulnerable groups, including 
historically marginalized groups mapped and selected in sub -activity 3.2.1.1 (social wealth categories c, d, 
e, and people with disabilities) .       F     or sustainability , the groups will be organized into saving groups and 
ensure they lend among themselves with the purpose of purchasing the cookstove            , the project       
subsidies may target      women -headed households  which has contributed over a percentage       of the total 
cost      . Additionally, the product design       will incorporate reducing health hazards      , such as reducing 
respiratory diseases risks and others linked to climate impact s     , contributing to reduction in morbidity and 
health treatment cost and enabling the vulnerable to have disposable income for investment into productive 
ventures and this will ensure       sustain ability       of impacts beyond the GCF fin ancing. Moreover, the project 
will target women -headed households, recognizing the significant role women and children play in firewood 
collection and cooking. The project will substantiate the time -saving benefits for fuel collection and links to 
women's decision -making and empowerment with clear indicators.  
Considering the lessons learnt from similar projects where hand -outs lead to poor sustainability, this pro ject      
will promote alternative income sources from fast -maturing crops such as chili and French beans which have 
ready market in Rwanda and externally. The members of the            saving groups will be able to use income 
generated from the sale of fast -maturing crops (chili and French beans) coupled with savings accumulated 
from th eir groups and save progressively to purchase the      cookstoves and replacement      . The project's 
technical support to MFIs will build their capacity      to develop       tailored financial products for cookstoves  
with affordable repa yment terms aligned to revenue streams from short -term crops and group savings , 
making it easier for farmers to access loans to buy cookstoves.  
GCF funds with co -financing from RDB will provide support for the development of ICS prototypes, youth -
led SME s engaged in cookstove production, subsidies for cookstoves, creation and support of savings 
groups, and technical support to MFIs to develop tailored financial products to facilitate access to ICS by 
local communities. The project will ensure that the coo kstoves are sustainably sourced and lead to minimal 
indoor air pollution and related respiratory conditions compared with the cooking methods presently in use 
both during production of the cookstoves and during usage by the individual households.  
Key sub -activities are:  
3.2.4.1. Promote local manufacturing through partnership with Integrated Polytechnic Regional Colleges 
(IPRCs) of Karongi and Musanze to help design  prototype Tier 2 ICS to address local constraints      . 
3.2.4.2. Build business and marketing capacity of the cooperatives and youth led SMEs to act as the 
marketing channels of      energy efficient cookstoves to CND community members based on wealth 
categories.  
3.2.4.3 Create a specialized small business development fund, to help local women and youth groups build 
innovative business models for accelerated distribution of ICS.  
3.2.4.4. Promote demand -through raising public awareness on the benefits of ICS by developing and 
disseminating messages on mass media  and in community meetings . 
Output 3.3 Financial services & private sector investment increased  
Financing challenges and needs are particularly high in clean cooking, mainly for two reasons: (1) due to 
lack of income, the upfront purchase of clean cooking equipment presents an affordability challenge to most


---
*Page 283*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 61 
 
 households, which adds to the monthly fuel expendit ures and (2) businesses operating in the sector are 
often unable to attract financ ing      for for investment in the value chain      . Serving low -income households 
also generally yields low returns  due to low customer base . 
With a particular f ocus on marginalized communities, and vulnerable groups of youth and women in the 
CND, the Project will deploy a FSG model to capacitate the communities' productivity and financial resilience. 
The project will address barriers to access to financial serv ices, specifically for women and youth by building 
the financial                      institutions to develop and financial products      that meet the  differentiated needs of 
vulnerable women and men  in the CND . The project Gender Exp ert, Youth Focal Point along with the 
Community Mobilization Specialist and Community Engagement Specialist will provide support to address 
barriers to access, ensure women’s financial skills are developed and there is community and financial 
institution a wareness and support to ensure marginalized groups, including women and youth can access 
financial services including credit  to invest in their businesses including purchase of the cookstoves . Besides 
this, to address the significant challenges facing MF Is and Participating Financial Institutes (PFI) such as 
limited understanding of forestry and agriculture sectors  investment and the corresponding risks            
associated with climate change  effects on credit repayment , this Project will      coach the participating  
financial service providers to enhance their       on assess ing the impact of climate change on their clientele 
and loan portfolio, and ensure equitable access to financial assets by women, youth, and historically 
marginalized communities. Furthermore, the Project will facilitate local and international impact investo rs 
and PFIs to engage in investment and credit provision for farmer cooperatives and SMEs in the selected 
value chains.  
In collaboration with TVET institutes/ICS youth producers and central (RFA, MININFRA) and local authorities 
(Districts), CND biomass and  micro -finance experts will refine and test, for each type of ICS/fuel to be 
promoted, the category/profile of households to be targeted and the related subsidy/microcredit schemes to 
be implemented to facilitate stove adoption with minimum concessionality . These schemes will be designed 
to align with the procedures and rules of identified local partner financial institutions . 
In addition, the financial products will be consistent with climate resilience and capacity -building for 
macadamia, avocado, vegetab les, honey and ecotourism value chain actors under Outputs 3.2.3 and 3.2.4. 
Techniques will be developed to analyze and score forestry and agroforestry value chains that are climate -
resilient.  
Activities and sub activities under this output will be execut ed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from WCS.  
Activity 3.3.1 Facilitate access to finance & private sector investments  
To de -risk the selected forestry and agroforestry -related value chains, the Project will organize sensi tization 
sessions for value chain actors and private financial institutions to build a common understanding with regard 
to the selected value chains. This will also include introduction of monitoring and measurement systems to 
support the risk and climate impact assessment on the value chains to be undertaken by the financial service 
providers.  
Communities involved in chosen forestry and agroforestry value chains in selected intervention sub -areas 
will be selected with a particular focus on landless people , historically marginalized communities, and 
vulnerable groups of youth and women in collaboration with local authorities (districts & sectors) and 
community representatives.   
Furthermore, the interventions will capitalize on the fast outreach of informal  saving groups. Saving groups 
are self -managed and self -capitalized entities that use members’ savings to facilitate lending within the


---
*Page 284*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 62 
 
 group. They set up clear rules and regulations which are known and adhered to by all group members. 
Groups consist of a limited number (10 -25) of people who have freely chosen to work together, and offer 
self-managed savings, insurance, and credit services in remote rural areas. Poorer segments of the 
community often do not have a regular source of income –however, within a savings group, people can save 
to purchase agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizer or equipment. Savings groups may also provide 
mutual assistance for group members, such as medical insurance or loans to members in need.  
Saving groups have transfor med marginalized communities by mobilizing local savings, which provide 
members  with a means to cope with emergencies, manage household cash -flow, build a capital base, and, 
crucially, re -build social networks, solidarity and trust. Savings group participa nts often do not have regular 
sources of income and commonly come from poorer segments of the community. Women are regularly 
involved in savings groups and have high participation rates. Saving group participants often come from the 
same socioeconomic back ground and know each other.   
Activities of saving groups include:  
● SAVING:  The group determines a fixed amount for a given period that each group member will bring 
to the savings account. The allocation and management of these savings can vary according to the 
needs of the members or is used to support group activities.  
● LENDING : The group can grant small internal credits to members. Loans are modest and repayable 
in the short term. Interest rate is fixed by members. At the request of the group, these credits are 
renewable almost automatically if there is no problem and if the am ounts are within a ceiling set by 
the group.   
● SOCIAL : The group not only improves the lives of its members financially but also socially as 
members are given the opportunity to socialize at each meeting and discuss other issues or 
concerns. The group furt her builds a small social fund to help group members in distress. Each 
group agrees on the amount to be saved, usually a smaller amount than the amount for regular 
savings, in every meeting for the social fund. This money is not loaned, but instead used to  pay 
group member expenses for things such as funeral costs or medical treatment and are only used if 
agreed on by all group members.  
In case of external loans from financial service providers, which most members can’t afford, group members 
agree to mutual ly guarantee each other (co -guarantee) when taking a loan. If a member does not pay, the 
group ensures repayment for him/her . The group uses moral pressure to force repayment and therefore 
there is no requirement for physical guarantees with third parties such as financial institutions. The internal 
character assessment for group members is important.  
The project will strengthen the capacity of saving groups and link them to more formalized financial 
institutions. The project will further enhance financial  education and client protection principles.   
This model is more convenient and more accepted by most women who cannot afford collateral loans. As 
such, this approach will attract more women and will facilitate their formal access to financing over time. 
Specific attention will also be paid to women’s participation in other project financial products that will be 
developed, such as asset finance in activity 3.3.2.  
The project will digitize saving groups, to reduce time and cost spent to access their saving s, thereby 
facilitating transactions with formal financial institutions. Solutions such as “push and pull technology” (i.e., 
payments using cell phones, commonly referred to as “mobile money”) have proven to be useful and 
convenient for savings groups to s end and receive money.


---
*Page 285*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 63 
 
 In activity 3.3.1, communities involved in chosen forestry and agroforestry value chains under this project in 
selected intervention sub -areas will be selected with a particular focus on landless people, historically 
marginalized com munities, and vulnerable groups of youth and women in collaboration with local authorities 
(districts & sectors) and community representatives.   
Sub-activities include:  
3.3.1.1 Develop tailored credit assessment tool for selected value chains, while integ rating climate impact 
data 
3.3.1.2 Facilitate access to finance for selected value chains of avocado, macadamia, vegetables and 
ecotourism that are relevant to build climate resilience  
3.3.1.3 Develop tailored financial products to meet the needs of women and youth  
Activity 3.3.2 Set up and support savings & loan groups, enhance asset -building  
To strengthen the capacity of local smallholder farmers in financial literacy and access to finance, farmers’ 
cooperatives will be assisted and supported in setting up saving groups. Savings groups are a proven and 
effective approach to the financial inclusion of the most vulnerable and are increasingly recognized as one 
of the strongest forms of community organization available due to the high levels of socia l capital generated 
from its savings approach. Saving groups create a platform for linkage with financial institutions and other 
business development services. Further, savings groups are recognized for enabling high levels of female 
inclusion. As groups m embers co -guarantee each other for accessing a loan and groups are strong, it forms 
low lending risks for MFIs since members mutually reinforce each other’s repayments.  
Once grouped, small savings group members, especially women, grow from accessing internal group loans 
to accessing formal financial institution loans. As members' bankability and trustworthiness increases, 
members are able to start accessing individual loa ns, gradually building to larger loans and are able to open 
individual savings accounts at financial institutions.  
Members of a saving group will be self -selected and the saving group will be managed by its members. 
Self-selection will be based on the fol lowing:  
● Knowledge of one another and similar economic background   
● Close proximity to where the meetings will be held   
● Reputation for honesty and reliability   
● Ability to attend all meetings on time and follow rules  
● Have a cooperative personality  
● Be able  to buy at least one share each week (or time set by the group)  
● Be able to repay loans on time   
Most saving groups are informal but transparent, democratic, and structured groups that have constitutions 
and clear rules. Members do not enter into contractu al arrangements for their membership. Record -
keeping is based on simple passbooks in which each member’s savings and loans are recorded; all 
transactions are done in front of the members during group meetings.  
Farmer savings groups (FSGs) will be created within cooperatives and farmers will decide which group to 
join. Groups will set up governing rules and conditions (savings amount, meetings, etc.), and criteria for new 
members who want to join. Particular attention will be given to social inclusion (incl uding vulnerable 
communities and landless people).


---
*Page 286*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 64 
 
 Youth and women -owned businesses selected for activity 3.2.2 will be linked to targeted FSG beneficiaries 
for supplying inputs (modern beehives, seedlings, etc.) and energy -efficient cook -stoves. Further more, 
intensive capacity -building and technical support will be delivered to all groups with emphasis on financial 
literacy, entrepreneurship, and gender mainstreaming. The activity will also help link savings groups to PFIs.  
For Activity 3.3.2, in collabo ration with local authorities, the project will target existing or potential youth and 
women -owned businesses that can intervene at any level of selected value chains in activity 3.3.1. The 
project will ensure the integration of vulnerable and landless peo ple. 
Key sub -activity:  
3.3.2.1 Establish/form saving groups for access to finance  
3.3.2.2 Provide organizational, technical, and financial capacity -building to women, youth, and CSOs (such 
as cooperatives or VSLA) with focus on financial literacy and provide long -term coaching to beneficiaries  
3.3.2.3 Support women, youth, and other marginalized groups to strengthen savings and loan groups and 
register for MFI accounts  
 
Activity 3.3.3 Build the capacity of financial institutions to serve targeted value  chains and communities  
Many financial institutions demonstrate little knowledge about the science of agriculture, forestry, climate 
change and associated risks. A study by the International Food Policy and Research Institute (IFPRI)112, 
noted that many agr icultural activities are located in remote, widely dispersed regions and that financial 
institutions find it impossible to provide cost -effective and affordable services in this context. Hence for this 
specific activity, PFIs will be supported to access an d adopt a digitalized forestry and agri -loan assessment 
tool, and to understand climate impacts on their portfolio to actively integrate and promote climate relevant 
financial products in their product offer.  
The Project will work with these institutions b y developing and refining appropriate financial products and 
financing operations that are better understood and user -friendly for smallholder farmers and vulnerable 
groups. The Project will also collaborate with selected PFIs to build their awareness of p rospective farmer 
and low -income group clients and their exposure to climate impacts.  
Key sub -activity:  
3.3.3.1 Capacity -building of PFIs  
Activity 3.3.4 Facilitate learning & knowledge sharing  
To deliver an adaptive program that cooperates with market ac tors on inclusive and sustainable business 
models that have a positive impact on smallholder farmers, while generating and sharing lessons on which 
business models work and which do not, the project will adopt the program -embedded reflection and learning 
(PERL) model for facilitating learning and knowledge sharing to popularize the CND unique approaches to 
restoration and environment management.  
By proving,  we seek to know and show what works and what does not work by demonstrating results at all 
levels, g enerating deeper insights into farmer benefits and the effects on the wider ecosystem, and building 
business model sustainability.  
 
112  Kloeppinger -Todd, R. and Sharma, M. eds., 2010.  Innovations in rural and agriculture finance  (Vol. 18). Intl Food 
Policy Res Inst.


---
*Page 287*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 65 
 
 By improving, we learn by doing to enhance project adaptation and improvement, build a learning culture 
through discussion an d reflection, generate knowledge to support project effectiveness, make comparisons 
over time, and enhance data quality procedures.  
Through sharing,  we disseminate high -level results and learnings to relevant audiences, contribute to 
visibility and commun ication, showcase successful, sustainable and scalable business models, and generate 
best practices.  
Under this activity we will go through the following actions to prove, improve and share:  
Capture  - We will establish a KML framework and support case studies and discussion by project staff; 
improve data collection; collect insights from field visits; write human interest stories; hold quarterly program 
reviews; measure client satisfaction; and colle ct information on business models, market uptake, and 
ecosystem changes.  
Synthesize  - We will organize discussions and quarterly program reviews with program staff and 
stakeholders for assessment, interpretation, reflection, and learning from results. Outp uts will include 
reports, briefs, and articles.  
Disseminate  - We will contribute to and support the project, presenting its achievements in newsletters, 
conferences, webinars, blogs, publications, media events, partner workshops and sector network 
presenta tions.  
Take action  - We will have regular discussions and reviews in which we revisit the work plan and processes 
in light of results and insights (e.g., based on outreach data, field visits, case studies, partner feedback, 
quarterly reports, changes in the ecosystem, etc.) , and adapt operational planning when needed (within and 
outside of the normal project planning and reporting cycle).  
Refine agenda  - We will help to align the project intervention strategy with a shared vision for success.      
      
The table below summ arizes the project activities to be implemented in Congo Nile Divide .


---
*Page 288*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 66 
 
  
Table 4:  Summary of project activities (place based and non -place based) to be implemented across the Congo Nile Divide.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
The proposed project will be implemented in five years, from 202 4–2029. The Ministry of Environment (MoE) 
is the Accredited Entity (AE) for the GCF and MoE will enter into a funded activity agreement with the GCF 
once the project is approved by the Board.


---
*Page 289*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 67 
 
  
The governance arrangements for the project at the national level are designed to build upon the  
institutional structure of MOE (the accredited entity) and RFA (the Executing Entity).  
Accredited Entity:   The MoE on behalf of the Government of Rwanda is a Direc t Access Entity of the GCF 
and will assume the oversight role on implementation, management, monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
on the CND Program elaborated in the FAA. The MoE will enter into a subsidiary agreement with the 
Executing Entity (EE) with c lear roles and responsibilities for each party. Under the Ministry of Environment 
there is a Single Project Implementation Unit that has a number of staff charged with resource mobilization 
and providing oversight over different projects implemented throug h the Ministry of Environment. The 
MoE/SPIU has a track record of experience in project oversight, management, monitoring and evaluation of 
projects and programs including the GCF funded FP073 that is currently at the mid -term level of 
implementation with over USD 32.8 million, managed over USD 3.8 million for the GCF funded PPFs, 
overseen the implementation of USD 10 million from Adaptation Fund. The MoE is currently managing the 
World Bank Funded project preparation advance of USD 6 million and has been i mplementing since 2018 a 
program funded by the UNDP focused on Strengthening Capacities of Environment and Natural Resources 
Sector for a Green Economy Transformation of over USD 6 million. Additionally MoE assumes its oversight 
role through chairing of th e Project Steering Committee for different projects implemented under the 
Environment and Natural Resources Sector as a whole namely TREPA, a GCF -funded project, Rwanda 
Urban Development Project Two funded by the World Bank and NDF,   an Early Warning Syste m project


---
*Page 290*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 68 
 
 (funded by LDCF), the Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and Conservation (LAFREC) programme 
(funded by GEF/World Bank), Green Amayaga Project (funded by the GEF) and the “Building resilience of 
communities living in degraded forests, savan nahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem 
management approach” programme (funded by LDCF). A coordination platform between approved GCF 
projects will be established to identify, maximize linkages and ensure complementarity through learning and 
shari ng best practices and failures arising from the implementation of existing GCF projects. Quarterly 
meetings will be organized under the supervision of the MoE between project directors and staff responsible 
for monitoring and evaluation to share lessons le arned.  
Project Financial Flow and AE Roles  
Funds from GCF will be provided to the MoE GCF account (as the AE), under the terms of the FAA. MoE 
will be responsible for financial management and accountable for the use of GCF resources. Financial 
transactions  will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally certified auditors. In addition, as 
the AE, MoE will: i) ensure that the project is executed in accordance with GCF standards; ii) supervise, 
oversee and manage the implementation of project i nterventions; iii) report on Project progress; and iv) 
ensure that Project activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries' national priorities. MoE will 
provide oversight to the project consisting of a) entering into subsidiary agreement with t he EE; b) managing 
and disbursing GCF funds to EE on the approved work plans and budgets; c) reviewing financial 
expenditures and progress reports; d) overseeing Project implementation in accordance with the Project 
document and Annual Work Plans and Budge ts, agreements with co -financiers and  executing entity rules 
and procedures; e) providing technical guidance to ensure that the appropriate technical quality is applied 
to all Project activities; f) providing financial reports to the GCF for Project funds  received; g) ensuring that 
the project complies with the terms agreed in the Project’s respective FAA as well as the AMA signed 
between MoE and the GCF; and h) undertaking regular annual supervision missions according to the MoE’s 
guidelines and convene   Project   Steering Committee (PSC) meeting twice a year   aimed to review progress 
and approve   work plans.   The PMU hosted under the Single Project Implementation Unit of the Ministry of 
Environment will manage, monitor and report on day -to-day implementati on of the Project activities by the 
EE. The EE will   execute the tasks within the overall project management structure: a) implementing day -to-
day activities as per the project work plan and budget, including the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan; b ) undertaking procurement activities as per the agreement signed by GCF and AE as well as the sub -
agreement signed by the AE and EE; c) managing contracts of suppliers and services providers; d) hiring 
and managing project staff relevant to the EE -managed project areas; e) implementing activities as per the 
project work plan; and f) carrying out financial and technical monitoring of activities, including the 
achievement of outputs and outcomes the EE is  in charge of. EE will enter into Memorandum of 
Unders tanding with different implementing partner agencies that will provide technical know -how to the 
implementation of the project activities. The implementing partners including but not limited to RWB, WCS, 
NLA, RDB, CORDAID and Districts will provide technic al and operation services articulated and agreed in 
respective MoUs. For the Implementing partners RFA will be paying service compensations and at District 
Level community approach will be used. Procured service providers will be contracted in accordance w ith 
MoE rules and regulations of procuring goods and services.   
Project Steering Committee (PSC):  An inter -ministerial Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary will be established by MOE to serve as the project’s coordination and  decision -making 
body. The PSC will ensure the project delivers its outputs and achieves its outcomes. The Committee will 
meet on a semi -annual basis to review project progress and evaluations, facilitate implementation (ensuring 
the necessary resources an d support are provided in a timely manner) and provide guidance to the PMU 
and EE/PIU. The Steering Committee will also facilitate effective coordination between the key stakeholders 
at the national and district levels and ensure the project aligns with Go vernment strategies and programs.


---
*Page 291*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 69 
 
 The PSC will reflect the multi -sectoral nature of the project and will include senior -level representatives from 
GoR and other relevant Stakeholders. The PSC will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, MOE or any 
Senior Ma nager from MoE delegated by the Permanent Secretary with representatives from: MINAGRI, 
MINECOFIN, MININFRA - MINALOC, RDB, REG, REMA, RWB, RFA, RAB, NAEB, WCS, RCA, NLA, UR, 
Provinces ESs, Districts’ Vice Mayors of Economic Affairs and representatives of C ivil Society Organizations.  
Project Management Unit:  It is under the MoE/SPIU that a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) of 
the CND program to supplement the existing MoE/SPIU structure for this complex program will be 
established for day -to-day manage ment of the program interventions. The Project Management Unit (PMU) 
will be headed by the Project Coordinator who will serve as the secretary and the rapporteur of the PSC. 
The Project Coordinator and other PMU staff will be recruited  as per the MoE/GoR r ecruitment practices. 
The Project Coordinator is responsible for the day -to-day operations of the PMU within approved project 
funded activity agreement and any other guidance provided by the AE and PSC including the tasks of 
managing and monitoring project  risks initially identified and submitting new risks to the AE and PSC for 
consideration and decision -making on follow -up actions and updating the status of risks in the project risk 
log. The PMU Project Coordinator will report to the overall MoE/SPIU - Coordinator as the immediate 
supervisor and to the Permanent Secretary as the secondary supervisor.  
The PMU will provide to the MoE/SPIU coordination and to the Chair of PSC with quarterly progress reports 
and close its operations when the final project evalu ation report and other documentation required by the 
GCF have been completed and submitted to MoE. The PMU will be staffed with required professional and 
technically qualified personnel selected and recruited following the MoE/GoR procedures. In all, the P MU 
will strive to maintain a lean management structure. It will comprise a Project Coordinator, Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, E&S Specialist, Procurement Specialist, Gender Specialist, Financial 
Management Specialist, Communication and Outreach  Specialist, Office Manager, and Driver as a 
dedicated team to manage the EE for the whole program.   
Executing Entity:  RFA will serve as the EE for the Project through a subsidiary agreement (SA)  signed with 
MoE. The SA will establish clear roles and respo nsibilities for both parties for the delivery of the project 
activities, the schedule and conditions for installments, the determination of the prevailing fiduciary standards 
and the terms and conditions for arbitrations and termination of contract. The SA  will include specific 
obligations for the EE on project execution, financial management, personnel administration and reporting, 
as well as on arbitration and liability terms.   
Rwanda Forest Authority:  RFA was established by the Government of Rwanda by the law No 72/2019 of 
29/01/2020 with the mission of ensuring the growth of forest resources, their management and protection 
for sustainable development purposes. RFA is an affiliated agency under the Mo E with a separate legal 
personality and a budget entity of the Government of Rwanda.   RFA is currently implementing   TREPA;   a 
GCF funded project as one of the executing entities, COMBIO Project funded by the Swedish government, 
executed Forest Management and Biomass Energy project (FMBE) implemented in the Northern province; 
Sustainable forestry, agroforestry and biomass energy management for climate resilience in Gatsibo and 
Gicumbi districts; and Improving the Efficiency and Sustainability of Charcoal an d Wood Fuel Value Chains 
in the North -western part of Rwanda supported by the Nordic Development Fund. RFA has three main 
divisions namely Forest Research Division, Forest Management, Administration and Finance and an 
established Single Project Implementat ion Unit (SPIU), composed of staff with the required financial 
management skills where the CND Staff will be hosted. The Director General of RFA as the Chief Budget 
Manager, the  RFA SPIU Coordinator together with Program Manager and a Financial Management 
Specialist will be responsible for the day -to-day financial management of the Project.   RFA SPIU will open a 
separate account at the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR), from which payments of the Project activities will


---
*Page 292*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 70 
 
 be made from. RFA follows the same financ ial and procurement policy as the one of the Ministry of 
Environment.   
WCS Technical Assistance (TA) Services:  As one of the project implementation partners,  WCS will 
provide technical assistan ce to the EE (RFA) through a n MOU  signed with RFA. The MOU  will detail all the 
activities that WCS will be directly supporting during the implementation of this project. The TA services will 
include advising RFA/SPIU, procuring and supervising international experts and consultants, and procuring 
materials to support t he execution activities. Relevant technical expert s from WCS will be embedded within 
RFA to advise SPIU on day -to-day project management to support the implementation of activities under 
outputs 1.2, 2.1, and 2.2. These experts will support RFA’s technical  teams and strengthen their capacities 
in different aspects of the project implementation. Furthermore, WCS technical assistance services will 
include supporting the development of ToRs and reviewing works of international consultants to ensure high 
qualit y deliverables.  
CORDAID Technical Assistance Services : CORDAID will provide technical assistance to RFA mainly on 
output 3.2 and 3.3 through  an MOU signed with RFA.  
Other Government of Rwanda implementing partners will provide implementation support and RFA will enter 
into specific M OUs with these partners  based on the type of support t hey will provide.   
Table 5:  Summary of project outputs. The EE will be responsible for all activities and sub -activities of the 
project, rec eiving support from technical implementation partners .  
Outputs  Executing 
Entity per 
output  Technical 
Implementation 
Partners  
Output 1.1. Landscape -wide land -use plan 
developed for climate -resilient livelihoods & 
forest ecosystems, integrating district 
development strategies (DDS)  RFA 
  WCS and NLA  
Output 1.2. Local & national institutional 
capacities strengthened to integrate biodiversity 
& climate risks into land use planning & 
management  RFA WCS and NLA  
Output 2.1. Protected areas management 
effectiveness improved to address climate risks 
and adaptation  RFA WCS and RDB  
Output 2.2. Natural forest cover restored; 
biodiversity  connections established  RFA WCS  
Output 3.1. Farming methods enhance 
productivity, reduce erosion & flooding risks, 
contribute to ecosystem services, and support 
connectivity  RFA RWB


---
*Page 293*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 71 
 
 Output 3.2. Rural livelihoods generate 
alternative incomes and reduce pressure on 
forests  RFA CORDAID  
Output 3.3. Financial services & private sector 
investment engagement  RFA CORDAID  
Monitoring and Evaluation  PMU   
 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)  will be responsible for ensuring technical guidance to both the 
project execution team and the PSC. The TAC will have technical representatives from all project 
stakeholders including MINAGRI, MINECOFIN, MININFRA, MINALOC, RDB, REG, REMA, RWB, RFA, 
RAB, N AEB, WCS, RCA, NLA, UR, Districts representatives and representatives of Civil Society 
Organizations. The TAC will be engaged in providing technical support and quality assurance of the project 
implemented activities as well as facilitating effective imple mentation and mainstreaming of project 
interventions beyond the life of the project. The institutional stakeholders will nominate relevant technical 
experts to the TAC, thus bringing expertise from their respective institutions to make technical contributi ons 
to the project implementation based on the integrated nature of the project.  
The project will use the GoR fund management modalities based on an annual work plan developed by the 
PMU together with EE and subsequently approved by the PSC. The Annual Work Plan (AWP) indicates 
which activities should be covered at PMU and EE levels as per the allocated respective budgets. The EE, 
together with support from implementing partners, will establish Local Project Implementation Committees 
(LPICs)specif ic to the zones of intervention in the Western and Southern Provinces of Rwanda. Two LPICs 
will be established; one for the Southern province and another one for the Western province for the 
coordination of activities in Western (GMNP) and southern (NNP) R wanda to ensure synergies and 
complementarity between partners. These teams will work closely with the Joint Action Development Forums 
(DJAF) based in each district located in these respective zones. LPIC will be composed of representatives 
of districts in  charge of natural resources management, RDB, CSOs, and conservation organizations, 
women and youth councils and JADF.   This arrangement will ensure that a) project delivery can proceed 
securely and efficiently despite the complex governance framework; and  c) government partners play a 
leading role in project delivery and capacity development. PSC will provide policy direction and guidance to 
improve the coherence and efficiency of this innovative approach to be developed as an up -scalable model. 
At the loc al level, the EE and its service providers will coordinate closely with districts to ensure smooth local 
level coordination in project implementation, provide ownership and ensure sustainability. The District 
Executive Directors (DEDs) are expected to play  an active role in project implementation, facilitation and 
monitoring and play a key role in the grievance redress mechanisms, as described in the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan of the project.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request  
Rwanda has achieved remarkable social, political, and economic progress over the past two decades. The 
Rwandan economy has grown well above average compared to its peers and the rest of the world, achieving 
growth rates of more than 8% regularly, with a 9. 4% growth rate in 2019113. However, the economy which is 
 
113  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2020.


---
*Page 294*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 72 
 
 dependent on nature -based tourism and agriculture is extremely vulnerable to external shocks, including 
climate change.  
Climate change is likely to increase variability in crop yields and agricultura l production, cause severe flood 
damage to physical infrastructure, reduce labor productivity, and impact demand for tourism114. The recent 
Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) estimates that if these risks materialize, Rwanda’s GDP 
levels can drop  by 5–7% below baseline in multiple years by 2050115, with negative impacts on private 
consumption, exports, and government revenues. By strengthening resilience to climate change, Rwanda 
can better prepare to manage the adverse impacts of climate change. I mplementing the commitments 
articulated in the NDC is estimated to require new investments of US$11 billion, of which close to US$7 
billion is conditional on new financing.  
Rwanda is classified by the U.N. as a Least Developed Country (LDC)116 and lacks su fficient public financial 
resources to implement its climate change and resilient green development objectives. The implications of 
climate impact for Rwanda demands concerted action and support both locally and internationally to enable 
the mainstreaming of climate resilience into public, private and community sectors at the pace and scale 
required. This Project will allow Rwanda to implement its NDC commitments and pursue its aspirations under 
its National Forest Policy and Climate Resilient Green Economy  plans for reversing trends of high 
deforestation, allowing for demonstration of sustainable reforestation models and reductions in demand for 
wood fuel. Rwanda has made an impressive commitment to using forests and forest protection as part of its 
strateg y to mitigate the impacts from climate change, and to provide benefits of biodiversity conservation 
and livelihood improvements.   
Yet, vulnerable citizens' needs, coupled with fragile landscape and forest restoration, will not be met solely 
with national resources in the rapid timeframe needed to arrest loss of economic assets for households and 
prevent further degradation of landscapes. Specific investments in awareness and forest governance, 
training at scale required to increase the resilience of CND co mmunities to the impacts of climate change, 
and alignment and coordination of support on undertaking climate resilient restoration activities are not 
currently being developed by the GoR. The GoR does not have the financial means to implement all project 
activities identified to improve climate resilience and requires technical assistance and support. While project 
partners are contributing co -finance for this project implementation, this represents only a fraction of the 
resources required for implementati on. The GCF grant investment can help initiate, expedite, and catalyze 
these critical interventions and assist with alignment of future climate resilience efforts. MoE is requesting 
grant funding for this Project due to Rwanda’s status as an LDC, insuffici ent alternative finance options, and 
because the proposed activities will provide a public good on which the livelihoods of many of Rwanda’s 
rural poor depend. The high levels of poverty among project beneficiaries in the CND as identified in the 
Feasibili ty Report necessitate the use of grant funds rather than a reimbursable financial option. While the 
GoR will contribute resources for the implementation and sustaining climate resilience efforts beyond the 5 -
year Project, this represents only a partial sha re of implementation resources. The GCF funding will crowd 
in additional private sector capital, such as efficient cookstoves and forest plantations, and will allow the 
government to cost -efficiently implement the adaptation capacity -building training and practices to ensure 
that CND landscape is restored, and climate resilient landscapes maintained.  
 
114  “World Bank Group. 2019.  Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.  World Bank, Washington, DC. World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32113   License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”  
115  World Bank Group. 2022. Rwanda Country Climate and Development Report . CCDR Series;. World Bank, 
Washin gton, DC. World Bank Group . https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/38067   License: CC BY -NC-ND 
3.0 IGO.   
116   United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2021. Least Developed Country Category: Rwanda 
Profile.


---
*Page 295*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 73 
 
 The lack of private capital structure, prevalence of subsistence farming, and inadequate market for 
agriculture and forested products, is the primary cause of the request for grants, not loans as little surplus 
products are produced and traded, and thus wi ll be inadequate to secure or service any loans.The prevailing 
market conditions necessitate GCF grant finance, rather than loans, to raise the capacity and bridge the 
financial and technical gaps until the restoration and value chain models are brought to  financially viability 
that can be sustained by private sector. Furthermore, our Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) shows 
that the direct returns on investment in landscape restoration activities are too low to make them financially 
attractive or feasib le for farmers, even if they had access to credit. Without GCF support, lack of private 
financing, large payback period, uncertainty and transaction cost of getting the loan, and upfront cost and 
benefits realized over a longer period of time reduces the f inancial attractiveness of climate resilience 
investments. It is unlikely that there will be a financial return on investment within the Project time frame to 
repay loans. The issue of societal benefit investment is accentuated by the fact that there canno t be direct 
uptake of benefits to communities from restoration within National Parks.  
Serving low -income households yields low returns and the community lacks financial education and capacity 
to link them to formal private institutions. Most formal financ ial institutions view these as high risk and high 
cost, as the transactions are often small and the clients usually have neither physical collateral nor the 
education needed to organize their finances. Without the value chain development for potential reve nue 
generating streams such as honey, tea plantation tourism, and efficient cookstoves, the private sector 
investments are not occurring. Henceforth, these potential revenue generating streams proposed in the 
project are not sustainable on their own and th e GCF grant will not only provide financing support but will be 
critical in creating enabling opportunities for market development beyond the project to catalyze private 
investments. The full concessionality funded by GCF grants is requested so that an ena bling environment 
can be created, and the project can overcome affordability challenges through developing a system of 
community co -guarantee. This will also go beyond the neoclassical economics model and focus on shifts in 
social dynamics that move the co mmunity as a whole to escape the poverty trap and increase financial 
resilience. The full concessionality for potential revenue generating streams will be passed on to end 
beneficiaries in the CND and the project will strengthen the capacity of community o rganizations on quality 
improvement and aggregation capacity, create market linkage with off -takers or buyers, and attract finance 
for development, marketing, and distribution.  
Planting indigenous species, well -suited to the climatic conditions of the CND,  is likely to increase the health 
and resilience of forest plantations and thus the erosion control benefits that these forests provide. However, 
when establishing protective forests, most existing projects in the CND use exotic species because they are 
fast growing, widely available, and low cost117. GCF grant resources are required to support restoration to 
help build natural capital (restored forest) which can be used sustainably and provide larger ecosystem 
benefits in the future.  
The financial Net Present Value (NPV) of $34.48 million for agroforestry, $2.98 million for protective forests, 
and $0.31 million for silvopasture intervention and economic NPV of $ 58.93       million for agroforestry, 
$30.22 million for protective for ests, $ 0.97       million for silvopasture, and $ 10.59       million for energy 
efficient cookstoves interventions for 20 -year analysis period when GCF support for the Project is 
considered118. These results are indicative of the investment in time and resources required to increase 
climate resilience, associated benefits, and restoration of landscape and forest productivity. Furthermore, 
 
117  Mukuralinda, A., et al, 2016. Taking to Scale Tree -Based Systems in  Rwanda to Enhance Food Security, Restore 
Degraded Land, Improve Resilience to Climate Change and Sequester Carbon.  PROFOR, Washington D.C.  
118 The provision of energy efficient cookstoves is a non -income generating intervention and is expected to have no 
financial cash inflows and no income generating opportunities, then no financial analyses is needed. The cookstoves 
analyses was pursued only at the economic analysis level.


---
*Page 296*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 74 
 
 agroforestry, restoration, and forest management require up -front investments that take 10 -30 years to 
mature ful ly. However, these future benefits are depressed by the use of a high discount rate that downplays 
the importance of long -term investments. The discount rate considered in our economic analysis is 13%, 
which is Rwanda Central Bank’s yield for a 20 -year tre asury bond, as issued in August 2021. This is the rate 
at which the government can borrow to fund equivalent investments in the absence of grant financing. For 
financial analysis, we used the discount rate of 15.44%, which is Rwanda Central Bank’s lending rate for 
July 2021. Consequently, the GoR seeks maximum concessionality from the GCF for the urgent adaptation 
actions proposed under this Project. Without GCF funding, under a business as usual (BAU) scenario, 
inadequate technical and financial capacity a t the national and local level will continue to hinder the efforts 
of rural communities in the CND to adapt their livelihoods. Consequently, the vicious negative cycle of 
unsustainable forest use and ecosystem degradation will persist, reducing the supply of goods and services 
which buffer impacts of climate change on rural communities, compounding their vulnerability. GCF funding 
is therefore vital to initiate progress towards a complete paradigm shift in GoR’s approach to adapting the 
livelihoods of rural  Rwandans to climate change.  
The Project cost per direct beneficiary of $31 ($39.86 with co -funding) and 20 -year economic rate of return 
of project interventions for agroforestry (       49%), protective forests (72%), and silvopasture (       51%) 
highlights its viability. The Economic rate of return for energy efficient cookstoves could not be estimated as 
there is no change in the sign in the net cash or resource flows from positive to negative over the analytical 
period; and the economic NPV of $ 10,585.675       for this intervention highlights its feasibility.  The cost of 
restoring natural forest for providing both adaptation and mitigation benefits is significantly greater than the 
cost of simply planting trees for mitigation. Restoration o f natural forest in Rwanda is essential for sustaining 
the critical ecosystem services on which vulnerable rural communities and the national economy depend . 
The capital market in the country is weak and provides limited opportunities. It has low levels of  direct 
investment which further limits the opportunity for financing. The country's capital markets currently are not 
able to serve the needs of rural and resource limited beneficiaries. The project addresses market failures 
and minimizes the risk of disr upting or unduly distorting markets or crowding out private finance, including 
new entrants, as well as other public investments. Taking the above -mentioned points into account the 
concessionality that the GCF provides is justified.  
B.6. Exit strategy  
The Project will establish a new inter -agency and local -to-national -scale spatial planning framework and 
capacity for an integrated approach to multi -sector analysis and planning. This will enable the analysis of 
land-use trade -offs that explicitly conside r the value of ecosystem services, climate risks and risks of 
ecosystem degradation. This represents a radical shift away from business -as-usual and will have long -term, 
far-reaching implications for policy and financial planning in Rwanda. It will provide  a spatially explicit 
framework for mainstreaming climate risk considerations across all sectors while also providing a 
mechanism for quantifying harmful financial flows to biodiversity from multiple sectors.  
In addition, the multi -scale spatial planning system will be able to strengthen a nd link directly to the system 
under development by Rwanda’s Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) for policy 
coordination to integrate climate risks into fiscal planning, with support from the IM F Resilience and 
Sustainability Trust. Further, it will support the ability of both national and local governments to plan and 
implement the new disaster risk reduction strategy in a spatially explicit way, which previously has not been 
possible.  
Mainstrea ming climate change adaptation metrics . The Project will integrate climate resilience metrics into 
land use planning, district development strategies and annual performance contracts and harmonize cross -


---
*Page 297*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 75 
 
 sectoral monitoring and reporting mechanisms. This wi ll lead to a systematic consideration of climate change 
risks and adaptation in policy planning that will be sustained beyond the Project. An MoU between key 
government agencies will operationalize the cross -sectoral planning task force, which will be supp orted by 
a ministerial order, giving it the mandate and financial support to operate beyond the life of the Project.  
Rwanda has adopted a private -public partnership (PPP) business model to make its national parks 
operations financially viable. However, in Rwanda, as in the rest of the world, national parks and the 
biodiversity they are intended to protect are threatened by climate change and by the interaction of climate 
change with other direct anthropogenic threats. By “climate proofing” its national park s–i.e., by establishing 
a technical unit within RDB, by explicitly incorporating climate change considerations into the management 
plans of national parks, including climate -wise functional linkages, such as the one this project will create in 
the CND, and  by training rangers and other park personnel to proactively manage climate -change -related 
threats –Rwanda will ensure that the ecosystem service benefits of the country’s biodiversity, including its 
national parks, will be sustained beyond the life of the Project. Specific finance instruments –such as payment 
for ecosystem services (PES) and structured impact conservat ion bonds to ensure ongoing revenues and 
benefit -sharing with surrounding communities –will be identified and implemented before the end of the  
project, in a manner consistent with the Biodiversity Finance Plan that the GoR has recently developed with 
support from BIOFIN. The Project through RFA will hire a Technical Advisor  , to work with RDB, MoE, 
REMA, FONERWA and MINECOFIN to ensure that a p ortfolio of sustainable finance mechanisms is 
designed and implemented before the end of the project period to ensure the long -term sustainability of the 
Project outputs.   
Strategies for Long -term Financial Sustainability.  Two specific examples of the Gove rnment of Rwanda’s 
commitment and approaches to financial sustainability that will be key parts of the Exit Strategy are the 
Tourism Revenue Sharing Program (TRSP) of RDB and the Community Adaptation Fund of FONERWA, the 
Rwanda Green Fund.  
Tourism Revenue Sharing Program.  The long -term success of the three protected areas in the CND 
depends, to a substantial extent, on the support of communities living around protected areas.  In recognition 
of this, in 2005 Rwanda established a Tourism Revenue Sharing Prog ram, allocating 5% of gross tourism 
revenue to local communities.  Currently Rwanda and Uganda are the only two African countries with formal 
tourism benefit sharing programs. RDB recently completed a 15 -year review of its Tourism Revenue Sharing 
Program ( Snyman et al. 2023) and it has increased the revenue sharing allocation from 5% to 10%.  
The primary challenges identified in the 15 -year review are increasing the effectiveness of community 
engagement, reaching the most vulnerable community members, and en suring that the TRSP meets 
community needs.  The GoR is interested in adapting the TRS Policy to more effectively engage the 
communities living around the PAs in the TRSP and to allocate more funding to directly enhance the lives of 
Rwandan citizens living  around PAs. In this regard the Project will work with RDB and district governments, 
to increase transparency in the Program, ensure that the most vulnerable community members benefit from 
the TRSP and to link the cooperatives and youth -led SMEs to the Pro gram. This will include working with 
RDB to use the insights from this project to revise the TRSP revenue allocation model and eligibility to create 
greater resilience among communities.  The 15 -year review recommended that the following percentages 
be use d for the revenue allocation going forward: 70% for livelihood projects; 25% for infrastructure support; 
and 5% in an emergency fund. However, there is a need for input from this Project to ensure that the specific 
types of projects to be supported most ef fectively increase community resilience.  This will ensure long -term 
benefits to communities.  
The Community Adaptation Facility (CAF) within FONERWA  was developed as part of Rwanda’s NDC Deep 
Dive:  Advancing Financial Innovation to Scale Up Climate Action .  The aim of the CAF is to provide grant


---
*Page 298*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 76 
 
 funding for community projects that scale up climate resilience. In this regard, the Project will support the 
cooperatives and youth -led SMEs engaged in Component 3 to prepare business plans and link them to 
innova tive financing for community projects with the CAF. In line with the CAF priorities, the business plans 
will focus on the investment priorities of the Rwanda Green Fund (FONERWA) targeting conservation and 
sustainable management of natural resources especi ally ecosystem rehabilitation, sustainable land 
management, sustainable forest management and promotion and protection of biodiversity.  The Project 
Technical Assistance will work with FONERWA to design specific long -term funding opportunities for 
communit ies in the CND to the CAF.  
Additionally, t he Project will enhance the environmental, social and economic resilience of communities in 
the CND by enhancing financial and accounting literacy, marketing and entrepreneurship, and vocational 
skills of community  members (e.g., in native tree propagation, forest restoration, and fuel -efficient stove 
production). This will mean the Project will invest in businesses that restore or indirectly halt the degradation 
and loss of native forests by reducing or eliminating  local stressors. These businesses and projects are 
expected to live beyond the lifetime of the project. The value chains, once organized profitably, can continue 
to grow without further support, while the financial service providers will continue to servi ce savings groups 
and farmers and SMEs in the value chain with sustainable financial services also after the project ends. By 
raising the productivity from selected crops, diversifying agriculture towards high -value agriproducts, and 
strengthening their va lue chains through trainings in marketing, processing and business, the project will 
attract investments from the private sector in sustainable agriculture and agroforestry. All economic and 
environmental benefits from the project will be rigorously monito red, captured, compiled and disseminated 
as knowledge products, packaged for various stakeholders including investors and MFI, with which the 
project will engage to secure microcredits to beneficiary farmers.


---
*Page 299*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
(c) FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  Total amount  Currency  
39,056,421  USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
Grants  39,056,421  - - - 
(b) Co-financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
10,943,579  USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Rwanda 
Development 
Board  Grant  5,000,000  USD ($)  - - - 
Rwanda Forestry 
Authority  Grant  831,307  USD ($)  - - - 
Rwanda Water 
Resources Board  Grant  5,000,000  USD ($)  - - - 
Ministry of 
Environment  In-kind 112,272  USD ($)  - - - 
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
50,000,000  USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions   
The Government of Rwanda is providing grant financing via the Rwanda Forest Authority 
(RFA), Rwanda Water Board (RWB), and Rwanda Development Board (RDB) to support 
activities in component 3. In addition  to their contributions, AE will cover office costs in 
the form of an in -kind contribution equivalent to $112,271 for the Project Management 
Unit which will be hosted within AE premises . The co -financiers have been identified 
based on their existing mandat es and activities they implement in the CND region hence 
this was the only assessment done and they have been able to commit their involvement 
in the project implementation. The provided co -financing commitments will serve as a 
basis of MoE engagement duri ng the project implementation. During implementation of 
the project, annual work plans will be adjusted together with the executing entity and all 
the co -financiers to align with everyone’s activities.  MoE/AE under its oversight role will 
ensure that all these stakeholders commit during planning on their co -financing and 
report on it during Annual Performance Reports submitted to GCF.


---
*Page 300*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1:  
Mainstreaming 
Climate 
adaptation into 
integrated land 
use planning  
 1.1 Landscape -
wide land -use plan 
developed for 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods & forest 
ecosystems, 
integrating district 
strategies  1,729,172  1,729,172  
 Grant     
 1.2 Local & national 
institutional 
capacities 
strengthened to 
integrate 
biodiversity & 
climate risks into 
land use planning & 
management  1,195,652  1,195,652  Grant     
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 2:  
Forest and 
landscape 
management and 
restoration  2.1 PA 
management 
effectiveness 
improved re climate 
risks & adaptation  2,051,778  2,051,778  Grant     
2.2 Natural forest 
cover restored, 
biodiversity 
connections 
established  16,917,145  14,271,796  Grant  2,645,349   Rwanda 
Water Board  
Component 3: 
Enhancing 
climate 
adaptation 
through 
promotion of 
resilient 
livelihoods and 
climate -smart 
farming methods  3.1 Farming 
methods enhance 
productivity, reduce 
erosion & flooding 
risks, contribute to 
ecosystem 
services, and 
support connectivity  13,451,014  10,856,387  Grant  478,071  
 
 
 
2,116,556  Grant  
 
 
 
Grant  Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
 
Rwanda 
Water Board  
3.2 Rural 
livelihoods 
generate alternative 
incomes & reduce 
pressure on forests  8,612,188  3,850,283  Grant  4,761,905  Grant  Rwanda 
Development 
Board  
3.3 Financial 
services & private 
sector investment 
engage  559,890  559,890  Grant


---
*Page 301*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 79 
  
 Monitoring & 
Evaluation  
 4.1 - Performance 
monitoring plan 
developed  555,475  555,475  Grant     
4.2 - Project 
monitored and 
evaluated; lessons 
learnt integrated 
into adaptive 
management 
processes  645,390  645,390  Grant     
Project 
Management 
Costs  5.1 Project 
managed efficiently 
to achieve its goal 
to build resilience to 
climate change in 
CND  1,901,344  1,480,769  Grant  106,925  
 
 
 
313,650  
 
 In-Kind 
 
 
 
Grant  Ministry of 
Environment 
(AE) 
 
Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
5% Contingency   2,380,952  1,859,830  Grant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 39,586  
 
 
 
 
238,095  
 
 
 
 
238,095  
 
 
 
5,346  
 Grant  
 
 
 
 
Grant  
 
 
 
 
Grant  
 
 
 
In-Kind 
 Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
 
 
Rwanda 
Water Board  
 
 
 
Rwanda 
development 
Board  
 
 
Accredited 
Entity  
 
Indicative total 
cost  (USD)  50,000,000              
39,056,421                        
10,943,579      
    
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
This project will build knowledge among land -use planning actors on the value of forests for climate 
resilience, and institutionalizing cross -sectoral meetings to encourage synergies and avoid overlapping


---
*Page 302*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 80 
  
 mandates and redundancy in different climate resili ence interventions  to ensure climate adaptation and 
climate resilience are explicitly incorporated into land -use planning processes in the CND, such that trade -
offs between different sectors can be resolved while balancing the climate resilience of nature  and people. 
Local land -use planning experts and community members will be trained and engaged to review and interpret 
the National Land Use and Development Master Plan, to ensure the plan accounts for current and future 
climate risks, and that these risks  are also considered in district level planning schemes. The knowledge and 
insights gained from these activities will be synthesized and used to inform the design of an Integrated Land -
use Plan for Resilient Livelihoods and Ecosystems, which will reconcile  the cross -sectoral (e.g., tourism, 
environment, forestry, food production, cash crops for export) trade -offs necessary to sustain forest 
ecosystem functions, deliver critical ecosystem services and improve community livelihoods. An innovative 
scientifical ly credible system for monitoring trends in natural forest cover and forest types will also be 
established, and a comprehensive capacity building programme will improve use of remote sensing, 
ecosystem service modelling and spatial planning tools to inform  decision making. Budget: $2,000,754  
To enhance forest resilience across the CND, through a combination of increased forest cover, improved 
forest condition, and improved management to reduce degradation and pressure on forests, the project will 
increase the extent and condition of natural fo rest within the CND’s national parks, by facilitating regeneration 
of large areas previously degraded by fires, securing key remaining natural areas outside PAs and 
developing a financial sustainability plan for the CND. The project will invest in the capa city of government 
agencies, districts, and communities to manage forest fires. Community members will be trained in and 
provided technical assistance and equipment for restoration techniques, establishment, and management of 
indigenous tree nurseries.  Management plans for the CND’s national parks will also be updated and park 
staff trained to explicitly consider climate adaptation and gender issues and manage  the parks as part of the 
larger  CND landscape.  The project will also develop the capacity of key G overnment ministries and agencies 
on sustainable conservation finance. Budget: 5,420,837  
Additionally, this project will strengthen the livelihoods of landless and or the most vulnerable households, 
who are often most at risk of unsustainable use of their farmlands, protected areas and resources within 
protective forests. Erosion control measu res and on -farm tree cover will be increased across the CND, 
helping reduce the risk of crop failure from extreme events like landslides, reduce land and water degradation 
caused by soil erosion, and increase provision of valuable products like wood fuel. To decrease pressure on 
forests for resource extraction, existing successful programs distributing improved cookstoves will be 
dramatically scaled up. Community members will be trained in and provided technical assistance for SLM 
practices, establishment, and management protective forests. Both cooperatives, individuals, participating 
financial institutions (PFIs), and value chain actors/small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) will benefit from 
capacity -building to improve their business skills and access to finance, and to strengthen value chains 
(including beekeeping, ecotourism, agri value chains, and cookstoves), including the construction of 
processing facilities and marketing materials. Vocational training schools and local youth cooperatives will 
be sup ported to produce, test, and distribute Tier 2 cookstoves.  Budget: 13,893,987


---
*Page 303*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
(d) EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential  
Adaptation Impact – This Project is designed to restore, sustain and expand critical forest ecosystem 
functions in the CND. More specifically, the project will protect, restore and expand natural forest in and 
around the core national parks; consolidate and expand some smalle r but critical "stepping stones" of 
remaining natural habitat between these national parks (mainly small forest patches and wetlands/ riparian 
areas); improve the landscape linkage function of key high altitude between the protected areas, while at 
the sam e time securing ecosystem services through afforestation and improved native species mix for 
plantation forests on steep slopes; silvopastoral interventions on cultivated pasture; and agroforestry 
interventions in regenerative agricultural areas. These int erventions will reduce erosion, decrease loss of 
soil organic matter, and thus increase the water infiltration rate, which increases water recharge which will 
enhance the resilience of forest ecosystems and smallholder farmers to climate change. The establ ishment 
of ecological connectivity between fragmented forests will promote landscape heterogeneity and support 
species migration to more favorable conditions within this human modified landscape and as a result help 
build the resilience of biodiversity to climate impacts. Increasing the capacity for species movement across 
these islands of forest habitat, will improve the adaptive capacity of multiple species that serve as important 
seed dispersers and insure the long -term viability of forests.  
Project interventions will include 10,000 ha of land (including both forest and silvopastoral sites) under 
improved, climate -resilient management; and improve agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of on -farm 
plantations, directly benefiting 1,254,242 people ( 654,404 women) with more climate resilient livelihoods 
from reduced exposure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and more knowledge on climate risks, value of 
forests and forests ecosystems, climate adaptation options, access to indigenous and agrofores try quality 
materials and improved ecosystem services.  
The Project will provide direct benefits to increase the climate resilience of more than 1.5 million of the most 
vulnerable residents of the CND, including increased adaptive capacity through redu ced exposure to flash 
floods, landslides, and soil erosion which will also increase their crop productivity and livelihoods (direct 
beneficiaries 52.2% female). Indirectly, 2,464,097 beneficiaries in the CND will receive co -benefits from 
improved and more sustained ecosystem services, including decreased sedimentation leading to improved 
water quality downstream and increased hydropower generation. This helps Rwanda produce cleaner 
hydropower energy at a lower cost, making it preferable to other more detrim ental energy sources. The 
project will also indirectly benefit 9,260,745 people and create approximately 24,212 job opportunities in 
forest -dependent communities.  
The Project will contribute altogether to the restoration of 5,000 ha of intact forest, 2 ,500 ha of protective 
forests and 3,346 ha of smallholder farmland, 1000 ha of pastures and 1,500 ha of riparian linkages. Overall, 
275,617 ha of the landscape could potentially be positively impacted by the project as land use planning, 
improved natural f orest management, improved buffer management and a stronger agroforestry sector 
would all contribute to improved outcomes beyond the specific areas directly targeted for restoration or 
improved management by the project. In particular, stronger capacity fo r land use planning across the CND 
and hence improved protection of key areas (e.g. steep slopes, riparian areas and protected area buffers) 
has strong potential to deliver significant mitigation benefits at a landscape rather than a site level. Although 
the project is focused on the priority landscapes covering 275,617 ha, it is likely that benefits due to increased 
adaptive capacity (achieved through improved land use planning and management of key features through


---
*Page 304*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 82 
  
 reduced exposure to flash floods, landsl ides, and soil erosion) could feasibly extend across the full 700,000 
ha CND.  
Additional adaptation benefits will include the training of 52,589 community members in forest management 
and restoration for climate resilience, which will be linked with on going restoration employment opportunities 
through other GoR and private sector projects; the strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems to 
promote climate resilience; and targeted capacity building for certain government institutions and minist ries 
in forest monitoring, remote sensing, spatial planning, and analysis. These beneficiaries will include MoE, 
REMA, RDB, MINAGRI, and the University of Rwanda.  
Complementary activities will address key drivers of deforestation while creating alterna tive livelihood 
pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and income -generating, climate -resilient crops, as well 
as strengthening supportive financial services.  
     Mitigation Impact – The Project will generate mitigation benefits by delivering sequestration of 
approximately       224,871  t CO 2-eq during the 5 -year Project period, which is about       0.8% of the 28.2M t 
CO 2 reduction targeted by Rwanda’s vision 2050.  
● 5,000 ha of critical intact natural forests will be under impr oved management for climate resilience, 
accounting for an estimated total of      596,116 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 1,000 ha of pasture  lands with increased coverage of native trees to secure reasonable landscape 
connectivity for forest species, accounti ng for an estimated total of      4,543 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 1,500 ha of riparian lands will be afforested which will contribute significantly to overall landscape 
connectivity, sequestering 110,138  t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 2,500 ha of protective fore sts and plantations will be established on slopes >55%, focusing on areas 
not currently planted in crops, accounting for an estimated total of 193,472  t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● Erosion control and agroforestry practices will be implemented over 3,346  ha of smallholder 
farmland, sequestering      129,006 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● Improved energy efficient stoves will be adopted by 8,500 households, securing       51,017 t CO 2-eq 
of avoided emissions over 20 years.  
Overall, there is potential for a significant contribution to GCF1 Core Indicator 4, hectares of natural resource 
areas brought under low emission or climate resilient practices. Conservatively, an area of 275,617 ha of 
the landscape could potentially be positively impacted by the project as land use planning, improved natural 
forest management, improved buffer management and a stronger agroforestry sector would all contribute 
to improved outcomes beyond the specific areas directly targeted for restoration or improved management 
by the proj ect. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
As described in Section B1, the Project provides a profound opportunity to implement new mechanisms of 
land-use planning and management that are based on consideration of the CND as a landscape, consisting 
of an inter-dependent mosaic of forests and farms, the management of each determining the health of the 
whole. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination across both geographic and sectoral boundaries, 
while mainstreaming climate risks into management plan ning represents a fundamental paradigm shift for 
land-use planning and management in Rwan da. This approach to land -use planning and management is 
entirely new for Rwanda and is intended to maintain and recover the ecosystem services that are essential 
to the resilience of smallholder farming communities within the region and to the globally significant and


---
*Page 305*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 83 
  
 unique biodiversity in this part of Rwanda. This represents a reversal of the previous negative feedback loop 
of ecosystem degradation to a more positive , climate -resilient system.  
Potential for scaling -up spatial planning and replication. Spatial planning is recognized by the IPCC, 
the EU and others as playing a key role in climate change adaptation and climate resilient development, but 
to date development planning in Rwanda has largely been based on tabular data, rather than on spatial 
planning. Adoption of spatial planning across ministries and on national regional and local levels, represents 
a significant paradigm shift for Rwanda. Piecemeal decisions and an ad hoc assemblage of isolated sector -
by-sector projects will be replaced with a holistic, climate -smart, evidence -based approach to planning and 
development – enabling systematic, ecosystem -based, multi -sector analysis of land use tradeoff s. The 
Project will therefore establish a new inter -agency and local -national model and capacities for holistic 
planning and implementation – one that can be scaled up for use elsewhere in Rwanda and beyond. This 
will enable better -informed planning decisi ons, the identification and valuation of nature -based solutions to 
climate adaptation and mitigation, and overall will foster climate resilient development pathways in the CND 
and nationwide. Communication and collaboration with complementary GCF and other  projects in Rwanda 
will accelerate this process.  
Potential for knowledge and learning. Component 1 will invest in new technologies and climate -smart 
knowledge to improve national and district planning, scenario analysis and monitoring capacities. In doing 
so, new mechanisms of coordination and collaboration will be established, and shared ac ross agencies. 
Component 2 will invest in best practices in forest management and restoration – some of which will require 
learning beyond the existing science of indigenous tree propagation and restoration (particularly in re -
establishing rain forest habi tat, establishing protective forests on slopes of >55%, and enriching farms with 
indigenous tree species). Component 3 will focus on processes to identify and pilot value -chain products 
(on-farm and off -farm) not yet in practice. All approaches will includ e the participation of local farmers, 
women, and youth to contribute to collective learning processes involving national and local government 
and vulnerable communities. Knowledge generated – and the processes by which it is generated – will be 
shared acro ss the region. The project is based on collective learning, knowledge generation and 
dissemination at community, landscape and national levels. A focus on knowledge management through 
demonstrations, monitoring, and evaluation across the project activities  will inform the implementation of 
current and future adaptation efforts.   
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment. Strengthening the Task Force in Component 
1 will ensure a single, first point of contact for all sectors’ planning developm ent and investments in the CND 
and will ensure that planning for climate resilience is addressed. By establishing a mechanism for 
coordination and harmonization, it will radically improve current conditions for public and private 
interventions and will est ablish partnerships and collaborations that live beyond this Project. Also 
importantly, promotion of sustainable financing for each component will help to assure that initiatives will 
either be self -sustaining or have solid plans for continued financial su pport.  
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies. The Project will finance the development of the 
Integrated Land -use Plan  which will be adopted by all ten CND districts as a framework for seeking 
synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity protections, reconciling land use conflicts 
that arise, and guiding development decisions and climate change adaptation. It will update the National 
Land Use Master Plan, ensuring it incorporates climate resiliency, and is accurate and rel evant to local 
contexts. As development of an Integrated Land -use Planning approach helps better reconcile cross -
sectoral tradeoffs and improve climate adaptation planning in the CND, this approach will prove a successful 
model for application to other reg ions of Rwanda and to other forest/farming landscapes beyond. In addition,


---
*Page 306*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 84 
  
 revising 2 NP management plans to include climate concerns will serve as a model for the remaining parks 
of Rwanda, as well as for the East African region.  
D.3. Sustainable develop ment (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed Project is aligned with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
including SDGs 5, 13 and 15 and will contribute to the achievement of the SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10. The 
Project will promote an ecosystem -based approach to forest protection, restoration, and rehabilitation that 
includes:  
● Reduction of erosion, sedimentation, and landslide risk as a result of restoration of degraded lands;  
● Increased number of native trees on farms with improved agroforestry systems, improving biological 
connectivity;  
● Increased carbon sequestration potential of plants and soils. While the primary objective of the 
Project is adaptation, the Project will also produce mitigation benefits of      204,079 t CO 2-eq during 
the 5 -year implementation period, and      1,033,275 t CO 2-eq over the 20 -year Project lifetime.  
● Reduced GHG emissions through more fuel efficient cookstove technologies, yielding cumulative 
savings of approximately      51,017 t CO 2-eq during the 20 -year Project lifetime.  
The Project will enable the transition to more climate resilient and product ive livelihood models and empower 
the rural poor, significantly reducing impacts from extreme weather events and increasing their potential for 
improved wellbeing. Social benefits will include:  
● Raised awareness about climate change effects and adaptation i n 1,253,252  people living in the 
CND (at least 52.2% representing women).  
● Capacity building of ~52,589 people (at least 50% women), in a wide range of topics aimed at 
increasing ecosystem and social resilience.  
● Create significant social capital through co -designing and co -managing a range of adaptation 
strategies, indirectly promoting social cohesiveness among CND villages through joint saving and 
lending systems.  
● Reduced inequality and poverty through increased financial inclusion and improved e conomic 
opportunities — especially for women, youth and historically marginalized groups.  
● Forest and landscape restoration in the CND will have several economic co -benefits for vulnerable 
communities, including:  
● Soil erosion control measures, protective f orests on public lands and agroforestry on private lands, 
will increase agricultural productivity and associated income.  
● The Project will create direct and indirect employment opportunities, benefiting approximately 24,212 
households and stimulate the loca l economy.  
● Leveraging private capital to invest in the value chains including cookstoves in the CND. The project 
will create important social and environmental benefits. However, the project will also have removed 
a number of risks (notably carbon risk) th at worry more traditional (social -impact or sustainability) 
investors. As a result, the venture becomes an attractive investment for private capital interested in 
a “triple bottom line”, allowing the business to develop sustainably and scale to more CND ar eas. 
During project implementation we will therefore produce a bankable business plan that details the 
activities and resources required for expanding further.


---
*Page 307*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 85 
  
 The Project will result in positive outcomes around access to resources, improved livelihoods, a nd income 
generation opportunity and capacity for women. With support from a dedicated Gender Specialist, the Project 
will engage women in project planning, investment and decision making. With opportunities to generate 
additional income, women, who tradit ionally are already further vested in investing in their families, will be 
more able to respond to incentives that address their families’ basic needs, such as better health and 
nutrition, linking to agriculture and food security improvements. The project will also get support from NGOs 
that engage men in programming and discussions to increase their participation in household and parental 
responsibilities and gain greater awareness of the importance of women’s fair access and control of 
resources, includin g income. Women will benefit from training and educational activities, leadership, 
entrepreneurship and decision making. Annex 8, which will be further elaborated on at project onset, 
provides more information on gender -sensitive impacts.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  
Despite Rwanda’s solid economic progress since 2000, poverty remains widespread and pervasive. Overall, 
38.2% of the population lives in poverty and 16% in extreme poverty119. Women are more affected by poverty 
than men, with 47% of female -headed households living in poverty compared with 44.9% of all households. 
Rural households are more than twice as likely to be in poverty/extreme poverty than urban households. 
Districts of  the Western and Southern Provinces in the CND region have the highest rates of poverty and 
extreme poverty in the country.  
Most rural households are smallholder subsistence farmers and, because of high population density, high 
relief terrain and dependen ce on rain fed agriculture, the residents of the CND are highly vulnerable to 
climate change. These risks include exposure to flash floods120, landslides121 and soil erosion122. During 
stakeholder consultations, communities indicated several socio -economic ch anges stemming from changing 
climate conditions. Notably, the longer dry season and unpredictable rains123 have reduced agricultural yield 
significantly, leading to more widespread malnutrition and extreme poverty, and farmers can barely meet 
their own fami lies’ needs124. In particular, women, youth, and historically marginalized people are feeling the 
impacts. As arable land is increasingly constrained, youth and historically marginalized people have few 
opportunities and are more focused on survival and sho rt-term gains at the expense of education and 
sustainable livelihood development (see Annexes 6 and 8 for more detail).  
As a result, the GoR has invested significantly in developing an enabling policy and institutional framework 
for a more climate -resilien t development pathway. Yet, while adaptation is a top priority, Rwanda is classified 
by the U.N. as a LDC and lacks sufficient public financial resources to implement its climate change and 
resilient green development objectives.  Currently there are no alt ernative funding options of the scale needed 
to secure Rwanda’s priority forests to reduce vulnerability of rural communities to climate risks. The GoR 
also recognises that a piecemeal approach to decision making has exacerbated competition over scarce 
land resources and reduced the adaptive capacity of both ecosystems and rural populations. However, many 
 
119  World Bank, 2020. Poverty and Equity Brief: Rwanda.  
120  Karamage, F., et al., 2017 . Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water 2017, 9(2), 14.  
121  Uwihirwe, J., et al., 2020 . Landslide precipitation thresholds in Rwanda . Landslides.  
122  World Bank, 2019.  Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.  
123  World Bank; CIAT. 2015. Climate -Smart Agriculture in Rwanda.  CSA Country Profiles for Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America and the Caribbean Series. Washington D.C.: The World Bank Group.  
124  Clay N., King B., 2019. Smal lholders' uneven capacities to adapt to climate change amid Africa's 'green 
revolution': Case study of Rwanda's crop intensification program . World Dev.


---
*Page 308*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 86 
  
 agencies operate within siloed environments, focusing on limited scopes framed by individual performance 
plans, and close coordination is often cited as a  key recommendation toward strengthening climate change 
adaptation measures125.  
Additionally, district government staff and community members have limited technical understanding or 
awareness of the complex interactions between forest structure and functions, climate change, and the 
provision of ecosystem services. Accurate measurement of forest cover and forest type is notoriously difficult 
in high relief terrain, such as in the CND126. Lack of access to and capacity to apply new methods for 
classify ing and monitoring forest change has limited forest monitoring in Rwanda127. Consequently, 
government forest data has historically been limited in scope and infrequently updated, and regional/global 
maps are too inaccurate to be of use. Capacity building ar ound the technologies and processes to make 
landscape -scale planning decisions is crucial to the success of Rwanda’s climate -resilient development 
pathway.  
D.5. Country ownership  
The proposed Project is closely aligned with the NAP’s adaptation priorities: 1) promotion of non -agricultural 
income generating activities, 2) introduction of species resistant to environmental conditions, and 3) 
development of firewood alternative source s of energy. It is also aligned with several priorities identified in 
the 2020 NDC: promotion of afforestation/reforestation, improvement of forest management, integrated 
approach to planning and monitoring for sustainable land management, development of a  harmonized and 
integrated spatial data management system for sustainable land use management. The Project will support 
implementation of the Green Growth and Climate Resilient Strategy and the Rwanda National Strategy for 
Transformation –NST1 (2017 -2022) a nd is aligned with the goals of the Rwanda National Forestry Policy 
2018, the Forest Sector Strategic Plan 2017 -2022, the Strategic Plan for the Environment and Natural 
Resources Sector (2018 -2024), and National Forest Management Plan 2017 -2026, reflecting  the 
government’s intentions to address climate change impacts and mitigation targets by improving forest 
management. It is also aligned with the national Biomass Energy Strategy (BEST) 2020 which aims to 
ensure a more sustainable biomass supply and combus tion technologies for homes and small enterprises. 
This Project aligns with the forthcoming GCF country program which prioritizes forest management through 
restoration and protection of natural forests, afforestation and agroforestry, as well as distributi on of high -
quality forestation inputs and capacity development.  
While this Project proposal to GCF focuses on a different geographic area - with specific adaptation needs 
through land restoration, development of markets and finance mechanism, as well as s upport to 
mainstreaming climate change into land use planning - the early and ongoing lessons from the experiences 
from existing GCF -funded projects, “Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern 
Rwanda''128 and “Transforming Eastern Pr ovince through adaptation” (TREPA)129 will be applied during the 
 
125   Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows a nd 
potential supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.  
126  Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change in Western Rwanda during periods of wars and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).  
127  Hero ld, M., Schiller, F., 2009. An assessment of national forest monitoring capabilities in tropical non -Annex I 
countries: Recommendations for capacity building. Global Observation of Forest and Land Cover Dynamics Land Cover 
Project Office.  
128  Rwanda Ministr y of Environment, 2018. FP073: Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in 
Northern Rwanda . Green Climate Fund.  
129  International Union for Conservation of Nature, 2021. FP167: Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation.  
Green Climate Fu nd.


---
*Page 309*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 87 
  
 implementation of this Project in the Congo Nile Divide Landscape.  
MoE is responsible for ensuring sustainable management of natural resources and for the development of 
policies, strategies,  regulations, and mobilizing resources for the development of the sector. The MoE 
managed USD 10 million from the Adaptation Fund to implement the Reducing Vulnerability to Climate 
Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based Adaptation Programme130 and has overseen a 
number of other climate projects including: an early warning system project (funded by LDCF), the 
Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and Conservation (LAFREC), and the “Building resilience of 
communities living in degraded forests,  savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem 
management approach” programme (funded by LDCF)131. The OECD rated Rwanda as one of the countries 
that uses aid most effectively132, and Rwanda is on course to achieve the SDGs. The GoR has demonstrated 
comprehensive country ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project. The national designated 
authority (NDA) is the core interface between a country and the GCF and is mandated to align GCF -
supported activities with strategic national objective s and priorities. The NDA coordinates with AEs on 
proposal development and completes a no -objection letter after it is determined that the proposal is aligned 
with the national priorities. This Project was initiated by the MoE and supported by the NDA, Rwa nda 
Environment Management Authority, due to the high climate sensitivity of the CND.  
Government agencies such as Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA), Rwanda Development Board (RDB), 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) and National Land Use Authorit y (NLA) will maintain 
strong ownership and support activities under component 1 and 2 as aligned with their mandates and the 
aforementioned plans and strategies.   
To better understand the interests of stakeholders and potential impacts of the Project, and  as preparation 
to design future engagement strategies, a comprehensive, gender -responsive, culturally sensitive, non -
discriminatory, and inclusive stakeholder analysis was undertaken and is incorporated into the Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (Annex 7).  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
Financing and concessional: The financial instrument chosen for this Project is grant financing of USD 
39.06 million which constitutes roughly 78% of the total Project’s estimated cost. The relatively high level of 
conce ssionality reflects the public good character of the investm ents to be made by the Project, Rwanda’s 
status as an LDC133 and its high vulnerability to climate change134. Furthermore, it must be highlighted that 
most project expenditures relate to creating pu blic goods through forest and landscape restoration or 
capacity -building of public institutions. These interventions are primarily non -income -generating; hence very 
hard to attract private sector investment. Attracting the private sector for public goods i nvestments remains 
challenging in the context of many countries worldwide, including Rwanda.  
Addressing low private sector investment in the forestry sector . One of the major reasons for lack of 
private -sector investment in Rwanda’s Forestry Sector is tha t most stands are too small to sustain an 
 
130  Adaptation Fund, 2014. Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community 
Based Adaptation. Link. 
131  UNEP, 2016. Building resilience of communities living in degraded forests, savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda 
through an ecosystem management approach . 
132 Newfarmer , R., et al., 2013. Managing Aid for Trade and Development Results: Rwanda Case Study . OECD.  
133  United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2021. Least Developed Country Category: Rwanda 
Profile.  
134  World Bank, 2021. Rwanda . Climate Change Kn owledge Portal.


---
*Page 310*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 88 
  
 economically viable operation (see the Forest Sector Strategic Plan). By restoring smallholder protective 
forest plantations and organizing them into Private Forest Management Units (PFMUs), this Project will 
assis t with creation of units that are economically attractive to private investors, helping to facilitate future 
private investment if landowners desire it. However, no private investors will be subsidized by the Project, 
and ownership of PFMUs will remain wit h the state/district governments and smallholders’ cooperatives who 
own forest plantations. RFA in collaboration with RCA and the district government directly implement 
organization of the cooperatives and conflicts in the cooperatives are managed in accor dance with internal 
rules and regulation governing each cooperative overseen by the Rwanda Cooperative Agency in case of 
escalated conflicts but specifically in the cooperatives that will be benefiting under this project, RFA and 
District government will a lso intervene in conflict settlement.  
No excess subsidy will be provided to the private sector, and no private sector investors will be crowded out 
by these investments. Wherever these are required for institutional and capacity support for market 
development and crowding in for private invest ments these are undertaken with concessionality to 
community in mind. For example, the subsidy/microcredit schemes to facilitate the adoption of efficient 
cookstoves are undertaken with minimum concessionality. The value chain development for other poten tial 
revenue generating streams such as honey undertaken under output 3.2 requires institutional and capacity 
support funded by GCF grant. In the case of ecotourism for tea plantations, no project concessionally  is 
planned and complete crowding in from the  private sector is envisaged. The value chain development of 
beekeeping is 100% funded by GCF grants so that an enabling environment can be created, and the project 
can overcome affordability challenges through developing a system such as community co -guarantee, 
overcome lack of private capital structure and insufficient markets.  Because of above mentioned reasons 
no private sector investors are expected to be crowded out by project investments.  
GCF grant as a suitable financing instrument. The GCF grant c an help create the enabling environment 
for the future engagement of the private sector in similar projects. The showcasing of potential revenue -
generating ways, thanks to the concessional GCF financing, may help invigorate the potential for future 
investm ents in this sector, which in turn might result in a multiplier effect leading to a higher degree of 
development impact.  
Results of the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA). Following the GCF guidelines for developing the 
Annex 3 package, the EFA was prep ared to assess the economic rationale for the proposed interventions. 
Consequently, four representative interventions were appraised in the EFA: (i). agroforestry, (ii). protective 
forests (iii). fuel -efficient cookstoves, (iv). silvo -pastoralism. Best pra ctices in appraisal for public sector 
projects have been followed. T he financial analysis for each intervention was calculated from the private 
perspective using a discount rate of 15.44% which was the lending rate of Rwanda Central Bank. For the 
three mod eled interventions (see table below) the financial NPV is positive and financial IRR is higher than 
discount rate signifying that project activities are profitable. The GCF support will result in a positive financial 
return for farmers or farmers and priva te actors over a 20 -year period and will help overcome high up -front 
investment costs during the project duration.  
Financial analysis (US$)  Agroforestry  Protective Forest  Silvopasture  
FNPV  $34,483,676  $2,980,381  $310,901  
FIRR  42% 25% 35% 
Aggregate financial analysis of with project (WP) interventions


---
*Page 311*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 89 
  
  
 
The obtained ex -ante aggregate economic net present values (ENPVs) for these interventions over the 20 
years’ timeframe and at a 13% economic discount rate range between USD      0.97million and USD      78.93 
million, with economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) between      49% and 72% (see table below).  
Economic 
analysis (US$)  Agroforestry  Protective Forest  Energy efficient 
cookstoves  Silvopasture  
ENPV  $58,934,340  
      $30,218,468  $10,585,674.50  
      $966,331  
      
EIRR  49     % 72% N/A 51     % 
Aggregate financial analysis of with project (WP) interventions135 
The sensitivity analysis that was carried out suggests that obtained results are relatively insensitive to 
increases in costs or decreases in benefits offering the robustness of obtained results. Therefore, the 
economic sustainability of the Project is likely, and the Project shows the economic rationale for 
implem entation as benefits are likely to outweigh the costs.   
Best Practices Forest Restoration/Tree Planting : The Project will use Rwanda’s best practice guidelines for 
tree nursery establishment, tree planting and tree management136. For assisted natural regeneration, 
methods developed and proven through multi -year research in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura National 
Parks will be used137. Forest Monitoring: The Project will utilize multiple contemporary methods for monitoring 
the success  of project interventions and forest health. Forest plantations will be mapped and monitored using 
the Rwandan government's newly developed Forest Monitoring and Evaluation Software (FMES)138, 
specifically developed for this purpose. The Project will develo p a modern indigenous forest monitoring 
system, utilize the most high -resolution datasets currently available (<3m) and take advantage of modern 
remote -sensing advances including cloud computing and machine learning. Cost effective replication for 
forest r estoration and climate resilience throughout Africa and beyond can be anticipated.  
 
 
135 No financial analyses for cookstoves intervention was warranted as energy efficient cookstoves are non -
income generating intervention with expectation of no financial cash inflows. Only economic analyses was 
conducted for cookstoves.  
136  Unique Ltd. & RNRA. 2015. Tree plantation establishment and management manual for Rwanda. Kigali, Rwanda 
137  Masozera, A.B., 2004. Regeneration of Burned Forested Areas With Periodic Removal of Pteridium aquilinum. 
Wildlife Conservation Society Rwanda.  
138  Rwanda Forest Authority, Enabel, 2021. Technical guidelines on the use of the Forest Monitoring & Evaluation 
System - FMES. Kigali.


---
*Page 312*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
  
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Scale  Rwanda's natural forests are 
extremely depleted and degraded. 
While overall forest cover has 
increased since the 1980s, this is 
primarily made up of exotic 
monocultures, which have very low 
potential to provide ecosystem 
services and adaptation benefits. 
There are small -scale efforts to 
establish/restore native forests and 
increase overall forest resilience, 
but scaling these efforts is 
hampered by a limited supply of 
indigenous seedlings.  Low Paradigm shift would involve a move away from widespread 
planting of exotic species for fuelwood, as well as improved 
erosion control measures on farmland and use of improved 
cookstoves, both of which will reduce pressure on Rwanda’s 
forests. As the be nefits of planting indigenous trees become 
more widely known, behavior changes in non -targeted 
communities are likely to be catalyzed.  The project is expected to bring 144,058 ha 
of land under climate -resilient 
management. This would represent a 
substantial step towards paradigm shift on 
increased resilience of forests and 
vulnerable communities, even before any 
replication effects, which  will likely be 
catalyzed by project activities focusing on 
training, capacity building, and peer - to-
peer knowledge exchange. The project will 
also deliver direct carbon reductions of  
1,204,448 t CO 2-eq over 20 years, and 
potentially more through increas ed 
institutional capacity to mainstream climate 
adaptation and improve land -use planning.  
Replicability  There are a small number of 
interventions occurring across 
Rwanda focused on improving 
resilience of vulnerable 
communities through forest 
restoration, agroforestry, livelihood 
diversification and clean cooking 
technologies. However, many 
interventions foc us on exotic 
species which have very low 
potential to provide ecosystem 
services and adaptation benefits.  Medium  If increasing the extent and integrity of natural forests and 
improving capacity for climate -responsive land management can 
increase climate r esilience of vulnerable communities in the 
CND, then the solution could be replicated throughout Rwanda 
and across East Africa. Further, if incorporating indigenous 
species into forest restoration and agroforestry can provide a 
similar/greater range of ada ptation benefits compared to exotic 
species, and also avoid the drawbacks of exotic monocultures, 
then the solution could be expanded nationally. If development of 
an Integrated land use planning approach helps better reconcile 
cross -sectoral tradeoffs and  improve climate adaptation planning The project will invest in strengthening 
institutional capacity to promote climate 
resilience, directly increase the resilience of 
ecosystems and co mmunity livelihoods, 
and identify options for use of indigenous 
species in forest restoration and 
agroforestry, in order to better contribute to 
climate -resilient livelihoods. These topics 
have received little attention to date in 
Rwanda, and lessons learn ed will inform 
efforts to improve climate resilience across 
Rwanda and East Africa.


---
*Page 313*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 in the CND, this approach could be applied to other regions of 
Rwanda.  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Sustainability  The GoR has invested in 
developing policies and institutional 
frameworks for a more climate -
resilient development pathway. 
However, domestic funding to 
implement these policies remains 
lacking, and as yet they have not 
translated to wide -scale 
improvements to climate resilience. 
Changes in behavioral norms have 
been limited, and overall uptake of 
climate adaptation solutions is poor.  Low Paradigm shift would see Rwanda demonstrate that pursuing 
development goals need not come at the cost of extensive 
environmental degradation. Climate -responsive Forest and 
landscape management will be standard, and government 
programmes will focus on incre asing the resilience of forest 
ecosystems and enhancing their ecosystem services. Behavior 
change across the CND would support this, as communities 
recognise, value, and protect the benefits provided by forests.  The project will work closely with 
governme nt and communities to build 
capacity to mainstream climate adaptation 
into forest and land -use planning and 
management. The project will facilitate and 
demonstrate the benefits of climate -resilient 
agricultural practices, forest management, 
and alternative  livelihoods, raising 
awareness within and outside target 
communities.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Mitigation Results 
Area 4: Forests and 
land use  
 Core Indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or removed/ 
sequestered  Greenhouse gas emission 
assessment  0 tonnes of CO 2      107,686 
tCO 2-eq       
224,871 tCO 2-eq 
(5-year 
implementation 
period)  
 
      
1,084,291 tCO 2-
eq 
(20-year lifespan 
period)  Government priorities 
remain supportive of long -
term forest restoration and 
afforestation plans.  
Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires and landslides in target  
areas  
The economic, social and 
political context in the 
country and project areas 
remain stable.


---
*Page 314*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Adaptation Results 
Area 1: Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Core Indicator 2: Direct 
and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Annual Agricultural 
Survey139 
National census  
Project Baseline and 
Completion Reports, 
including documentation of 
workers contracted for 
reforestation/afforestation 
work, farmers adopting 
agroforestry activities, good 
silvo-pastoral practices, 
restoration of riparian 
linkages, signed MoUs for 
Private Forest Management 
Units, and households 
receiving improved 
cookstoves  Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0 Direct 
beneficiaries: 
95,873 (50,046) 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  Direct 
beneficiaries:  
108,277 (56,5 21 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  
2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  Government priorities 
remain focused on long term 
forest restoration and 
afforestation plans  
Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires and landslides in target 
areas  
Rural l andowners agree to 
adoption of agroforestry and 
reforestation activities  
Adaptation Results 
Area 1: Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Supplementary Indicator 
2.1: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood 
options  Project Baseline and 
Completion Reports, 
including documentation of 
beekeepers  using modern 
hives, farmers at different 
levels of value chains, 
people employed in 
ecotourism, have access to Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0 Direct 
beneficiaries:  
26,160 (13,656 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  Direct 
beneficiaries:  
52,319 (27,311 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:   
 
 
 
139  The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda conducts the Agricultural Survey yearly. Available at:  
https://www.stati stics.gov.rw/statistical -publications/subject/agriculture -and-environment


---
*Page 315*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 finance for other climate -
resilient livelihood options  2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  
 
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Adaptation Results 
Area 4: Ecosystems 
and ecosystem services  Core Indicator 4:  Hectares 
of natural resource areas 
brought under improved 
low emission and/or 
climate -resilient 
management practices  Updated National Park 
Management Plans 
complete (ha per park)  
Forest cover statistics from 
Forest Monitoring and 
Evaluation System (FMES)  
GIS Data/Remote Sensing  
Ranger Based Monitoring 
data from PAs  
Vigilance Committees 
monitoring data  No increase in 
climate -resilient 
management 
practices (o)   42,558 ha of 
land brought 
under climate -
resilient 
management  130,104 140      
ha of land 
brought under 
climate -resilient 
management  Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires in target areas  
 
 
Adaptation Results 
Area 2:  Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary Indicator 
2.2: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security   Annual Agricultural Survey  
Gender responsive 
Comprehensive Food 
Security and Vulnerability 
and Nutrition Analysis 
Survey (CFSVA)141 TBD Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0  Direct 
beneficiaries : 
1,598,536 
(52.2% female)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
2,464,097 
(52.2% female)  Absence of extreme natural 
disasters and economic 
shocks affecting yields and 
household economy; 
migration patterns do not 
significantly affect the 
number and status of 
households.  
 
 
140 130,104 ha refer to 121,758 ha of all core PAs and 8,346 ha restored areas outside PAs  
141 The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda conducts the CFSVA every 3 years.


---
*Page 316*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 The level of beneficiary of this project are individual households, - who can be in a cooperative or a business community group - who will 
participate directly in the project, and thus benefit from its implementation. Beneficiaries include all people who own the l and where activities will 
take place and/or those who will be employed by the project (except EE staff, consultants and implementat ion and contractual organizations). 
Dependents of household that directly benefit from the project are also considered as direct beneficiaries and were calculate d based on 4.2 
average household size142 and 0.37143 average land size in the CNDL.  
Adaptation R esults Area 1, Core Indicator 2 direct beneficiaries are beneficiaries of activities 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 3.1.1, 1.1.2.  
Adaptation Results Area 1, Supplementary Indicator 2.1 direct beneficiaries of activity 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.4 (excluding 8, 500  beneficiaries of  
cookstoves) and 3.3.2  
Adaptation Results Area 2 Supplementary Indicator 2.2 direct beneficiaries are the total population in landscape implementati on sectors of this 
project.  
Indirect beneficiaries broadly refer to all other human populations living with in the CNDL districts. More details on calculations are provided in 
annex 23.  
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Core 
Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 
5: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory 
frameworks for 
low-emission 
and climate -The GoR is committed to developing an 
enabling policy and institutional 
framework for a more climate -resilient 
development pathway, as evidenced by 
the large number of government policies 
and strategies focus ed on improving 
climate mitigation and adaptation. 
However, climate change is not being 
comprehensively considered by all 
sectors, cross -sectoral planning is rare, 
and new institutions are needed to low An integrated planning approach 
is used to reconcile cross -sectoral 
tradeoffs while explicitly 
considering climate resilience 
actions. New institutions have 
permanent capacity in place to 
ensure that spatial data on 
climate, forests and ecosystem 
services is i ncorporated into land 
planning and management.  The project will facilitate development of an 
integrated land use plan for the CND which 
will reconcile the cross -sectoral (e.g., tourism, 
environment, forestry, food production, cash 
crops for export) trade -offs necessary to 
sustain forest ecosystem functions, deliver 
critical ecosystem services and improve 
community livelihoods.  
 National 
level (one 
country)  
 
142  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR); The Fifth Rwanda Population and Housing Census, Main Indicators Report, Februa ry 2023  
143  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Agricultural Household Survey 2020 report, December 2021


---
*Page 317*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 resilient 
development 
pathways in a 
country -driven 
manner  provide relevant spatial data to inform 
planning  The project will facilitate the development and 
adoption of an integrated landscape level 
planning taskforce, in line with t he JADF to 
bring the relevant stakeholders (ministries 
and their agencies, districts, private sector 
and civil society organizations) on board, to 
strengthen inter -sectoral collaboration on the 
planning and implementation of the FLR 
plans. The project will  also support capacity 
development of relevant technical staff 
working on FLR and land use planning (from 
central government agencies, district 
government, and NGOs) and will assist the 
GoR in developing a dedicated SPU within an 
appropriate ministry to  provide the technical 
expertise needed to process and integrate 
spatial planning into decision -making within 
and across sectors.  
 
 
Core 
Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 
6: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or 
transfer, and 
innovation  Climate -resilient development in 
Rwanda is hampered by a lack of 
modern technological advances, both in 
terms of generating information required 
for land -use management and decision 
making, and in deploying climate -
resilient practices and technology. 
Rwand a has only recently developed a 
system to monitor plantation forests and 
lacks a robust system to monitor 
indigenous forests. Similarly, agricultural 
and forest management techniques are 
generally rudimentary, and most rural low The GoR has an innovative, 
scientifically credible system for 
monitoring indigenous forest 
cover and condition, as well as 
the technical capacity for 
incorporating spatial data into 
land-use management. Improved 
agricul tural practices (e.g. 
terracing, modern beehives) are 
widespread, and locally produced 
improved cookstoves are in use 
by most households.  The project will design and finance the 
establishment of a new indigenous forest 
monitoring system for Rwanda. The project 
will also establish improved agricultural 
practices across 3,346 ha, as well as 
increasing use of modern beehives to reduce 
forest fi re risk. Finally, the project will upskill 
technical colleges to enable local production 
and distribution of improved cookstoves to 
8,500 households.  National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 318*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 communities in the CND do not u se 
modern cooking technologies.  
Core Indicator 
8: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
effective 
knowledge 
generation and 
learning 
processes, and 
use of good 
practices, 
methodologies 
and standards.  While GoR recognizes the need for 
developing an enabling policy and 
institutional framework for a more 
climate -resilient development pathway, 
the value of forests and ecosystem 
services for climate adaptation is poorly 
understood, both in government and by 
communities. There is no system to 
regularly produce data on indigenous 
forest cover and condition, and no 
specialized government unit dedicated  to 
producing spatial data on climate 
change, forests or ecosystem services. 
Agricultural and forest management 
practices are generally rudimentary.  low Rwanda has an innovative, 
scientifically credible system for 
generating and sharing 
information on nat ural forest 
cover and condition, and a 
government unit dedicated to 
ensuring spatial planning 
knowledge is incorporated into 
land-use management. Improved 
agricultural practices (e.g. 
terracing, modern beehives) are 
widespread, and degraded forest 
plantati ons are restored and 
managed according to 
government best -practices.  The project will design and finance the 
establishment of a new indigenous forest 
monitoring system for Rwanda, as well as 
establish a spatial planning unit within 
government that has the capacity to generate 
and integrate spatial planning knowledge into 
decision making. Project activities will also 
establish best -practice agricultural and forest 
management practices across 144,058 ha of 
land, and create community structures (e.g. 
farme r cooperatives) which facilitate 
knowledge and information sharing among 
community members.    National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 319*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1: Landscape planning, policies & management effective & coordinated across sectors and scales to address climate risks & adaptation benefits  
Output 1.1.  Landscape -
wide land -use plan 
developed for climate -
resilient livelihoods and 
forest ecosystems, 
integrating district 
strategies.  Operationalization of an 
Integrated Land -use Plan 
for Resilient Livelihoods 
and Ecosystems in the 
CND  
Climate change and 
biodiversity reflected in 
District Development 
Strategies (DDS)   Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Performance 
evaluations of the 
districts  0 integrated plans for 
the CND  
 
 
 
 
Climate change and 
biodiversity Indicators 
and targets not 
included in 
evaluations  1 draft integrated 
land use plan 
developed  
 
 
 
Climate change 
and biodiversity 
Indicators and 
targets fully 
integrated in 
evaluations  1 final integrated 
land use plan 
develop ed, 
approved and 
used  
 
Climate change 
and biodiversity 
Indicators and 
targets fully 
integrated in 
evaluations.  
 
 District land -use plans are 
updated within project 
timeframe  
Key stakeholders are 
supportive of cross sector 
collaboration.  
Sectoral ministries  
incorporate biodiversity 
and climate change into 
sectoral plans and 
programmes.  
Output 1.2. Local and 
national institutional 
capacities strengthened to 
integrate biodiversity and 
climate risks into land use 
planning and management  District planners, staff 
within REMA, RDB, NLA, 
RDB with the skills and 
capacities to use spatial 
planning tools, generate 
data necessary for 
mainstreaming climate 
change, understand 
gender barriers and how to 
mainstream gender 
equality principles into 
planning, including 
supporting women, youth Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Pre/post training 
assessments of unit 
members  
  0 units with capacity  
 
 
0 staff reporting 
improved awareness 
and capacity.  
  Draft structure & 
function of spatial 
planning unit 
developed.  
Training materials 
in development  
  Spatial planning 
unit formally 
established.  
 
36 Staff reporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (18 
Female, 18 
Male)  Lack of leadership of the 
hosting institution/ 
government agency could 
delay the establishment of 
the unit.  
RFA is committed to lead 
and invest in the capacity of 
its staff to implement the 
monitoring system.


---
*Page 320*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
and marginalized groups 
participation in meetings  Capacity building programs 
can overcome the effects of 
high staff turn -over and 
frequent re -arrangement of 
the institutions of natural 
resources management 
(transfer of departments, 
merging and creation of 
new Ministries)  
UR GIS center with the 
capacity and skills to train 
students and staff from 
government agencies on 
spatial planning and 
climate modeling  
  Pre/post capacity 
assessment of the 
UR GIS Center  Staff with knowledge 
in spatial analysis and 
climate modeling but 
without quantitative 
skills to use new 
technologies/software 
to generate data for 
decision making  Training modules 
developed and 
staff to be trained 
identified  10 lectures and 
assistant 
lectures 
reporting 
improved skills, 
20 students 
trained each year 
from year 3.  
A system for monitoring 
forest  trends is 
established and in use by 
the GOR  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  0 systems in place  Operational 
structure & function 
of forest monitoring 
system developed  Forest 
monitoring 
system in 
operation


---
*Page 321*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Rural people, specifically 
women and youth, are 
trained and participate in 
land use planning 
processes at district level  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  0 3 women per 
district 3 youth  
per district  30 youth  
30 women  Rural women and youth 
groups in targeted districts 
are motivated to invest time 
and ef forts in the activities.  
Outcome 2: Natural forests protected, connected, more resilient to climate impacts & risks  
Output 2.1.  Protected Area 
management effectiveness 
improved re climate risks 
and adaptation  Climate adaptation 
reflected in the new 
general park management 
plans  
  
  Progress report, mid -
term evaluation and 
final evaluation  0 plans currently 
contain climate 
adaptation plans  3 General 
management plans 
updated and 
approved by key 
stakeholders  Updated general 
management 
plans guiding 
RDB 
management 
decisions  General Park management 
plans are in the process of 
revision during the project 
intervention


---
*Page 322*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
RDB has adopted a 
landscape approach to 
conservation.  
 
New iterations of park 
management plans 
reference integrated CND 
land use plan  
A framework for 
conservation planning at 
landscape level is 
operational, and RDB 
planning and monitoring 
dept at each park is 
actively engaging 
stakeholders  Progress report, mid -
term and final 
evaluations  0 park management 
plans reference CND 
land use plan  1 new park 
management plan 
referencing CND 
land use plan  
RDB proactively 
engaging 
stakeholders in the 
land use planning 
process of the CND  3 new park 
management 
plans referencing 
CND land use 
plan Limited engagement of 
RDB beyond parks’ 
boundaries could delay the 
operationalization of the 
planning framework


---
*Page 323*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
 Number of RDB, RFA, 
districts staff and local 
communities trained in fire 
forecasting, detection and 
management  Post-training 
assessments of 
change in capacity of 
trained park staff in 
designated positions 
on 1) fire detection, 
early warning 
methods and fire 
danger rating system 
and 2) management 
of climate 
information and its 
relevance for park 
management  
Post-training 
assessments of 
change in capacity of 
trained individuals in 
designat ed positions  0 staff reporting 
improved awareness 
and capacity  
0 staff reporting 
improved capacity for 
fire management  15 Staff reporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (8 
Female, 7 Male)  
15 staff reporting 
improved capacity 
for fire 
management  15 Staff r eporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (8 
Female, 7 Male)  
30 staff reporting 
improved 
capacity for fire 
management  Capacity building programs 
can overcome the effects of 
high staff turn -over and 
frequent re -arrangement of 
the institutions of natural 
resources management 
(transfer of departments, 
merging and creation of 
new Ministries)  
All stakeholders embrace 
the concept of information 
sharing and learning 
willingly and 
enthusiastically.  
  
Financial instruments to 
generate revenues post 
GCF identified and piloted  Interim and final 
evaluation reports  
Technical reports  0 financial 
instruments  1 financial 
instrument 
identified  3 financial 
instruments 
identified and 1 
instrument 
piloted  GoR commitment to 
enactment of policies 
conducive to att racting 
investment in emerging 
financing solutions


---
*Page 324*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 2.2. Natural forest 
cover restored, biodiversity 
connections established  Area (# ha) of degraded 
natural forest restored in 
national parks  
  GIS mapping of 
cleared areas using 
field GPS data  
  0 ha restored  4,500 ha initially 
cleared  4,500 ha cleared 
at least four 
times, ensuring 
natural 
regeneration can 
take place in 
Nyungwe NP  Major fire outbreaks during 
project implementation 
may prevent reaching the 
targets  
0 ha restored  500 ha under 
restoration in 
GMNP  500 ha restored 
in GMNP  The park is well managed 
and there are no major 
illegal activities  
Area (#ha) of riparian 
lands restored with 
indigenous species in the 
CND  GIS mapping of 
restored areas using 
field GPS data  0 ha restored  500 ha  1500 ha restored  District officials are 
committed to protect and 
create 10 m buffer around 
streams/rivers as per land 
use policy  
Area of remnant natural 
forest loss avoided  Interim and final 
evaluation   TBA Draft strategy and 
action for the 
protection and 
conservation of 
remnant forests   Strategy and 
action plan 
developed and 
implemented for 
the conservation 
of remnant 
natural forests  RDB, REMA and District 
officials are committed to 
protect remnant natural 
forests


---
*Page 325*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
 Area (ha) of pastoral lands 
brought under climate 
resilient silvopastoral 
packages in GMNP  
Average tree density/ha in 
restored silvopastoral 
lands  
  GIS mapping  
Bi-annual technical 
report  
Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Annual forest 
inventory  TBA 
  
TBA 
  
TBA 500 ha  
  
Density: 50 tree/ha  
  
 1000 ha  
  
Density: 50 
tree/ha  
 Farmers are willing to 
integrate trees on their 
pasture lands  
Outcome 3:  Vulnerable rural livelihoods more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable & nature -positive  
Output 3.1 Farming 
methods enhance 
productivity, reduce 
erosion and flooding risks, 
contribute to ecosystem 
services, and support 
connectivity.  
  Area (# ha) of forest 
restored on  slopes >55%  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
 
Annual forest cover 
report144 
  
Catalogue of geo -
referenced area 
under restoration  
 0 hectares  2,500 ha under 
restoration on 
slopes >55% 
planted with 
seedlings.  
 2,500 public and 
private hectares 
restored and 
maintained.  
 
density: 1,200 
trees/ha  Farmers, women, and 
youth groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
 
144  The Annual  Forest Report is prepared by Rwanda Forest Authority. The Monitoring system for the preparation of these reports has been dev eloped.


---
*Page 326*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
% of tree species diversity 
in restored areas on 
slopes >50%  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Annual forest 
inventory  0 30% indigenous 
species and 70% 
exotic species on 
private land  
 
70% indigenous 
species and 30% 
exotic species on 
public land  30% indigenous 
species and 70% 
exotic species on 
private land  
70% indigenous 
species and 30% 
exotic species on 
public land  
Number of target 
beneficiaries (households) 
in target sites who have 
adopted agroforestry 
measures (and report 
improvements in soil and 
water management  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
 
Household surveys  0 5,405 households 
(of which 50% are 
women headed 
households) 
adopted 
agroforestry 
measures  5,405 
households 
beneficiaries (of 
which 50% are 
female).   
Average tree density/ha in 
restored agroforestry 
lands  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Household surveys  
Catalogue of geo -
referenced area 
under restoration   
Annual forest 
inventory  0 
  
  
 TBA   
  
  
 100 trees/ha  3,346 ha of 
agroforestry 
established.  
  
100 trees/ha


---
*Page 327*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 3.2. Rural 
livelihoods generate 
alternative incomes & 
reduce pressure on forests  Number of value chain 
products that are viable 
and marketed (Honey, 
Avocado, macadamia, 
horticulture)  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Annual sales reports  0 3 products 
developed  5 products 
developed  Stakeholders in the value 
chains are collaborative  
Number of 
businesses/cooperatives 
with viable business plans 
established and 
operational for climate 
resilient value chains  Bi-annual technical 
report Interim 
Evaluation and Final 
Evaluation Report  37 beekeeping 
cooperatives with 
1,965 members (32% 
women, 16% youth)  
0 seed enterprise, 
nurseries farmer’s 
cooperatives  
  
0 cooperative of 
tourism guides  15 new 
cooperatives (40% 
women, 50% 
youth)  
5 seed and nursery 
enterprises owned 
by y outh and 
women.  
 2 cooperatives  20 new 
cooperatives 
(40% 
women,50% 
youth)  
 
10 seed and 
nursery 
enterprises 
owned by youth 
and women.  
 3 cooperatives  Willingness of farmers’ 
representatives of and 
Rwanda Cooperative 
Agency (RCA) to 
participate in the project  
Increase in household 
income within community 
associations/cooperatives 
engaged in the project 
(disaggregated by gender 
and social category)  Household surveys  TBA in year 1  20% additional 
income in 
participating 
households in new 
income generating 
activities.  
 
Targets for health 
benefits, and time 
and firewood 
savings TBD  An additional 
10% Successful rolled out of 
capacity building and 
linkage to outside (input -
output) market


---
*Page 328*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
# of target beneficiary 
households adopting 
cookstoves  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Household surveys  0 target households 
using Tier 2 
cookstoves  4000 target 
households of 
which 50% are 
women -headed 
households  8,500 target 
households 
using Tier 2 
cookstoves    
Number of employments 
generated from the 
selected value chains  
 Interim and final 
evaluations  
 
Annual reports on 
employees hired per 
value chain  TBA in year 1  # women:600  
# young:400  # women:900  
# young:600  No outbreak of a new 
pandemic  
 
Farmers, women and youth 
groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
Output 3.3. Financial  
services & private sector  
investment engage  Agriculture Credit 
assessment tool upgraded 
to include forestry  Loan approval 
reports generated by 
the tool  
 
Interim and final 
evaluation  0 3 MFIs and PFIs 
are using the tool to 
provide loans to 
smallholder 
farmers  
 
70% of the 
smallholder 
farmers and 
gradually grow  5 MFIs and PFIs 
are using the tool 
to provide loans 
to smallholder 
farmers  MFIs and PFIs are willing to 
participate in this project  
Number of financial 
products refined, 
contextualized ,  and rolled 
out to improve access to 
finance for agriproducts for 
1) vulnerable groups/ 
smallholders and 2) 
horticulture, bee products, Bi-annual  technical 
report  
 
Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  TBA 4 financial products 
refined and rolled 
out . At least 1 for 
each value chain (4 
total)  6 financial 
products already 
deployed by PFIs 
are refined, 
contextualized  
and at least 5 
rolled out by PFIs 
for financing MFIs are willing to 
contribute in terms of staff 
and resources


---
*Page 329*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
energy efficient 
cookstoves and 
ecotourism value chains  selected value 
chains.  
10 approved 
loans’ 
applications  
Number of people 
including women and 
youth with organizational, 
technical and financial 
improved capacity  Interim and Final 
Evaluations  0 7,800 (40% youth, 
50% women)  
 12,445 (40% 
youth, 50% 
women)  Farmers, women and 
youth groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
 
Number of men, women 
and youth who have 
access to thriving financial 
services  Interim and Final 
Evaluations  0  3,000  (40% youth, 
50% women)  
 8,500  (40% 
youth, 50% 
women)  
 Men, women and youth 
are open to access 
financial services  
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Synthesize & disseminate 
information on value of natural forests & 
ecosystem services  Ensure that the value of natural forests 
and ecosystem services for supporting 
climate change resilient livelihoods is fully 
appreciated by all sectors involved in land 
use decision making  1.1.1.1: Map the sectors involved in land -
use planning in the CND and review how 
forests, ecosystem services and  climate 
resilience is incorporated into each 
sector’s planning process.  
1.1.1.2: Conduct comprehensive 
literature review & stakeholder 
consultation to collect & synthesize 
information on climate risks for various A map of the sectors involved in the land -
use planning in the CND  
Information package on climate risks, 
value of forests for increasing resilienc e of 
local communities, adaptation options 
developed and disseminated to 
ministries, local government and local 
NGOs


---
*Page 330*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
sectors (e.g. agriculture, forestry), the 
value of forests for increasing resilience of 
local communities, and highlight 
adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral 
implications  
1.1.1.3: Host workshops & presentations 
with key ministries, government 
organizations, NGOs and community 
organizations to disseminate high -level 
knowledge on value of forests for 
increasing resilience of local communities  
1.1.1.4: Develop guidelines for integrating 
climate risk into land use planning and 
cross sectoral planning  
1.1.1.5: Develop outreach materials on 
climate r isk in the CND and the value of 
forest ecosystems for increasing 
resilience  
1.1.1.6: Implement outreach program 
tailored to different stakeholders (local 
government, civil society, communities) to 
enhance capacities for land -use planning, 
funding mobilizat ion, and delivery of 
climate adaptation actions  
1.1.1.7 Conduct climate literacy courses 
for local government and civil society 
organizations, aimed at increasing 
women and youth participation  
1.1.1.8 Provide financial and logistical 
support to trained organizations in 
grassroots mobilization to increase Guidelines for integrating climate risk into 
land use planning and cross sectoral plan 
developed  
104 episodes of radio drama to educate 
communities on climate change and 
gender issues, climate risks, value of 
forests and forests ecosystems, climate 
adaptation options developed  
Broadcast of 104 radio program episodes 
on a popular national radio station


---
*Page 331*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
women and youth participation in climate 
adaptation planning  
1.1.1.9 Introduce social safeguards at a 
high level at each meeting, including the  
GRM, FPIC, and Access Restrictions 
Mitigations as safeguards to be in place 
for work with local communities  
Activity 1.1.2 Develop climate -resilient 
landscape land -use plan  Ensure that climate change adaptation 
requirements are fully integrated into 
planning processes at local, district and 
national scales.  1.1.2.1: Engage district officials, JADF, 
and community members in the CND 
(especially women) in reviewing and 
interpreting the NLUDMP, to ensure the 
plan accounts for current and future 
climate risks, while building local support 
for climate sensitive planning.  
1.1.2.2: Conduct participatory land -use 
planning process in communitie s from 
village to district level to support 
integrated climate resilient land use 
planning  
1.1.2.3: Develop Integrated Land -use 
Plan that supports Resilient Livelihoods 
and Ecosystems in the CND, ensuring 
alignment with National Land Use and 
Development M aster Plan and ensuring 
the CND plan guides the district plan  
1.1.2.4: Develop and rollout a series of 
trainings (virtual sessions and online 
modules) on gender sensitivity and 
mainstreaming women and youth into 
planning  A summary of the current NLUDMP  and 
its recommendations relating to forestry, 
agricul ture and climate adaptation.  
Reviewed/updated district level planning 
schemes to ensure they account for 
current and future climate risks (e.g. 
DFMPs, District Development Strategies)  
 
A community natural resources mapping 
manual to outline main steps in 
community land -use planning process  
A comprehensive review of national and 
district development plans/strategies, 
guidelines and projects to understand 
planned future land -use & climate 
adaptation projects in the CND and 
identify synergies and conflicts be tween 
land-use & climate adaptation plans from 
different sectors  
Integrated Land Use Plan developed


---
*Page 332*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1.2.5: Assess specific climate i mpacts 
on historically marginalized and Category 
c,d,e populations through a participatory 
NR process to ensure the component 
projects address their needs for 
adaptation   
Activity 1.2.1: Create interagency 
taskforce institutionalizing integrated 
landscape planning & policy  Collaborative integrated landscape 
planning suppo rted, which secures 
climate resilience undertaken with 
appropriate social safeguards. This 
activity aims to strengthen collaborative 
efforts, in particular between institutions 
(from local to national level) in charge of 
natural resources management to 
encourage synergies and avoid 
overlapping mandates and redundancy in 
different climate resilience interventions.  1.2.1.1: Review & strengthen 
operationalization of the current cross -
sectoral task force  
1.2.1.2: Hold quarterly sectoral planning 
meetings with both national and district 
administrations in CND  
1.2.1.3: Facilitate discussions and provide 
technical support (e.g., policy briefs) in 
decision -making for cross -sectoral 
actions around climate adaptation and 
forest resilience in the CND  
1.2.1.4: Continue to introduce social 
safeguards at each meeting including the 
GRM, FPIC, and Access Restriction 
Mitigations as safeguards to be in place 
for work with local communities. For those 
at the district or community level, provide 
options for feedb ack on the process and 
best ways of communication with local 
partners  A cross -sectoral planning task force 
operational as recognized by a ministerial 
order  
Activity 1.2.2: Build capacity for spatial 
planning in national agencies re climate 
change  Capacity  for integrated land use planning 
which supports climate change resilience 
and delivery of ecosystem services is 
improved. This activity aims to build the 
technical capacity of staff in the Ministry 1.2.2.1: Recruit spatial planning expert to 
support spatial planning unit  Spatial Planning Unit Operational  
Capacity needs assessment completed


---
*Page 333*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
of Environment and University of Rwanda 
to generate and u se the data on forest 
cover and ecosystem service values 
necessary for mainstreaming climate 
adaptation and forest resilience into land -
use planning..  1.2.2.2: Assess and identify th e 
institutional home and operationalize the 
spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.3: Conduct a capacity needs 
assessment and identify the appropriate 
tools for spatial planning to fit the 
Rwandan context and conduct 
familiarization  
1.2.2.4: Led by the spatial planning unit, 
develop capacity within the University of 
Rwanda and the  MoE to use remote 
sensing, climate change modeling and 
spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, 
InVEST, RIOS, SWAT) to incorporate 
climate risks into land use planning 
processes  
1.2.2.5: Deliver training workshops on 
utilization of earth system models for la nd 
use planning purposes, utilization of 
remote sensing resources (lightning, 
satellite radiances) for hazards detection 
and climate monitoring and on regional 
climate monitoring and applications  Capacity for forest mapping, climate 
change modeling and spatial analysis 
built within UoR and MoE  
Activity 1.2.3: Develop an effective forest 
monitoring system to underpin forest 
management decisions  An effective forest, climate change and 
land use monitoring system is established 
to support climate resilient forest 
management decisions.  1.2.3.1: Recruit Forest ecologist or 
remote sensing expert to support the 
design and implementation of indigenous 
forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.2: Review existing forest mapping 
data and monitoring software, and assess 
utility for generating quantitative A report on the status of existing forest 
mapping data and monitoring software  
A design of the structure and operation of 
forest monitoring  
Two weather sta tions installed and 
operational  
Forest monitoring system operationalized


---
*Page 334*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
assessments of indigenous forest cover 
from local to national scales  
1.2.3.3: In collaboration with REMA, 
MINAGRI, RAB, RDB, RISA, MoE and 
affiliated agencies and University of 
Rwanda, design structure and operation 
of forest monitoring system, including 
required inputs (data, computing, 
personnel), desired outputs, and 
operational structure (e.g. location, 
reporting structure, funding)  
1.2.3 .4: Purchase and install 2 new 
weather automatic stations in the CND  
1.2.3.5: Establish & operationalize forest 
monitoring system  
1.2.3.6: Generate updated maps & 
statistics for indigenous forest cover, 
forest type etc. using forest monitoring 
system  
1.2.3.7: Develop capacity within hosting 
institution for continued operation of forest 
monitoring system  Updated maps and statistics for 
indigenous/natural forest cover and type 
generated  
Trainings delivered to develop the 
capacity of staff within hosting institution 
in forest monitoring  
Activity 2.1.1: Facilitate revision of PA 
management plans to address climate 
risks Park planning process expanded to 
ensure full incorporation of buffer zone 
and landscape linkage requirements, and 
ability to engage with the larger CND and 
district landscape management planning 
processes.  2.1.1.1 Review and update existing 
national park management plans to 
ensure climate and related landscape 
changes risks, impacts and required 
management responses are integrated  
2.1.1.2 Provide technical and financial 
support to planning, research and 
monitoring as well as community based 
conservation units within RDB in General management plans for NNP, 
GMNP and VNP updated


---
*Page 335*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
managing the parks as part of larger CND 
landscapes  
2.1.1.3 Train PA staff to integrate gender 
and social inclu sion into programming  
2.1.1.4 Train PA staff on integrating needs 
of women, youth, historically marginalized 
and Ubudehe Categories c,d,e 
populations into climate adaptation risks 
and responses  
2.1.1.5 Train PA staff on SEAH, GRM, 
FPIC, and Access Restric tion Mitigation 
Processes to ensure NP climate change 
responses are undertaken in a way which 
supports social inclusion and equity  
Activity 2.1.2 Establish long -term plans for 
CND financial sustainability post -GCF Identify financial instruments that could be 
employed for revenue generation post 
GCF as part of a broad and 
comprehensive RDB business planning 
effort for the sustainable management of 
the CND landscape  2.1.2.1 RFA to Recruit a Tec hnical 
Advisor to guide RDB, MoE, REMA, 
FONERWA and MINECOFIN on 
sustainable conservation finance.  Technical Advisor recruited  
 
CND long term financial sustainability 
developed  
 
 
Activity 2.1.3 New fire management 
curriculum developed and operationalized 
in PAs  Capacity increased for improved fire 
management in core PAs and adjacent 
landscapes. A collaborative effort in fire 
management planning and 
implementation in CND districts will be 
carried out and facilitated.  2.1.3.1 Develop a curriculum tailored to 
needs and capacities of different 
stakeholders  
2.1.3.2 Build the capacity of RDB to 
manage fire in National Parks  
2.1.3.3 Build the capacity of RFA, local 
authorities and commun ities to 
collaboratively manage fire in forests 
outside PAs  A fire training program that addresses 
local needs and skills gaps developed  
Train the trainer process completed for 25 
RDB staff allowing them to instruct future 
classes without assistance  
Fire detection, early warning, and fire 
danger ranger system is established and 
operationalized


---
*Page 336*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
2.1.3.4 Implement a “fire wise” outreach 
and awareness program for communities 
and local government (district, sector, 
cell), as well as Rwanda Forest Authority, 
surrounding natural forests to red uce the 
incidence of human -caused fires  200 community facilitators (youth) trained 
to raise awareness on fires in 
communities surrounding natural forests 
and forests plantations  
10,000 community members reached 
through soc ial marketing events  
Activity 2.2.1 Secure key remaining 
natural areas outside PAs  Remaining priority natural forests and 
other ecosystems required for climate 
change resilience secured through 
appropriate land use planning processes  2.2.1.1 Raise awarene ss on remaining 
protected natural forests in CNDL to 
secure their protection  
2.2.1.2 In collaboration with RFA, REMA, 
districts identify and implement actions 
that support conservation and 
management of remnant protected 
natural forests in CNDL  Action plan for the conservation of 
remnant natural forests developed 
and implemented  
Activity 2.2.2 Restore natural forest cover 
in & outside PAs including riparian 
linkages  Support natural forest restoration 
processes in PAs through improved 
management of alien and invasive 
species; and actively restore nature forest 
in priority areas next to core PAs and 
protected forests to expand the natural 
forest estate  2.2.2.1 Review mapping of degraded 
natural forest areas in core NPs, stepping 
stones a nd unprotected riparian lands 
using updated imagery and ground 
truthing  
2.2.2.2 Identify parcels for restoration in 
core PAs, stepping stones and riparian 
lands using desktop and field -based 
assessment  
2.2.2.3 Establish indigenous tree seed 
nurseries in th e CND to serve core PAs, 
stepping stones, riparian land restoration 
and promotion of indigenous trees on 
farms and in protective forests  
2.2.2.4 Recruit, train in forest restoration 
methods and equip community workers to Indigenous tree seed nurseries 
established and operational  
4,500 ha of indigenous forest in NNP 
restored  
500 ha restored in Gishwati Mukura NP  
1,500 ha of riparian lands restored


---
*Page 337*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
be involved in core PAs restoration  and 
riparian linkages  
2.2.2.5 Restore 4500 ha of indigenous 
forest in NNP  
2.2.2.6 Restore 500 ha Gishwati Mukura 
National Park  
2.2.2.7 Restore 1,500 ha of riparian lands  
2.2.2.8 Using permanent plots sampling, 
collect field monitoring data on tree 
species recruitment and growth for 
estimation of biomass, species richness 
etc. in restored parcels in Nyungwe and 
Gishwati -Mukura National Parks in 
restored parcels in Nyungwe a nd 
Gishwati -Mukura National Parks as well 
as on riparian lands to assess success of 
initiatives, then replicate or adapt as 
needed  
2.2.2.9 Perform Environmental and Social 
Screening on all positions being created 
by the project  
2.2.2.10 Establish a grievan ce process for 
laborers  
2.2.2.11 Update emergency and 
preparedness plan including risk 
mitigation guidance to local conditions at 
restoration sites  
 2.2.2.12 Train all workers on their rights 
and how to access the GRM


---
*Page 338*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
2.2.2.13 Provide code of conduct and 
emergency preparedness and safety 
training for all laborers  
2.2.2.14 Hire and train labor and safety 
leads at each site to provide guidance to 
staff, be available for grievance issues, 
and monitor health and safety con ditions 
for workers  
2.2.2.15 Develop and implement strategy 
(including social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth participate and benefit 
from forest restoration projects  
Activity 2.2.3 Promote silvopastoralism 
with indigenous trees in Gishwati Pasture 
areas  Existing pasture lands will be 
characterized and livestock farmers 
clustered according to the size of their 
grazing lands. Tree species that exist on 
their grazing land  will be identified and 
grouped according to the level of their 
resilience to climate change. A 
participatory approach will be used to 
assess livestock owners' preferences for 
indigenous species on their farms. Sites 
will be identified for indigenous tree 
nursery establishment and nurseries will 
be established in project sites and 
managed by the livestock communities.  
 2.2.3.1 Assess the status of pasture lands 
in Gishwati area and identify key areas for 
restoration and the potential to introduce 
indigenou s species  
2.2.3.2 In collaboration with landowners, 
identify suitable indigenous species for 
fodder trees, shrubs, grasses, and 
herbaceous legumes that have potential 
to improve pasturelands and increase 
their climate adaptive capacity  
2.2.3.3 Produce and disseminate fodder 
trees, shrubs, grasses, and herbaceous 
legumes to project beneficiaries  
2.2.3.4 Train beneficiaries on improved 
livestock and pasture management  1,000 ha of pasture land in Gishwati 
grazing area restored with indigenous 
tree species


---
*Page 339*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 3.1.1 Restore high slope areas 
(>55%) as protective forests  Promotion of protective forest and 
agroforestry practices to improve 
landscape connectivity and ability to 
deliver ecosystem services  3.1.1.1 Introduce and raise awareness of 
indigenous s pecies to target stakeholders 
in CND  
3.1.1.2 In consultation with RFA, National 
Land Authority, districts and communities, 
determine fragile areas (steep slopes > 
55%) to be allocated for protective forests 
and their ownership  
3.1.1.3 Assess the current st atus of the 
indigenous tree species in selected areas 
for protective forests and select 
indigenous tree species appropriate to 
CNDL  
3.1.1.4 Develop restoration plan for 
protective forests  
3.1.1.5 Build capacity of local 
stakeholders (men and women) on PFMU 
approach and methods  
3.1.1.6 Design and approve SFMPs of 
private FMUs  
3.1.1.7 Ensure consent of smallholders 
prior to planting trees (SS)  
3.1.1.8 In collaboration with smallholders 
reforest/restore 2,500 ha of public or 
private land with slopes >55%  and 
ensure sustainable management under 
private FMUs according to approved 
SFMPs  
3.1.1.9 Support monitoring and evaluation 
of restored private FMUs  2,500 ha of protective forests on high 
slope areas restored


---
*Page 340*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 118 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
3.1.1.10 Assess impacts of exotics on 
neighboring lands and mitigate their 
negative impacts (SS)  
3.1.1.11 De velop and implement strategy 
(including social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth participate and benefit 
from forest restoration projects (G)  
3.1.1.12 Assess the benefits and costs of 
each proposed tree and plant species and 
how those benefits affe ct different 
population segments (SS)


---
*Page 341*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 119 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 3.1.2 Develop on -farm 
agroforestry for high caloric and 
indigenous tree species  Implement agroforestry/sustainable land 
management (SLM) over 3,346 ha of 
smallholder farmland  
 3.1.2.1 Identify sub -areas of intervention 
for agroforestry dissemination in the CND  
3.1.2.2 Introduce and raise awareness of 
agroforestry in target communities  
3.1.2.3 Develop the capacity of extension 
agents at district/ sector level and NGOs 
to support adoption of agroforestry 
technologies  
3.1.2.4 Establish agroforestry/fruit tree 
nurseries to facilitate access to quality 
planting material  
3.1.2.5 Promote sustainable land 
management practices by stabilizing 
existing terraces, and plant high calorific 
agroforestry species to provide a 
sustainable source of fuelwood for energy 
efficient cookstoves to protect sloping 
land against severe soil erosion  
3.1.2.6  Train RFA, extension agents, 
Project participants and community 
members on specific techniques for 
identification of and management of 
invasive pests and pathogens (SS)  SLM/agroforestry established on 3,346 ha 
of smallholder land


---
*Page 342*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 120 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
● Activity 3.2.1 Develop forestry 
and agroforestry -related value 
chains for marke t access  Vulnerable groups of youth and women 
identified and their capacity for production 
(quality and quantity) enhanced in sync 
with particular niche markets demands  3.2.1.1 Identification and mapping of 
vulnerable groups of youth and women 
within the CND  
3.2.1.2 Capacity building for farmers' 
cooperatives/unions on good agricultural 
practices (GAP) for market standards in 
the selected agroforestry -related tree 
fruits and horticulture  
3.2.1.3 Development of Global GAP 
standards modules and market ac cess 
linkage for the selected value chains  
3.2.1.4 CND Honey value chain capacity 
production, market, and financial 
development  
3.2.1.5. Tourism value chain development  Vulnerable groups of youth and women 
within the CND identified and grouped 
into coopera tives 
5 Value chains identified and 
beneficiaries selected  
GAP training for 900 people from targeted 
cooperatives and unions completed  
Train of trainers completed for 30 
cooperative members  
New tourism trails and base camps 
outside of Gishwati -Mukura NP 
developed and operational  
Community freelance tour guides trained 
and operational  
● Activity 3.2.2 Facilitate and scale 
up climate -resilient value chain 
products  This activity aims to build the capacity of 
smallholder farmers in producing, 
processing and marketing quality 
products that meet national and 
international standards to be competitive 
on the market  3.2.2.1 Value chain contextualization in 
focus areas in the CND  
3.2.2.2 Facilitating market accessibility  25 youth and women 
cooperatives/enterprises with the 
capacity to deliver quality products and 
services  
● Activity 3.2.3 Facilitate access to 
markets for vulnerable farmers  This activity will focus on enhancing 
productivity (quantity, quality, and 
sustainability at the farm le vel) and 
exploring the market linkages model 
between farmers, suppliers, and buyers.  3.2.3.1 Development of farmer -inclusive 
business models  
 900 cooperative members are linked to 
the market from farming inputs suppliers 
and production aggregators through 
inclusive farming -as-a-business.


---
*Page 343*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 121 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
● Activity 3.2.4 Scale up 
production, use and sales of 
fuel-efficient cook -stoves  Evaluate and promote financing models 
that sustainably foster energy efficient 
cook -stove access to historically 
marginalized communities and other 
vulnerable groups of the CND  3.2.4.1. Identification and production of 
Energy Efficient Cooking -Stoves  
3.2.4.2. Energy efficient cook -stoves 
distributed to CND community members 
and categorization based on UBUDEHE 
Categories  8500 households have access to EES  
● Activity 3.3.1 Facilitate access to 
finance & private sector 
investments  Build common understanding between 
value chain actors and private financial 
institutions towards selected value chains  3.3.1.1 Tailoring credit assessment tool 
for selected value chains, while 
integrating climate impact data  
3.3.1.2 Facilitate access to finance for 
selected value chains  Agriculture Credit assessment tool 
upgraded and adopted by PFIs  
 
At least 15 projects of the 5 selected value 
chains funded by PFIs  
● Activity 3.3.2 Set up & support 
savings & loan groups, enhance 
asset -building  Strengthen the capacity of local 
smallholders’ farmers in financial literacy 
and access to finance  3.3.2.1 Establish/form saving groups for 
access to finance  
 Cooperative members are linked to PFIs 
and at least 70% have accessed to 
financial service and loan  
● Activity 3.3.3 Build capacity of 
financial institutions to serve 
targeted value chains and 
communities  Undertake a climate screening of financial 
service providers using the green index 
tool and support PFIs to access and adopt 
a digitalized forestry and a gri-loan 
assessment tool  3.3.3.1 Capacity -building of PFIs  
 PFIs have developed an environmental 
policy and strategy for their organization 
including staff awareness training and 
integration of climate and livelihood 
impact measurement systems  
 
 
● Activity 3.3.4 Facilitate learning 
& knowledge sharing  Produce and share lessons learned 
during the implementation of this project  3.3.4.1 Programme -embedded learning 
and reflection  ESMP


---
*Page 344*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 122 
 
 
  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements  
The Project’s logical framework outlines the expected results, indicators, means of verification, baseline values and target values at mid -term and 
end-term. The Project Coordinator will be responsible for the overall  monitoring of Project progress and reporting to the PSC. A national M&E Specialist 
hosted under the PMU, supported by EE -based Specialists, will be employed to develop practical guidelines for — and operationalize — a 
performance monitoring framework to t rack the Project's progress towards achieving its targets. The national M&E Specialist will be responsible for: 
i) establishing a performance monitoring framework to define biannual targets; ii) measuring the indicators at least 1 –2 times per year to evalu ate the 
progress of the Project; iii) reporting to the Project Coordinator and PSC; and iv) participating in the production of report s. RFA M&E Specialist will 
support the National M&E Specialist by: i) following guidelines developed by the national M&E sp ecialist to conduct performance monitoring; ii) 
measuring the program indicators at least 1 –2 times per year; iii) ensuring all activities comply with the Project’s ESMF process and procedures; iv) 
supporting environmental screening and helping to follow t he Environmental Management Plans; and v) participating in production of reports. The 
M&E Specialists will be supported by a Gender Specialist to oversee and monitor the application of gender disaggregated indic ators. The M&E 
Specialist and Gender Speciali st will perform regular visits (at least once/year), randomly selecting villages to monitor implementation. They will use 
these visits to cross -check the information provided by EE and beneficiaries in monitoring reports. During each visit, the team will c ollect qualitative 
data on implementation outcomes and difficulties through focus group discussions with beneficiaries and interviews with key s takeholders. The 
national M&E Specialist, supported by the EE M&E Specialist will then compile quarterly Project  reports outlining progress in each site, allowing for 
feedback and support from the PMU and PSC in case of delays or challenges. MoE, as the AE, will perform supervision missions from year two 
onwards, selecting sites to visit each year and assessing the status of implementation. In addition, the MoE procurement office — which oversees 
the destination and use of funds disbursed to the EE — will monitor the Project's compliance with policies and procedures, as well as alignment 
between implementation and ob jectives. The annual performance reports will include a narrative report (with supporting data) on implementation 
progress based on the logical framework in the Project, including a report on ESMS as well as gender. The report will be alig ned with the moda lities 
set out in the GCF results management framework and its performance measurement frameworks.  
As per the AMA, an independent consultant will be contracted to conduct an Interim Evaluation and Final Evaluation. Both will  comply with GCF 
evaluation policy and international standards and make use of qualitative and quantitative data analyses, including interview s with relevant 
stakeholders, data provided by the Project, EE M&E Specialists and Gender Specialist, and participative workshops a nd focus groups with 
beneficiaries. The MTE will analyze whether the Project is on track, any problems, and challenges, and required corrective ac tions. The PSC and 
PMU will develop a management response to the recommendations along with an implementation plan, and the PMU will monitor implementation of 
the recommendations. The Final Evaluation will be an independent assessment of Project performance against its contributions to a paradigm shift 
and enabling environment.


---
*Page 345*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 123 
  
  
● (f)  RISK ASSESSME NT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1 - Lack of coordination, institutional resistance, and regulatory barriers to mainstreaming 
climate change into land use planning  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Macroeconomic/Political  Low High  
Description  
Despite its progressive policies, Rwanda has historically had limited capacity for mainstreaming climate 
change into government/institutional practices and given the pervasive ways in which the impacts of climate 
change impact across numerous sectors, mini stries and government agencies will need to work across any 
perceived or real institutional barriers to align and mainstream climate change in land use planning. For 
example, the Rwanda Development Board has historically not worked beyond Park boundaries, and this will 
be integral for institutionalizing the climate change adaptation processes across the Congo Nile Divide as a 
large interconnected landscape. Additionally, insufficient coordination, collaboration and information -sharing 
between relevant gover nment departments, and research institutions may hinder or limit participation of 
relevant institutions and agencies, reducing the timely delivery and effectiveness of the Project, especially 
the aspects related to mainstreaming climate change in land use planning and other components of the 
Project as well. Furthermore, the perception of an uneven playing field, with larger or more well -connected 
institutions and companies able to evade the payment of environmental fees and fines under existing 
legislation , may undermine the uptake of the other options for financial sustainability of improved PA and 
forest ecosystem management.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Project is part of a larger suite of efforts supported by the multi -agency Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) to create a spirit of cooperation among the various agencies and institutions charged with addressing 
climate -related issues. The PSC demonstrat es Rwanda’s commitment to fulfilling mainstreaming of climate 
adaptation into regular government processes and procedures. As such numerous government agencies 
have already had the opportunity to work together on a variety of climate -related issues, align institutional 
policies and reduce any potential regulatory barriers to ensure successful implementation of projects related 
to climate change. The PSC will directly oversee the Project Management Unit, and with this larger guidance 
structure, the EE will c ommunicate to the PMU and the PSC on a regular basis to prompt collaboration and 
address any unforeseen institutional or regulatory barriers encountered during the life of the Project for 
immediate attention and remediation. PSC will address the risk of ev ading the payment of environmental 
fees by facilitating buy -in from stakeholders such as RDB and MINECOFIN into compliance with 
environmental laws through greater emphasis on the links to climate resilience and NDC objectives . These 
measures will reduce th e impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 - Extreme weather/climatic events hinder the ability to deliver Project objectives   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description


---
*Page 346*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 124 
  
 The activities that will deliver overall Project success involve dependencies on weather conditions for 
successful implementation of the projects that rely on accessing steep slopes, planting trees, and establishing 
beekeeping operations. Extreme events su ch as heavy rainfall or prolonged drought could severely limit the 
success of these endeavors making sites inaccessible, creating unfavorable conditions for seedling survival, 
and decreasing the potential success of new beekeeping operations. This region, given its topography and 
the expected climatic variability, is likely to experience these types of disruptions. Severe disruptions may 
impede implementation, including potential implementation delays and fall under GCF's policy on 
restructuring and cancell ation. That said, it is unlikely these extreme conditions will present themselves in 
the next 5 years for the duration of the project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As weather is unpredictable, any mitigation measures will not change the probability nor address the impact 
in the short term. As the entire project is envisioned to improve the resiliency of this landscape to climate 
variability and promote adaptation, th e specific activities will be able to mitigate, and in some cases prevent, 
longer -term impacts. As our implementation arrangements involve bolstering the climate adaptation capacity 
of the government and the communities in the CND, the entire project itsel f will serve as mitigation to this 
unlikely outcome.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 - Project staffing and capacity  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Implementation of the Project hinges on staffing of the Project Management Unit, hiring additional staff within 
the EE and recruiting thousands of additional laborers in the form of community engagement specialists, 
contractors for building terraces, individuals to remove ferns, contracts to construct and deliver stove s, 
consultants to contribute expertise on behavior change, invasive species/pest management, and gender 
sensitization. Many factors could intervene to slow or thwart hiring progress including the high turnover of 
staff in the implementing institutions as f requent changes in government bodies could result in a disruption 
and/or delays in implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Rwanda has a successful track record of implementing large scale projects through government ministries. 
Competent staff will be avai lable for project implementation, and their abilities will be enhanced through the 
commitment to training individuals involved in the program. This risk, if realized, may impede 
implementation including potential implementation delays and fall under GCF's policy on 
restructuring and cancellation. Therefore, the Project will invest heavily in strengthening institutional 
capacity to promote climate resilience and apply actions that directly increase the resilience of ecosystems 
and community livelihoods. The Project will also document decisions, best practices and lessons learned to 
support the institutional memory to sustain Project activities in case of high staff turnover. Labor and safety 
as well as community security plans to be establish ed as part of the ESAP (Annex 6) will make the Project 
a desirable place to work. Mitigation measures reduce impact to LOW.


---
*Page 347*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 125 
  
  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 - Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) 
considerations into the implementation of the proposed Project activities as well as its management structures and 
systems  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Should ESS be inadequately considered in the Project or in the management and governance structures, 
there could be social and environmental implications. To start there may be a disproportionate distribution of 
benefits to certain segments of society. Although the Project’s primary beneficiaries inc lude women and other 
most vulnerable people, there is a risk that the Project implementation will experience preferential treatment 
at sites that favor certain groups over others. For example, despite tremendous policy and legal efforts, a 
patriarchal cult ure and persistent disparities in education, employment, land ownership and other factors 
characterize gender relations in Rwanda and could cloud implementation efforts. Likewise, some vulnerable 
groups may be unable to benefit from the efforts, such as la ndless people unable to benefit from trees or 
having a safe place for a new cookstove. One serious risk afflicting major projects such as that proposed, if 
not properly addressed, includes sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment (SEAH) whi ch 
may be prevalent if preferential treatment occurs (e.g., interfamily SEAH in retaliation for benefits received 
by women rather than men) or there may be power dynamics with hired staff who work with communities 
and withhold Project benefits within a SEA H conflicts (e.g. requesting sex for an opportunity to participate in 
the project, harassment if potential beneficiary refuses).  On the environmental side, several environmental 
risks detailed in Section F and Annex 6 could undermine the success of the Pr oject including topsoil loss 
and possible collapse of the terraces, unsustainable practices for sourcing clay for the cookstoves, and 
inadvertent introduction of invasive species, pests or pathogens from the nurseries to the field sites.  
Mitigation Measur e(s) 
The Project anticipates these challenges and has envisioned multiple participatory aspects to the Project 
that are guided by the gender action plan and the ESAP. To mitigate social risks, local community 
engagement will be facilitated by the EE in co operation with local community organizations through the 
integrated landscape delivery teams (ILDT) and the Joint Action Development Forums (DJAF). Safeguards 
in place to support Labor and Community Health & Safety will require training/sensitization to SE AH and the 
repercussions for those who engage in such activities (i.e., termination of employment). In the hiring process, 
staff will be screened for prior infractions. Hired staff will be trained in survivor -centered and gender -
responsive approaches to su pport any victims of SEAH in association with the Project activities.  To minimize 
environmental risk, the PMU and the EE will adhere to the environmental action plan and oversee the hiring 
of contractors to perform the activities. Multiple consultants or specialists, if not part of subcontracts, will be 
recruited to train project participants on mitigating measures to reduce these risks. If the proposed ESAP is 
followed properly the impacts will be LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 - Lack of adoption among target populations for livelihoods activities  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Medium  High


---
*Page 348*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 126 
  
 Description  
The success of the Project depends upon the integration of activities such as beekeeping, improved 
cookstoves, planting of fruit trees and terrace construction on private lands by the project beneficiaries. If 
planned and executed incorrectly a myriad of issues could prevent beneficiaries from adopting the activities 
beyond the life of the Project. This includes but is not lim ited to overlapping or misalignment between the 
proposed Project activities and those being implemented by other government departments or non -
government organizations in the Project area.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Numerous international development projects  have experienced mixed results upon completion regarding 
the uptake of promoted activities into daily lives. This Project has a strong behavior change component based 
on current best practices in identifying the barriers to behavior change, removing those  barriers, and 
changing norms thus ensuring, through adequate participation and training, that the activities will be adopted 
and maintained over time. The work plan involves ample collaboration with women and youth groups through 
the ILDTs to build long -term community ownership for the Project. Further, if there are activities being 
promoted by the government or other NGOs that either overlap with the proposed activities or contravene 
with the Project activities, adoption by intended beneficiaries may be d isrupted. As such the NSC will serve 
as the overarching body to ensure such projects within similar geographic regions remain aligned. These 
mitigation measures reduce the impact to MEDIUM.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 - Unforeseen disruptions due to another COVID variant  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description  
As demonstrated during the recent years of the COVID pandemic, variants may cause unforeseen 
disruptions to travel and Project implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Project will likely start well after COVID has run its course; however, in the event  of new variants the 
PMU and EE will be ready to implement necessary COVID -safety practices such as masking, social 
distancing and reducing travel to areas with low health care options. Mitigation will reduce impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 - Prohibited practices including money laundering and terrorist financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited Activities  Low Medium  
Description  
The Project involves a large number of actors for successful implementation including ministries, government 
agencies, NGOs, sub -grantees, vendors, service providers, community members and beneficiaries. 
Specifically, there is an intention to distribute or  disperse to beneficiaries both directly and indirectly 
commodities and other items of value such as the distribution of seedlings for trees that will produce fruits or 
contribute to enhancing biodiversity of farming systems, access to improved cook stoves  as well as the


---
*Page 349*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 127 
  
 possibility for distribution of bees to start honey operations. As with any project infusing large sums of money 
directly or indirectly with multiple actors, corruption could occur.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Since the 1990s Rwanda has set a s ocial foundation for anti -corruption efforts by establishing policies and 
procedures to prevent corruption/reduce vulnerability to corruption and sanctioning misbehavior through 
prosecutions. Specifically, a reduction in administrative corruption is of not e for a large project such as the 
one proposed. The systems in place will reduce the potential for prohibited activities. Additionally, 
commitment to campaigns for individuals to report corruption has created a societal norm for intolerance. As 
a result, R wanda moved from a state of high corruption 20 years ago to a level on par with middle income 
countries. The International Monetary Fund published an assessment of Anti Money Laundering and 
Combating Financing of Terrorism in 2015 indicating that while the  risk of AML/CFT is low, at that time more 
could be done to bolster the systems in place to address the issue. At present, the GoR has robust measures 
to fight money laundering and terrorist financing. This was done first by enacting the law N° 001/FIC/202 2 of 
16/02/2022 on Regulations relating to anti -money laundering, combating the financing of terrorism. The 
Rwanda government has also put in place a special agency for this purpose named Financial Intelligence 
Center (FIC) with a clear mission to promote financial system integrity by conducting effective financial 
intelligence to counter money laundering, the financing of terrorism and related financial crimes in 
governmental institutions, projects, and parastatal agencies under the supervision of the Mini stry of Finance 
and economic planning. MoE and the GCF Project under its supervision will also comply with FIC regulations. 
The MoE also has an Internal Audit function as well as regular audit conducted by the Office of the Auditor 
General to carry out the  efficiency and effectiveness of internal controls.  
Regarding higher level security threats, at present, there are no UN Security Council Sanctions against 
Rwanda, though it is noted that there are sanctions in Democratic Republic of Congo, close to the Congo 
Nile Divide. The UN Security Council Consolidated Sanctions list indicates approximately 20 individuals with 
ties to Rwanda, a small percentage of whom may live in the country. This list has been circulated to the AEs 
and will be cross checked when h iring for the project and once project sites are selected to ensure these 
individuals will not be involved in any manner with the Project or its activities, either as a counterparty, 
implementer, or beneficiary.  
To report and remedy any risks that may occu r, the MoE will maintain a Project level grievance redress 
mechanism to which anyone can report on the occurrence of prohibited activities. All complaints will be 
investigated following the process identified in Annex 6. Any complaints believed to contribu te to prohibited 
activities will be referred to the appropriate authorities in Rwanda.  
Assuming all staff will be made aware of the prohibited activities, all subcontractors/counterparties will be 
screened for engagement of activities and made aware of th eir obligations to alert the PMU and/or submit 
grievances related to such activities occurring as part of the Project, the overall impact of the money 
laundering and financing of terrorism risk on the Project will be LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 - Politica l Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Low 
Description


---
*Page 350*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 128 
  
 Political risk is in part driven by long -standing frictions with neighboring countries and the potential for 
domestic instability in these countries to spill over into Rwanda. These geopolitical challenges constrain 
Rwanda’s longer -term development as a se rvices hub. Although the government of Rwanda has been 
effective in its pursuit of social stability through targeted transfers and support and improving accountability 
at all levels from Villages and to national levels through village councils, JADF and Um ushyikirano (National 
Dialogue Council - an annual forum that brings together leaders and citizens to reflect on the country’s 
progress and share ideas to solve ongoing challenges, this political risk may impede implementation 
including potential implement ation delays and fall under GCF's policy on restructuring and cancellation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Much of the work of the project will be taking place within a Ministry and through work at the community level. 
Oftentimes, regardless of political instabil ities, communities with devolved decision -making structures and 
local capacity will have a greater chance to withstand that instability and continue to operate.  For this project, 
much of the work will be turned over to the local community leaders and the laborers hired locally who will 
be trained and will then own the capacity to do this work in the long -term, regardless of what national 
leadership is in place. The structures resulting from this workplace citizens participation in decision making 
which wil l constitute a buffer against potential domestic instability. Mitigation will reduce impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 9 - Expansion of tea plantations  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Macroeconomic/Political  Low High 
Description  
Projected climate changes predict significant elevation rises in CND agro ecological zones, including the 
potential for tea cultivation at much higher elevations than at present. This is unlikely to threaten Rwanda’s 
existing montane forest protected areas, as forei gn revenues from tourism in these reserves far surpass 
those from tea. However, tea remains a significant source of foreign revenue and a government target for 
expansion. Any increased tea production in the CND would therefore most likely affect lands outs ide of 
parks: smallholder, cooperative, and district holdings, many of which might also be targets for reforestation, 
agroforestry, and biodiversity stepping stone initiatives under this Project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The integrated land use planning inc luded in this Project design, will bring together tea industry, agriculture, 
forestry, biodiversity, and tourism interests to identify and reduce such potential conflicts over use of the 
CND’s limited land resource base. Through this integrated land use pl anning we aim to establish a formal 
public -private sector forum at the landscape level to help improve communication across sectors, 
appreciation of environmental issues, and increase synergies between interventions to avoid conflicting 
targets and indicat ors between sectors and advocate for mainstreaming biodiversity and climate change in 
different economic sectors.  
Selected Risk Factor 10 - Timely provision of Co -financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Low


---
*Page 351*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 129 
  
 Description  
The Project co -financiers may delay providing their co -financing commitment which can jeopardize 
implementation and hence project intended objectives could not be met.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Accredited Entity has already requested for commitments of co-financing from all the project co -
financiers which are already Government of Rwanda institutions, and all the committed co -financing are 
already part of the Institutions Day  to day mandates hence there is anticipated low impact on the project 
implementa tion  
 
 
 
(e) GCF  POLICIES  AND  STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  
As proposed, the environmental and social risk category for the Project is Category B or ‘moderate risk” 
according to GCF classification. The project was  partially screened for potential social and environmental 
risks, following GCF requirements (Annex 6). All preliminary potential negative impacts for activities and sub -
activities were determined to be minimal, reversible and readily mitigated through gen erally accepted 
mitigation measures and standard international practices, thus in the low to moderate categories. While the 
impacts will occur within the Congo Nile Divide Project area boundary and implementation zone, the specific 
locations and communitie s affected by Project activities will be determined in Project implementation thus 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework has been developed for a more thorough screening 
of all activities by the AE/EE.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measu re and Management 
Strategies


---
*Page 352*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 130 
  
 Environmental and social risks: For all Project 
components, disproportionate benefit distribution to 
some groups and not others including women, youth, 
historically marginalized people and Rwanda’s poverty 
categories ( Ubudehe) C, D, and E is a risk. Such power 
differentials could exacerbate exposure to sexual 
abuse, exploitation and harassment, a risk that may 
affect all Project components if unmitigated. The 
Project may cause social risks including loss of access 
to la nds due to new land classifications or stricter 
implementation of land use and park laws, 
displacement of informal land occupants due to 
afforestation/reforestation, and loss of access to land 
for food production. The potential for invasive species 
spread in the reforestation/afforestation components, 
water usage during increased seedling production at 
nurseries, terrace stabilization for planting, loss of 
topsoil to erosion during planting, disturbance to wildlife 
during afforestation or reforestation, mod ification of 
water flow and topsoil that could increase exposure to 
disease, increased human -wildlife interactions with 
increased tree cover and fruit trees, air quality impacts 
from cookstove production at scale, and supply chain 
impacts for livelihoods i nterventions all have associated 
environmental and social risks to be thoroughly vetted 
as specific sites and beneficiaries are identified.  The PMU will hire an Environmental and Social 
Safeguards (ESS) Specialist to oversee the application 
of the ESMF for  a more thorough assessment of impacts 
by specific activities during Project implementation. The 
ESS Specialist will also oversee stakeholder 
engagement, sensitize all relevant staff on social 
safeguards and community engagement including SEAH 
training, an d ensure Project activities target vulnerable 
groups to build resilient livelihoods. Consent processes 
will be established with communities. The Project will 
have a Project -level grievance redress process available 
to address complaints that aligns and com plements the 
grievance redress used by the MoE. The PMU will also 
hire an Environmental Management Specialist (EMS) 
who will work with the ESS on environmental 
assessment and implementing proper mitigation 
processes as required.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measure and Management 
Strategies  
Labor and working conditions: The dangers involve 
the potential for sexual abuse, exploitation and 
harassment (SEAH) in the hiring process or while 
working, forced labor, child labor, and exposure to 
occupational health and safety risks. These risks 
include safety of laborers removing ferns and planting 
trees on steep slopes, exposure to potential disease 
vectors in standing water or soil and large scale 
fabrication of stoves, risks using the machinery in the 
production of stoves, exposure to bees in honey 
production as well as other si milar risks.  The ESS will coordinate with AE/EE human resources 
staff to conduct a Labor and Working Conditions Risk 
Assessment that will inform the development of a Labor 
and Working Conditions Risk Management Plan. The 
ESS and HR staff will appoint fiel d safety leads within 
each sector. These individuals will receive training on 
National Laws governing labor and working conditions, 
SEAH, and other risks relevant to the activities that 
involve the hiring of laborers during the course of the 
Project.


---
*Page 353*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 131 
  
 Resource efficiency and pollution prevention: The 
stabilization of terraces risks topsoil loss and terrace 
collapse due to deteriorating conditions and improper 
long-term maintenance and extreme weather events. 
Pollution/waste may be created across the sup ply 
chains for stove production and distribution. Pesticides 
and fertilizers may be used for seedling production. 
Water usage in nurseries could divert resources for 
others. The release of CO2 emissions in the sourcing 
and distribution of materials in 
reforestation/afforestation as well as the livelihood 
enhancement activities could also pose a risk.  The ESS, EMS, and a Procurement Specialist will 
conduct activity -specific assessment for resource 
efficiency and pollution control. During implementation 
they will oversee subcontracts for 
reforestation/afforestation and all livelihoods 
enhancement projects. For stabilization of terraces, the 
subcontractor will have an engineer oversee the 
technical components of stabilization to ensure best 
practices and reduct ion of risks.  For livelihoods 
enhancement projects the ESS and Procurement 
Specialist will ensure environmentally sourced materials 
and establish measures to minimize production waste 
and maximize distribution efficiency of stoves. The EMS 
will work with nurseries on plans for mitigating pesticides, 
fertilizers and water use.  
Community safety and security: Increased risk of  
forest fires due to increasing tree coverages, increased 
exposure to vector -borne diseases, human wildlife 
conflicts associated with reforestation/afforestation and 
the influx of international funding that shifts power 
dynamics and creates environments prone to increased 
incidents of SEAH. With expected changes in land 
classifications, interactions among law enforcement 
and informal land owners or communities who use the 
resources could become more prevalent and increase 
risks of harm if law enforcement lacks proper training 
for working with communities. Work on steep slippery 
slopes, working with bees, use of new cook st oves and 
work in remote locations (e.g., fern removal) will require 
safety considerations for participating community 
members. Extreme weather or global events (e.g. 
pandemic) may disrupt safety and security.  The ESS will screen each activity for communit y, safety 
and security risks. The EE will have at a minimum, an 
Emergency Response and Preparedness Plan to 
address specific local hazards and response at each site; 
all staff will be trained on the plan as well as on disease 
prevention and hygiene, SEAH p revention, and 
addressing human -wildlife conflicts. The PMU will need 
to address at a high level across the GoR the potential 
for escalating conflicts among landowners and law 
enforcement as land classifications change in the course 
of the Project.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measure and Management 
Strategies  
Resource access/restrictions: Land classification 
processes could result in changes that affect resource 
access due to existing land use, occupancy, and land 
tenure in the CND especially among farmers, settlers, 
and traditional uses of the land and forest. At a smaller 
scale with less risk, as tree planting and transitions to 
native or value -added species (e.g. fruit trees) 
commence, access to tree resources may be 
diminished un til trees grow larger and become usable.  The ESS will screen all Project activities for the potential 
to cause displacement, namely access restrictions to 
resources. The Project is committed to stakeholder 
engagement and will mitigate access restrictions r isks 
through a process framework and mitigation hierarchy. 
The AE grievance redress process will manage access 
complaints.


---
*Page 354*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 132 
  
 Biodiversity conservation: The inadvertent 
introduction of non -native/invasive pest 
species/diseases during forestry/agroforestry related 
activities could negatively impact production and forest 
health. Wildlife may be disturbed in the course of fern 
removal and/or tree planting as well as other potential 
livelihood activities that will be implemented. Human -
wildlife interactions may increase as a result of 
increased forest cover and fruit trees being available in 
the CND. This could cause landowners to retaliate 
against wildlife.  The ESS will screen all Project activities for biodiversity 
and conservation risks/impacts. Mitigation measures will 
be put in place to ensure tree planting, nursery 
management, and seedling distribution incorporate 
training by consultants on invasive speci es recognition 
and management and that options for managing human -
wildlife conflicts are able should issues arise.  
Historically marginalized peoples:  
Rwanda is a nation with a single/common culture, 
tribe, language and with a national constitution that 
recognizes all Rwandans are born and remain equal 
in rights and freedom (article 16 of Rwandan 
Constitution, 2015).  That said, there are historically 
marginalized groups as well as categories c,d, e, 
groups in the areas of the project activities.  The risks 
are that the impacts of project activities on these 
groups are not adequately considered and analyzed 
and further that the intended benefits for these  groups 
do not materialize given a lack of attention to their 
particular needs and vulnerabilities. Should this occur, 
the overall intent of the project could be in jeopardy 
given the focus on making such communities more 
resilient in light of climate chan ge uncertainties.  As the project focuses on providing benefits, in particular 
increased resilience to climate change for vulnerable 
communities, the ESS will pay particular attention to the 
screening for activity level impacts on historically 
marginalized and categories c,d ,e. Thus far, 24 focus 
groups with 4 exclusively historically marginalized, 5 
exclusively women and 3 exclusively youth participants 
informed the project design and provided insights on 
impacts and improved ways of benefiting individuals in 
these groups (s ee Annex 6, section 4). A detailed plan 
for engaging with women, youth, those below the poverty 
line and landless groups will be prepared by project staff 
in collaboration with district, sector, and local ngo leaders 
in the project implementation phase as specific projects 
and locations are determined . In addition,  all interactions 
with these groups will include processes for obtaining 
consent as well as clarity regarding access to the 
grievance redress process should complaints arise 
during the project.  
 
Risk details and screening assessment to be conducted in Project implementation are described in the 
Partial Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (Annex 6). Positive project impacts include a focus on  improving resilience of the most vulnerable 
communities, communities stewarding/ harnessing the carbon cycle and reducing greenhouse gasses by 
sequestering carbon (i.e., through conserving indigenous trees, increasing soil organic carbon, and 
practicing r egenerative agriculture); and utilizing efficient cook stoves. The PMU/ESS will be responsible for 
conducting screenings, including screenings for project -level impacts on historically marginalized groups of 
each Project activity as specific locations and beneficiaries are determined and with implementing mitigation 
measures aligned with Rwanda National Laws and GCF policies and practices. These measures include a 
commitment to training in all relevant EE staff on stakeholder and community engagement; conse nt with 
local communities; access restrictions mitigations; SEAH and adhering to the labor and safety laws that meet 
international best practices. The full Stakeholder Engagement Plan can be found in Annex 7. The EE and 
the AE will develop a compliance mon itoring, supervision and reporting schedule that meets requirements 
in the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy. The AE will establish a


---
*Page 355*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 133 
  
 Program -level grievance redress mechanism that includes a process of public notificati on, documentation, 
investigation and resolution. This GRM will complement the MoE GRM.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan  
Women, youth and marginalized groups in the CND are key stakeholders in the Project and its primary 
beneficiaries. The Project will be implemented across various sectors along the CND, where natural forests 
are particularly vulnerable due to high populatio n, increasing dependence upon fuelwood, and illegal use of 
forests to improve income streams. The Gender Assessment uses a range of primary (24 focus groups and 
18 key informant interviews) and secondary (published reports, policies and academic literature ) sources to 
triangulate our understanding of gender in climate resilience and Project design. The Gender Analysis 
identified and analyzed gender risks and impacts of the program and climate change through four steps: 
scoping; legislative and policy review ; stakeholder consultation and analysis; and baseline analysis. The 
Action Plan operationalizes the findings from the Assessment, the ESIA, and youth -based information 
collected during the feasibility studies and stakeholder consultation.  Despite tremendo us policy and legal 
efforts, a patriarchal culture and persistent disparities characterize gender relations in Rwanda. Disparities 
persist in post -primary education; in access to and control of property, including land and economic 
resources; in employment  opportunities and entrepreneurship; in decision -making at household and 
community levels; in family responsibilities and unpaid care work; and in the experience of violence, 
harassment, conflict, and insecurity. Sexual and gender -based violence persists a t high levels. While women 
have made impressive political progress, especially at the national level, their local political representation 
and engagement remains unequal. Economic opportunities remain markedly gender -differentiated. In 
Rwanda and the CND, structural barriers to economic and political equity and female empowerment have 
significantly impeded measures to adapt to climate change impacts. While these structural inequalities are 
lower compared to other countries because of leading gender -consider ate policies across sectors, the point 
remains that women’s ability to access, use and control natural resources, infrastructure and services is 
different and low compared to men. This means the degradation of natural resources and new infrastructure 
will affect genders differently and result in greater vulnerability for women. However, women are vital change 
agents and can be powerful leaders from community to global levels in mitigating and adapting to climate 
change. Three key themes in the Gender and So cial Inclusion Action Plan include i) Change negative gender 
and social norms, ii) Provide access to skills building, leadership and programmatic inclusion, and iii) 
Facilitate women’s financial autonomy. Youth account for over 50% of Rwanda’s population. An analysis 
was done to determine how GCF funding could support activities to align with and strengthen the 
sustainability of the overall program by supporting youth through the following activity themes: i) Non land -
based opportunities, ii) Access to skil ls building, and iii) Youth leadership and Programmatic Inclusion. Social 
norms are difficult to change, and deeply entrenched biases will require active engagement by men, women, 
and youth, in decision -making roles as well as grassroots stakeholders. By w orking through the themes 
outlined above, social and technical barriers to participating in decision -making, planning, and activities will 
be addressed. Specific targets will be developed after a brief inception phase. Further details are in Annex 
8. 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement  
Funds from GCF will be provided to the MOE's GCF account  (as the AE), under the terms of the  FAA.  MoE 
will be responsible for financial management and accountable for the use of GCF resources. Financial 
transactions will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally certified auditors. In addition, as 
the AE, MoE will: i) ensure that the p roject is executed in accordance with GCF standards; ii) supervise,


---
*Page 356*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 134 
  
 oversee and manage the implementation of project interventions; iii) report on Project progress; and iv) 
ensure that Project activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries' nat ional priorities. MoE will 
provide oversight to the project consisting of a) entering into a subsidiary agreement with the EE (RFA); b) 
managing and disbursing GCF funds to the EE, after providing no objection to work plans and budgets; c) 
reviewing financ ial expenditures and progress reports; d) overseeing Project implementation in accordance 
with the Project document and Annual Work Plans and Budgets, agreements with co -financiers and each 
executing entity rules and procedures; e) providing technical guid ance to ensure that the appropriate 
technical quality is applied to all Project activities; f) providing financial reports to the GCF for Project funds 
received; g) ensuring that the project complies with the terms agreed in the Project’s respective FAA as  well 
as the AMA signed between MoE and the GCF; and h) undertaking regular annual supervision missions 
according to the MoE’s guidelines and convene  Project  Steering Committee (PSC) meeting twice a year  
aimed to review progress and approve  work plans.  The PMU will manage, monitor and report on day -to-day 
implementation of the EE. The EE will execute the tasks within the overall project management structure: a) 
implementing day -to-day activities as per the project work plan and budget, including the Env ironmental and 
Social Management Plan; b) undertaking procurement activities as per the agreement signed by GCF and 
AE as well as the sub -agreement signed by the AE and EE; c) managing contracts of suppliers and services 
providers; d) hiring and managing p roject staff relevant to the EE -managed project areas; e) implementing 
activities as per the project work plan; and f) carrying out financial and technical monitoring of activities, 
including the achievement of outputs and outcomes the EE are in charge of.  The EE will enter into a 
Memorandum of Understanding with different partner agencies that will provide technical know -how to the 
implementation of the project activities. Procured parties will be contracted in accordance with MoE rules 
and regulations of procuring goods and services. The financial management structure of the project is built 
on the Permanent Secretary of MoE, the Project Coordinator/ Chief of Party and the Finance Management 
Specialist at the PMU level who will oversee and monitor the proj ect finances with project directors and 
finance managers from the EE (RFA).  
The project will be executed by Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA), a Rwanda government entity affiliated to 
the Ministry of Environment with a semi -autonomous legal entity. RFA has t ransparent and accountable 
financial management systems in place, which are essential elements for the effective, accountable 
management of the project. RFA will follow the Government of Rwanda procedures for planning, budgeting, 
and accounting, which are outlined in the law n° 12/2013/ol of 12/09/2013 on state finances and property, 
and ministerial order n°001/16/10/tc of 26/01/2016 relating to financials; and supporting operational manuals 
issued by the Ministry of Finance.  
The MoE shall ascertain that t he EE has in place efficient internal control systems, review financial reports 
and proceed funds disbursements and will also periodically inspect the project for compliance as well as 
coordinate audits exercises for the EE. RFA will enter into agreements with MoE that outline general 
modalities of the funds management in line with GCF grant requirements and RFA’s policies. GCF funds will 
be transferred to an RFA designated bank account. Funds will be disbursed to the EE based on agreed 
annual work plans an d budgets, and its reporting will be on a quarterly basis. The project financial processes 
will rely on the EE’s charts of accounts, internal control systems, disbursement plans, budgeting, expenditure 
management and accounting, reporting, and assets manag ement as assessed by MoE. Procurement 
regulations embed the principles of fairness, transparency, accountability and the promotion of competitive 
economy and efficiency. The Project will be audited annually and commissioned by the Accredited Entity 
(MoE) t o produce certified financial statements and reports to ascertain that GCF funds are well managed. 
The project will maintain a regularly updated record of all assets and documents that will be retained for at 
least 5 years after the end of the project.


---
*Page 357*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 135 
  
 G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.


---
*Page 358*
---

H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 136 
  
  
(f) ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval    
☐ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☒ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)


---
*Page 359*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 360*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest 
and Landscape Restoration   
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Ministry of Environment  (MoE) of the Republic of Rwanda  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Three Provinces of Rwanda (Western, Southern, and 
Northern) in 10 Districts (Karongi, Musanze, Ngororero, 
Nyabihu, Nyamagabe, Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru, Rubavu, 
Rusizi, and Rutsiro).  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of di sclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans . 
Link to disclosure  English : 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76268&token=0d001d8f3dc586127656b6b8280
da983d72dda02   
 
Kinyarwanda*:  
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76248&token=a3f7cf9afd24f1eacdd08dc21dd9cd
9299ad1e25  
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans .  
Link to disclosure  English : 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76268&token=0d001d8f3dc586127656b6b8280
da983d72dd a02 
 
Kinyarwanda *: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76248&token=a3f7cf9afd24f1eacdd08dc21dd9cd
9299ad1e25


---
*Page 361*
---

Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”  
Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS ) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on 
accredited entity’s website   Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans . 
Link to disclosure  English : 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76268&token=0d001d8f3dc586127656b6b8280
da983d72dda02  
 
Kinyarwanda *: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76248&token=a3f7cf9afd24f1eacdd08dc2 1dd9cd
9299ad1e25  
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  A Historically Marginalized Peoples Plan , which serves as an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework , is contained as an 
Annex to the ESMF.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Place  To accommodate for those who may not have access to the 
Internet, a computer, or a reliable power source, the 
Ministry of Environment will be sharing the ESMF 
documents to the following districts:  
• Karongi district  (2.0526° S, 29.4128° E) , P.O Box: 23 
Kibuye , village: Kamuvunyi, Cell: Gacaca, district: 
KArongi  
• Musanze district  (1.5020° S, 29.6332° E), P.O Box: 03 
Musanze , village: Byimana, Cell: Ruhengeri, District: 
Musanze  
• Ngororero district  (1.8537° S, 29.6347° E) , P.O Box: 
103 Muhanga , village: Ngororero, Cell: Kazabe, 
district: Ngororero  
• Nyabihu district  (1.5911° S, 29.5220° E) , P.O Box: 
125 Musanze village: Mukamira Cell: Rubaya 
District: Nyabihu


---
*Page 362*
---

• Nyamagabe district  (2.4671° S, 29.5736° E) , P.O 
BOX: 36 Gikongoro , village: Nya rusange , Cell: 
Nyamugari , district: Nyamagabe  
• Nyamasheke  district ( -2.342014193676258, 
29.08901503907659) , P.O Box: 72 Nyamasheke , 
village:Gikuyu, Cell: Ninzi, district:Nyamasheke  
 
• Nyaruguru district  (2.6987° S, 29.5703° E) , P.O Box: 
215 Butare  village: Nyarusovu Cell: Mubuga, district: 
Nyaruguru  
• Rubavu district  (1.6736° S, 29.2886° E) , P.O Box:  173 
Gisenyi ; village: Ny aburanga , Cell: Nengo , district: 
Rubavu  
• Rusizi district  (2.4830° S, 28.9054° E) , P.O Box: 253 
Rusizi , village: Ntwali, Cell:Cyangugu, district: 
Rubavu  
• Rutsiro district  (1.9617° S, 29.3857° E)  P.O Box: 49 
Kibuye , village: Nduba, Cell: Congo -Nil district: 
Rutsiro  
 
and request them to have physical copies of ESS reports  in 
their local government offices , publish an Executive 
Summary of the ESMF on their notice board in both 
Kinyarwanda and English and publish it on their website to 
ensure it is accessed by all affected people in their location 
as well as to those who may have access to the Internet, a 
compute r. 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 23, 2023  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
 
* Subsequent to the disclosure of the ESS report to the Board and active observers on 22 September 2023, the 
following update has been made: the links to the Environmental & Social Management Framework (ESMF), 
in which the ESMF document -had been made available, have been updated for both English and 
Kinyarwanda. The footnote 86 has been removed.


---
*Page 363*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 144 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP 217 
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda  
Country/(ies):  Rwanda  
Project/programme size: Small  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
This Congo Nile Divide  project will 
safeguard Rwanda ’s biodiversity, enhance 
climate resilience, and support vulnerable 
communities.  The project should ensure linkage to other 
GCF funded projects in the country. In 
addition, we encourage MOE Rwanda to 
establish finan cial mechanisms to upscale 
across the wider landscape.  
The project is  located in  the Albertine Rift, 
which is one of the most biologically rich 
regions in Africa, containing more than half 
of Africa’s birds and 40% of its mammals.  The project should ensure monitoring and 
evaluation of the project interventions is 
undertaken.  
With more frequent extreme rainfall events 
in recent years, this agricultural landscape is 
recognized as the region of Rwanda most 
vulnerable to floods and landslides.  
Project interventions will include improved 
management  on 250,000 hectares (ha)  
(including promotion of natural 
regeneration/planting on 10,000 ha) and 
improved agroforestry practices on 2,000 ha 
of on -farm plantations . 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XXI titled “List of proposed conditions 
and recommendations” , respectively.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’ s assessment
2.1 Project ba ckground  
3. The proposed project’s goal is to improve the resilience of vulnerable communities to
climate variability and shocks by increasing the extent and integrity of natural forests and by
strengthening the capacity for climate -responsive forest and land scape management. The
project will:


---
*Page 364*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 145 
 
 
(a) Strengthen institutional and regulatory frameworks for low -emission climate -resilient 
development pathway s by mainstreaming climate change into integrated land -use 
planning.  
(b) Increase the climate resilience of vulnerable rural communities through forest and 
landscape restoration and reducing demand for fuelwood.  
4. The proposed interventions will target districts along the Congo Nile Divide  (CND)  
region. Rwanda’s CND, an area of 444,600 hectares  (ha) , is a high -elevation land scape of 
remnant natural forest reserves embedded in a mosaic of intensively managed smallholder 
farms and commercial plantations. The CND separates the drainage basins of the Congo and Nile 
Rivers. It is part of the Albertine Rift, which is one of the mos t biologically rich regions in Africa 
and “one of the most important regions for conservation” on the continent, containing more 
than half of Africa’s birds and 40  per cent of its mammals.   
5. Though covering barely 5  per cent of the country, this archipelag o of protected forests is 
of critical importance for:  
(a) Its globally recognized high biodiversity values ; 
(b) Its role in Rwanda’s acclaimed ecotourism offerings , serving as the primary source of 
Rwanda’s foreign revenue and as a major economic development drive r; 
(c) The ecosystem services provided for surrounding subsistence farmlands as well as 
commercial tea and coffee plantations offering employment opportunities for women 
while providing the  second and third  highest sources of foreign revenue ;  
(d) The regulation o f water capture and release to growing urban centr es on the CND 
periphery, the nation’s extensive river network, and downstream hydroelectric 
operations; and  
(e) The sequestration and storage of nearly 60  per cent of Rwanda’s national carbon stocks . 
6. These values and services are already compromised by a combination of anthropogenic 
and climatic factors; they will be much more severely threatened by the potential negative 
feedback loops associated with projected climate change impacts. The project will  promote an 
ecosystem -based approach to forest protection and restoration and will increase the extent and 
resilience of forest ecosystems and species, including by functionally linking currently isolated 
forest fragments. Through these approaches, the project will protect, restore and rehabilitate 
forest ecosystems,  thus  enhancing biodiversity and reducing key threats while increasing the 
provision of critical ecosystem services to strengthen  the adaptation of vulnerable communities.  
7. Project interventions will directly benefit 1,254,242 people (654,404 women). The 
project will also indirectly benefit 9,260,745 people and create approximately 24,212 job 
opportunities in forest -dependent communities. The total mitigation impact is estimated to be 
1,204,448  tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  (t CO 2 eq) by 2043.  
8. The total project financing is USD 50,000,000 with a request for GCF grants of USD 
39,056,422. The Rwanda Forestry Authority  (RFA) , Rwanda Water Board  (RWB) , Rwanda 
Development Board  (RDB)  and the Minis try of Environment  of Rwanda (MOE Rwanda)  will 
provide co -financing of USD 10,831,308 in grants. MOE  Rwanda  will also provide  an in-kind 
contribution of  USD  112,271. The project is submitted under environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category B.


---
*Page 365*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 146 
 
 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1: Mainstreaming climate adaptation into integrated land-use planning (total cost: 
USD 2.9 million; GCF cost: USD 2.9 million)   
9. This component aims to integrate climate change adaptation considerations into land -
use planning at the national and subnational levels. The goal is to achieve climate resilience 
through col labor ation among government agencies, civil society, the private sector and diverse 
partners. The component has two main outputs : The first is to deve lop a climate -resilient land -
use plan for the CND by integrating climate adaptation information into existing land -use 
planning efforts. The second aims to strengthen institutional capacities in Rwanda to integrate 
biodiversity and climate risks into land -use planning.  
Component 2: Forest and landscape management and restoration (total cost: USD 18.9 million; 
GCF cost: USD 16.3 million)   
10. In this component, targeted interventions will integrate climate change awareness and 
adaptation into national forest pa rk planning, policies  and management, as well as restore 
degraded areas within those parks. These efforts will help sustain the forests’ rich biodiversity, 
the lucrative tourism revenues that flow into local and national economies, and the ecosystem 
servic es needed for  the climate resilience of vulnerable communities. This suite of activities will 
also identify priority areas outside of parks – in remnant natural stands, around wetlands and 
along streams – for protection and restoration.  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods (total cost: USD 22.6 
million; GCF cost: USD 15.3 million)   
11. The activities under this component aim to combine environmental conservation with 
socioeconomic development, creating a multifaceted app roach that resonates with the global 
commitment to sustainable growth. They include initiatives such as enhancing and restoring 
forest plantations, providing sustainable fuel sources, delivering carbon sequestration benefits 
totalling 522,606 t  CO 2 eq over  20 years, and developing comprehensive land -use planning. The 
other activities focus on rural livelihoods, financial services and sustainable farming methods.  
12. The component will support reafforestation on steep slopes on both public and 
smallholder privat e lands. It will develop farm -based agroforestry for climate -resilient species 
that produce fuelwood and/or market products, while conserving and enriching soils. The 
component will complement land -based production with a scaling -up of alternative value -chain 
products for smallholders that are nature -positive, including , but not limited to , tourism -based 
income, beekeeping, and improved cooking stoves. Central to these activities will be the 
facilitation of access to market chains and financial mechanisms f or establishing and 
maintaining businesses. Given that these activities are designed at the core to be profitable and 
promote financial sustainability, it is intended that they be replicable and sustained once GCF 
funding expires.  
Project management (total  cost: USD 3.1 million; GCF cost: USD 2.7 million)  
13. The Project Management Unit (PMU) of the CND project will be established under MOE 
Rwanda /Single Project Implementation Unit ( SPIU ) to manage day -to-day operations of 
complex program me interventions. Heade d by the Project Coordinator, who will also serve as 
the secretary and rapporteur of the Project Steering Committee , the PMU will be responsible for 
tasks such as managing and monitoring identified risks and reporting new risks to the  
accredited entity  (AE) and the Project Steering Committee . The PMU will adhere to MOE 
Rwanda /Government of Rwanda  recruitment practices and provide quarterly progress reports. 
The Project Coordinator  will report  to the MOE Rwanda /SPIU  Coordinator as the immediate 
supervisor an d to the Permanent Secretary as the secondary supervisor.


---
*Page 366*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 147 
 
 
14. The PMU ’s structure will comprise various specialists , including for monitoring and 
evaluation, procurement, gender, financial management, communication and outreach, along 
with an office manager and driver. Its staff will be selected and recruited following M OE 
Rwanda /Government of Rwanda  procedures, aiming for a lean management structure. 
Operations will conclude once the final project evaluation report and other required documents 
have be en submitted to M OE Rwanda , signifying a comprehensive and organized approach to 
the management of the entire program me. 
15. The GCF portion of this project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GC F Policy on Fees.  
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                                                                 Scale: N/A  
16. The projec t has  1,254,24  direct beneficiaries,  representing  30.9 per cent of the CND 
population , and 9,260,745  indirect beneficiaries , representing almost 70  per cent of Rwanda’s 
population. Additional adaptation benefits will include the training of 45,992 community 
members in forest management and restoration for clim ate resilience. Altogether, t he project 
will contribute to the restoration of 5,000 ha of intact forest, 2,500 ha of protective forests , 
3,346 ha of smallholder farmland, 1 ,000 ha of pastures and 1,500 ha of riparian linkages. 
Overall, 275,617 ha of landsc ape could potentially be positively impacted by the project. 
Although the project is focused on priority landscapes covering 275,617 ha, it is likely that 
benefits due to increased adaptive capacity could feasibly extend across the full 700,000 ha 
CND. The  project will generate mitigation benefits by sequest ering  approximately 250,841  t CO 2 
eq during the five-year project period, which is about 0.9  per cent  of the 28. 2 million t CO 2 eq 
reduction target in Rwanda’s Vision 2050. The total mitigation impact fr om reduced 
deforestation,  the introduction of  forest restoration and adoption of improved cookstoves is 
estimated to be 1,204,448 t CO 2 eq by 2043.  
17. The project contributes to  the implementation of Rwanda’ s updated nationally 
determined contribution ( NDC ) (2020) commitments. It is also aligned with the country’ s Green 
Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy and other national policies. The proposal objectives are 
also well aligned with the country’ National Forest Policy and related plans for reversing trends  
of high deforestation.  
18. With support from the NDC Partnership, Rwanda now has a single NDC implementation 
framework that captures both national and subnational climate actions and investments plans 
and includes a strategic program me for climate resilience,  scaling up renewable energy 
program me, green climate fund strategic framework, public investment priorities , sector 
strategic plans and district development strategies. Therefore, the proposed project is well 
supported by this existing NDC implementation framework that provides an enabling 
environment that will ensure climate actions undertaken are integrated in to national planning.  
19. The proposed project further strengthens the country ’s national and subnational 
adaptation priorities, approaches and plans through promoting ecosystem -based adaptation 
while utilizing climate science, effective landscape planning, p olicies, cross -sectoral 
coordination and management in addressing climate risks and adaptation benefits.  
20. The project in general seeks outcomes at a range of levels (from national through to 
catchment  level ) across the public sector, while scaling  up lesso ns and initiatives from aligned 
programming. It will build the capacity of MOE Rwanda (AE) and other related agencies and 
stakeholders to coordinate and col labor ate more effectively to help accelerate  subnational and 
local climate action. It is envisaged t hat these funds will also crowd in additional private sector


---
*Page 367*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 148 
 
 
capital (e.g. cookstoves and forest plantations ) while enabling the g overnment to implement the 
adaptation interventions. However, without a clear private sector framework or plan, this might 
be challenging to implement. Nonetheless, Rwanda has a GCF country program me and strategic 
framework and has managed GCF funded projects and program mes. 
21. Furthermore, the project clearly articulates the alignment, additionality and/or 
complementarity with seve ral ongoing or planned program mes funded by significant 
international and multilateral agencies (e.g. World Bank, Global Environment Facility  and 
United Nations Development Programme , etc.), which reflects on the experience  and track 
record of MOE Rwanda  to deliver on this project  interventions.   
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                                     Scale: N/A  
22. By utilizing integrated landscape and ecosystem -based adaptation approaches in 
addressing climate change impacts in Rwanda , the project  offers myriad opportunities for 
upscaling and replication to similar ecological zones across the country. This approach to land -
use planning and management is entirely new for Rwanda and will restore and sustain varied 
ecosys tem services for both adjacent and nationwide populations. The project coordination and 
collabor ation efforts across both geographic and sectoral boundaries , while mainstreaming 
climate risks in management planning , represents a fundamental paradigm shift for land -use 
planning and management in Rwanda.  
23. The project has the potential to contribute  to the regulatory frameworks and policies for 
driving climate investments in the forest and renewable energy sectors. The project will finance 
the development of t he integrated land -use plan , which will be adopted by all ten CND districts 
as a framework for seeking synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity 
protections, reconciling land -use conflicts that arise, and guiding development decisions  and 
climate change adaptation. It will also update the National Land Use Master Plan  to ensure it 
incorporates climate resiliency and is accurate and relevant to local contexts. The adoption of an 
integrated land-use planning approach helps to better reco ncile cross -sectoral trade -off’s  and 
improve climate adaptation planning in the CND ; this approach will prove a successful model 
for application in other regions of Rwanda and other forest/farming landscapes beyond. In 
addition, revising two national park management plans to include climate concerns will serve as 
a model for the remaining parks of Rwanda, as well as for the East Africa region.  
24. Overall, the project ’s efforts in shifting policy, practice and col labor ative learning 
processes symbolize a fundam ental change towards climate -resilient development pathways in 
Rwanda, with implications for broader regional application.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                              Scale: N/A  
25. The project is closely aligned with several Sustainable Development Goals. Key 
environmental benefits include restoration of degraded lands to reduce erosion, sedimentation, 
and landslide risks; the planting of native trees to enhance biological connectivity; and 
mitigation of greenhouse gas  emissions through both increased carbon sequestration and fuel -
efficient cookstove technologies.  
26. Social benefits extend to more than a million people, focusing on increased awareness of 
climate change, empowerment of the rural poor (with an emphasis on wo men ’s participation), 
and creation of social capital through col labor ative adaptation strategies. The project aims to 
significantly reduce poverty and inequality . It will provide economic co -benefits such as 
increased agricultural productivity, employment opportunities for around 24,212 households, 
modern beekeeping practices yielding significant income, and a net present value (NPV) of USD 
369 million over 20 years from forest restoration and other activities. Private capital


---
*Page 368*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 149 
 
 
investment is also targeted,  thus fostering a “triple bottom line” that balances social, 
environmental and economic benefits. Emphasis on gender -sensitive impacts ensures that 
women are actively engaged in planning and decision -making, leading to increased income, 
improved health and n utrition, and strengthened leadership and entrepreneurship skills.  
27. Overall, the project offers a comprehensive and strategic approach to sustainable 
development, thereby promoting climate resilience, economic growth, social cohesion and 
gender equality wi thin the CND region.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                Scale: N/A  
28. The project proposal interventions were designed from key findings and 
recommendations of a climate change vulnerability assessment of the selected project 
geographical area ( see a nnex 2). Climate exposure, sensitivity, adaptive capacity, impacts and 
barriers as well the greenhouse gas emissions profile were established and either quantified or 
supported with reference to scientific publications. Further, climate change impacts on t he 
target sectors as well as size and economic and social development of the target population , 
including critical barriers to reduce their vulnerability , are e labor ated herein. The proposed 
interventions are targeted to match the identified barriers. The vulnerability of the target 
sectors is quantified to the extent possible, however , gender disaggregation is covered in 
qualitative terms only.  
29. The CND landscape districts support nearly one  third of Rwanda’s population on barely 
one fifth of its land base . The total population is 1,598,536, of which women account for 52.2  per 
cent . Through the project interventions, targeted vulnerable groups will attain more climate -
resilient livelihoods  from reduced exposure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and mor e 
knowledge on climate risks, the value of forests and forest ecosystems, climate adaptation 
options, access to  quality  indigenous and agroforestry materials , and improved ecosystem 
services.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                                      Scale: N/A  
30. MOE Rwanda,  which is the AE for this proposal , clearly played a pivotal role in defining 
and drafting the proposal stakeholder engagement report and plan ( see a nnex 7) as it is aligned 
with Rwanda ’s GCF country program me stakeholder engagement strategic framework. In its 
country program me, Rwanda arti culated how it will conduct stakeholder engagement at the 
readiness stage and in delivering GCF concepts, projects and program mes. This process has 
provided Rwanda with an overarching framework that supports its stakeholder engagement 
processes, which is c learly seen in this proposal . This framework  can support the strengthening 
of local climate action from national to local levels with clear feedback loops and avenues for 
incorporating learning.  
31. The proposal indicates that a detailed stakeholder and gende r analysis were conducted, 
augmented by extensive consultations of various actors from national, subnational and local 
levels. A range of stakeholders from the public and civil society were consulted , in addition to 
government agencies at all levels that w ill be engaged throughout the project cycle, cutting 
across all key sectors and scale. The general concern relates to  local ownership and the transfer 
of knowledge that can sustain interventions after the project closure. It w ould be  ideal if 
Indigenous kn owledge and technology transfer is well factored in to implementation.


---
*Page 369*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 150 
 
 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                        Scale:  N/A  
32. Utilizing grant financing reflects the public good character of the investments, the 
proj ect aims to create a model that overcomes barriers to private  sector investment in 
Rwanda ’s forestry s ector. With an economic internal rate of return of 43.32  per cent  and a 
financial internal rate of  return  of 42  per cent , the project is estimated to generate a n NPV  of 
more than US D 120.48 million over 20 years,  which  translat es to US D 64 per direct beneficiary. 
The mitigation cost is estimated to be US D 43.84 per t  CO 2 eq. Implementing best practices for 
tree planting and utilizing cuttin g-edge monitoring technologies, the project is aligned with 
similar initiatives and sets the stage for potential replication in other regions. Its community -
focused approach, including measures to develop economically viable units, contributes to a 
threefo ld increase in net economic benefits compared to a scenario without the project.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
33. Project background : The project aims to increase resilience of vulnerable rural 
communities in the Rwandan side of the CND by building capacity for integrated planning and 
management through forest and landscape restoration and reducing demand for fuelwood. The 
project will involve the formulation and implementation of plans (i.e. int egrated district land -
use plans and enhancements of general management plans of national parks), coordination with 
various agencies, capacity -building, and physical interventions on the ground. This includes 
afforestation/reforestation of protected forest and private landholdings, installation of soil 
conservation measures, ecological interventions such as fern removal in natural forest s and 
restoration of degraded forest s in Gishwati -Mukura National Park , production and distribution 
of fuel -efficient cooks toves, beekeeping activities , and support for the value chain s of these 
enterprises. Among the environmental and social  (E&S)  co-benefits are the enhancement of the 
unique, endemic biodiversity of the area through decreased sedimentation, improved water 
quality and recharge, reduced erosion, decrease in loss of soil organic matter as a result of forest 
restoration and establishment of connectivity between the forests across the CND landscape. 
The project is also expected to contribute to the empowerment of the women and youth in the 
target areas.  
34. E&S risk category and safeguards instrument : The overall project E&S  risk category  is 
Category B (moderate). The Secretariat confirms the proposed E&S risk category since the 
project is, in itself, an environmental and social enhancement project. The potential adverse E&S 
risks and impacts will mainly come from the implementation of ground activities , are expected 
to be mostly minimal  and highly localized  and can be avoided/mitigated through careful design 
and the ap plication of generally accepted mitigation measures and standards. The Secretariat 
conforms to the assigned risk category and it is within the accreditation level of the AE. A partial 
environmental and social impact assessment and environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) have been prepared for the project.  
35. Compliance with the GCF ESS standards : The paragraphs below provide a brief 
description of the programme’s compliance with ESS standards.  
36. ESS 1 (Assessment and managem ent of environmental and social risks and 
impacts) : The ESMF discussed the baseline socioeconomic conditions of the project area. It has 
also provided a general assessment of the risks and impacts of the project. The assessment 
included an indication of th e positive and negative components of the activities and 
subactivities, the consequence of the impact, the probability that the impact will occur, the 
duration for which the impacts are expected to occur, and the overall significance of the impact.


---
*Page 370*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 151 
 
 
Neverth eless, given that much of the project activities cannot yet be fully specified in terms of 
location, ownership, design and approach and will only be identified and fully specified through 
consultations and coordination with various stakeholders during proj ect implementation, the 
ESMF provided the basis for identifying the risks and impacts of the subprojects and defining 
the processes and procedures to be applied in assessing and managing the risks and impacts of 
individual project activities during impleme ntation. The major anticipated negative impacts of 
the proposed activities and subactivities include , but are not limited to: disproportionate 
distribution of project benefits, potential for gender -based violence  (GBV) , risks related to 
labo ur and working conditions, community health and safety, potential for introduction of 
invasive species and pests on planted seedlings, water use at nurseries diverting from other 
uses, use of pesticides and fertilizers in seedling production, destabilization and erosion during 
construction/reconstruction of terraces, land classification that impact access and introduce 
restrictions, increased exposure to disease/vector -borne illnesses, potential for negative 
human -wildlife interactions, and environmental risks related to the supply chain. Among the 
mitigating measures include a commitment to stakeholder engagement, a process of consent, 
training on sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment ( SEAH ), establishing a grievance redress 
mechanism  (GRM) , adhering to the labo ur and  safety laws and international good practices, 
providing training on invasive species management, providing oversight in the supply chain, 
and adopt ion of  practices to reduce the use of chemicals and production of wastes.  
37. ESS 2 (Labo ur and working conditio ns): The project will likely require the hiring of 
professionals, service personnel and assistants , and activities on the ground such as terracing, 
removal of ferns and reforestation/afforestation activities will require  the hiring of field 
workers and labourers. Risks associated with these activities include , but are not limited to , the 
potential for SEAH in the hiring process or at work, forced labour , child labour , and exposure to 
occupational health and safety hazards. Workers may be exposed to hazardous working 
environments such as steep slopes, disease vectors in standing waters, safety hazards in the 
fabrication/production of stoves, and exposure to bee stings in honey production, among other  
things . The project will ensure proper labour  and working conditions are provided to workers 
(e.g. in forest camps) , and trainings on labour  and occupational health and safety standards will 
be undertaken. A Code of Conduct  as regards worker safety and security will also be reflected in 
contract documents. Moreover, the project will not support activities that include the use of 
forced labour , human trafficking and child labour. During implementation, risks and potential 
imp acts related to labour  and working conditions will be further assessed and managed through 
the development of a labour and working conditions risk management plan,  including ensuring 
that workers have access to a GRM . 
38. ESS 3 (Resource efficiency and polluti on control) : The nature of the proposed 
interventions does not entail  the use of substantial amounts of fuel, water, electricity  or raw 
materials, except for the operation of nurseries (for its water requirement) and the production 
and distribution of cook stoves (for raw materials and electricity). The project will however 
promote the increased use of energy -efficient cooking stoves to lessen the impact on forest 
resources for fuel. During implementation, further review on resource efficiency and pollution 
control risks will be undertaken to assess and manage issues as regards water use and water 
availability, use of pesticides and fertilizers, potential for soil loss, soil erosion and slope 
destabilization, and use of raw materials and waste generation in t he cook stove 
fabrication/production and distribution. The project will also ensure raw materials are from 
sustainable sources and will establish measures to minimize production waste and maximize 
distribution efficiency of stoves. Appropriate management m easures will be developed upon 
screening and assessment of these risks.  
39. ESS 4 (Community health, safety and security) : The project activities could have 
community health, safety and security issues , which include potential for increased exposure to 
vector -borne diseases should ecological balance be altered or stagnant water develop  as a result 
of the reforestation/afforestation and fern removal activities in the area (which may increase


---
*Page 371*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 152 
 
 
the population of certain disease vectors and insect pests). Some of t he mitigating measures 
include proper drainage design of terraces. There could also be possibility for human –wildlife 
conflict in areas where fruit trees are planted , which may inadvertently increase physical 
interactions with wildlife that could result in  crop loss or physical injury both to humans and 
wildlife. The risk related to the presence of migrant labour  is considered low given that the 
project will hire residents from surrounding communities. Nevertheless, the activities will be 
assessed more clos ely with regard to  such risks , with measures to be discussed and determined 
in consultation with the communities during implementation.  
40. ESS 5 (Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement) : The project does not include 
any activities that will require resettlement or involuntary taking of land. However, project 
activities could facilitate a potential loss of access to lands given that the 
afforestation/reforestation activities could result in stricter enforcement of land use and park 
laws in changes to  rules of access or land classification. To address this, the project will not 
establish protective forests on lands used for food production. On -farm afforestation will not 
involve the acquisit ion of lands, land rights or land -use rights through expropriation or other 
compulsory procedures and will comply with the country’s legal system. Communities will be 
engaged in an inclusive and participatory manner and will be part of the planning and 
afforestation processes , and agreements on land rights and responsibilities will be developed 
with them. An access restrictions mitigation process framework is developed and will be 
implemented as required.  
41. ESS 6 (Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources) : The project intends to enhance the region’s ecosystem to reduce the vulnerability 
of communities to climate change impacts. For instance, the proposed interventions on 
protected forests will be restoration (e.g. restor ation of the 500 h a of degraded forest in GMNP, 
and the fern removal covering 4,500 h a of Nyungwe National Park , while the proposed 
interventions in the Stepping Stones and Landscapes Linkages (located outside of the parks) 
will be composed of  the protecti on of isolated forest patches and afforestation on steep slopes 
and riparian areas supplemented with agroforestry activities to enhance ecosystem services. 
Nevertheless, care should be exercised in implementing these activities to ensure that negative 
impa cts such as potential for the introduction of alien or invasive species, pests and pathogens 
from poorly managed nurseries are adequately addressed. During project implementation, 
consultations with communities and stakeholders will aid in determining the selection of 
appropriate species suitable to the locality . 
42. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7 (Indigenous Peoples ): The AE recogni zes 
that while there are historically marginalized groups as well as "Categories C, D and  E, groups " 
that may meet the GCF criteria for Indigenous Peoples that could potentially be included in the 
project area, the screening so far has indicated that Indigenous Peoples have not be en found in 
the project area.  Given that specific sites will be selected fo r project activities during project 
implementation, each subproject will be subject to more in -depth screening for impacts to 
historically marginalized peoples, with particular attention to the GCF criteria of Indigenous 
Peoples, during project implementat ion. The AE will conduct a screening for subprojects as 
outlined in the “Screening for Presence of and Risks to Historically Marginalized Groups” to 
evaluate the characteristics of historically marginalized and Categories C, D and  E people. 
Should the scre ening process identify Indigenous Peoples , then the subactivity will require a 
historically marginalized peoples plan. The AE also recognizes  that there are potential barriers 
to integrating historically marginalized peoples into the project.  Nevertheless,  there is interest 
in working with historically marginalized groups  to identify how traditional livelihoods like 
beekeeping can be adapted and promoted  and how negative impacts on these livelihoods will be 
mitigated.  The AE has included in the project the hiring of an ESS specialist and community 
engagement specialist to minimize risks as well including a commitment to stakeholder 
engagement, free, prior and informed consent and the setting up of a project -level  GRM . In line 
with its roles and functions, the GCF Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group  (IPAG)  is available to


---
*Page 372*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 153 
 
 
provide advice to the AE , which  is also encouraged to share emerging good practices and 
success stories with  IPAG . 
43. ESS 8 (Cultural Heritage) : The physical interventions (i.e. afforestation, reforestation 
and terracing, etc.) will be undertaken in mountainous areas where there are few human 
settlements. The preliminary screening of target areas also indicated that it is not expected that 
the pro ject activities will disturb any cultural heritage sites. Nevertheless, the project has 
developed a chance find procedure to cover chance encounters of artefacts during project 
implementation.  
44. Institutional implementation arrangements : As the AE, M OE Rwan da will oversee 
and monitor the management and implementation of the project. The Wildlife Conservation 
Society (WCS)  and RFA  will serve as EEs for the project through a project cooperation 
agreement. All work will be coordinated by the PMU and supported b y other relevant 
government agencies , including the National Land Authority and the RWB within M OE Rwanda . 
The PMU will have oversight o f the day -to-day operations of the project , including monitoring 
and evaluation. It will engage specialists (e.g. Enviro nmental and Social Safeguards Specialist, 
Invasive Species Specialist, Community Engagement Specialist, Behavio ur Change Specialist, 
Gender Specialist, etc.) that will screen for the potential environmental and social risks and 
impacts and develop manageme nt measures for proposed activities. The PMU will also be 
responsible for coordination on trainings for all project EEs. As regards safety, a Labour  and 
Safety Coordinator will also oversee working conditions in the field. The project will also engage 
Comm unity Engagement Specialists and Labour  and Safety Officers.  
45. Stakeholder  engagement and GRM : The project benefited substantively from an 
extensive stakeholder consultation process, which started during the project conceptualization. 
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has also been prepared to engage the stakeholders throughout 
project implementation. The project will have a project -level GRM , which is described in the 
ESMF. The GRM is independent of governmental judicial procedures. The project also allows 
access to the GCF independent redress mechanism.  In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples 
Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples ’ focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, 
including before a claim has been made.  
46. Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment safeguarding : The SEAH 
safeguarding approach proposed by the AE is consi dered by the Secretariat  to be  in compliance 
with the SEAH provisions pursuant to the revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The 
project identifies that all project components may exacerbate the existing power differentials 
and expose the project ben eficiaries to potential SEAH risk. The AE will take a number of 
mitigation measures to prevent and manage SEAH, including ensur ing that all staff are trained 
on survivor -centred approaches to address SEAH, and that the Human Resources and 
Administration Of ficer and the ESS Specialist of the project will work together to develop a 
Security and Risk Management Plan to prevent SEAH incidences. The project’s Gender Specialist 
and Community Engagement Specialist will develop training on SEAH prevention, GBV 
prog ramming and survivor -centred approach. The project will also safeguard against SEAH 
through a Code of Conduct that explicitly indicates zero  tolerance for GBV . This  Code of Conduct 
will be shared with all personnel and used for training all employees. In addition to  the 
prevalence of GBV in the target countr y, the project also recognizes that the influx of funds and 
activities , combined with power dynamics , may disproportionately affect women, youth, 
historically marginalized people, and others in the poverty categories  of Rwanda . As the specific 
locations and beneficiaries will be determined during full implementation, each subproject will 
be screened to av oid any subproject that may aggravate risks of GBV and SEAH. The project will 
respond to SEAH incidents through GRMs at  the AE, EE, and project levels . Training  will be 
organized  for all project staff, implementing partners, key service providers and other  partner 
organizations to identify and regularly assess SEAH risks along the project cycle  as well as


---
*Page 373*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 154 
 
 
ensure that  both  the AE and all the EEs respond to SEAH incidents with  survivor -centred and 
gender responsive approaches.  
4.2 Gender policy  
47. The AE has provide d a gender assessment and action plan therefore complies with the 
requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
48. The gender assessment provided demonstrates the commitment of Rwanda to 
advancing gender equality and women’s empowerment. The assessment shows that Rw anda 
has a strong political commitment to promoting gender equality, reflected in its policy and legal 
framework and various sectoral strategies. It is the first country to have a majority female 
Parliament , with 61  per cent  of these positions being held b y women , and has established 
through its constitution a minimum of 30  per cent  female representation in public governance. 
The country has also made international commitments such as ratifying and implementing the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms  of Discrimination against Women , the Beijing 
Platform for Action and the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa. An institutional 
framework for coordinating and ensuring oversight of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment is in place , which mai nly rests with the Ministry of Gender and Family 
Promotion. The Ministry is mandated to coordinate the implementation of the national gender 
policy and advocacy on gender issues, a gender monitoring office and the National Women’s 
Council. All ministries a nd public institutions have gender focal points. However, there is 
divergence between the frameworks in place and implementation on the ground due to 
challenges such as lack of financial resources and technical capacity within the various 
ministries as wel l as existing norms and practices that run contrary to equality principles and 
practices.  
49. The gender assessment was conducted through desk review and stakeholder 
consultation. Additional stakeholder consultation will be conducted at national, district and  
project site level in order to further adapt project activities to  the local context. The assessment 
indicates that women and men have different roles and responsibilities within society and 
households. These roles rigidly set women as caregivers and home makers, while men are 
considered breadwinners engaging in income -generating activities, wage employment and 
decision -mak ing. Women own less land, have less access to extension services and financial 
support (loans) , and are less educated and able to  gain  experience in handling money. Women 
rely more on informal sources of loans as they do not usually have collateral to put up to access 
loans from financial institutions. Women engage and represent 66  per cent of the agricultur al 
workforce ; however , they  occu py 19.7 of the paid jobs. Women’s role s in afforestation and 
agroforestry is also curtailed by their lack of ownership and or land rights. Lack of land rights 
hinders the financial benefits women can get from resources on land such as trees. Women 
mostly u se trees that provide little commercial value ; rather they  are focused on fulfilling their 
household needs through fuelwood, fodder, bean poles and fruits. Discussion with women had 
indicated that women observed shortage s of fuelwood, fodder  and wood suitable to their bean 
poles , and also that there is declining soil fertility and crop yields. Fuelwood also is the main 
source for cooking , which has health hazards for women , and gaining access to cleaner, 
improved cook  stoves is a challenge. M en usually decide not to spend money to purchase the 
improved cook  stoves that can directly address the multiple challenges faced by women. 
Female -headed households are identified as much more vulnerable to climate change impact s 
compared to male -headed ho useholds owing to the prevalent gender inequality. Engagement in 
alternative source of incomes for women poses its own challenge s to women, one of which is 
affordability of required inputs, and this is particularly so for the beekeeping sector. The 
interes t of the government is this area is also high, and investments have taken place , but only 
23 per cent  of women engaged in the sector.


---
*Page 374*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 155 
 
 
50. The action plan includes activities that will address the challenges identified through the 
gender assessment. Activities  contain corresponding indicators, targets, gender expertise and 
budget while also including timelines for each of the actions. The project will direct investments 
to the areas of equal access to resources (e.g . land), services (finance), capacity developm ent, 
decision -making and also the participation of women in management, as beneficiaries /partners 
and as critical stakeholders in processes. Project intervention s will respond  to and address the 
growing pressure on natural resources , thus  ensuring that the resilience and adaptive capacities 
of communities , including that of women and disadvantaged people , are built. The gender action 
plan  is focused on  ensuring  (1) climate adaptation program mes and land-use planning address 
the priorities of women and youth ; (2) women , youth and marginalized households have 
increased capacity to effectively engage in and benefit from forest management and forest 
restoration ; (3) women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage 
in green jobs and livel ihood activities ; and (4) monitoring and evaluation effectively measures 
how women, youth and marginalized people  are benefiting to enable  the adaptive management 
of the project. A capacity -building component that focus es on strengthening cooperatives and 
village savings and loans institutions through gender mainstreaming across decision -making, 
membership , and products and services is included to ensure women  are able to benefit  from  
and engage in all aspects of the proje ct. Private landowners who will be willing to engage in land 
afforestation activities will create private forest management units , which will then be assisted 
in form ing and register ing cooperatives that are  at least 50  per cent  women. Further , the 
selecti on of tree species will take into consideration women’s us age and priorities. Women will 
be engaged and supported through knowledge acquisition, trainings , and skills development 
processes  so that they  benefit from the project implementation, particularly focusing on critical 
challenges such as rights to land  and access to decision -making positions. Further, the challenge 
of rights to land  will be addressed through advocacy work with men and local judiciary systems. 
This will be complemented by activities t hat will advocate for women’s land rights and access to 
redress mechanisms. The project will engage community leaders  and women and men 
community influencers to further promote equal and fair control of resources to mitigate the 
risk of men taking control  over  incomes earned by women.  
51. There are three recommendations to  the AE. The first recommendation is that the AE 
needs to ensure that gender issues are mainstreamed across all components of the project ; this 
is lacking for component 3 (output 3.1 of the gender action plan) , which presents many 
important opportunities to address gender issues. Secondly, the AE needs to refine and clearly 
show what outcomes it intends to achieve as a result of the interventions . Activity 3.1.1 in the 
funding proposal  states the following regarding the composition of administrative committees: 
"Note that gender consideration is mandatory (at least 30% women) ". It is not clear  if 30  per 
cent  refers to “women in decision -making bodies” or “membership of women in cooperatives”, 
or both. These results are different in nature and should be captured independently. The AE 
should provide clarification in this regard . Thirdly, as part of its expressed commitment to do so, 
the AE should consistently  collect  data  and report in a sex -disaggregated manner  on the gender 
action plan . 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( low risk )  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk)  
52. We acknowledge th e important role of the Government of R wanda via MOE Rwanda  as 
the AE  (direct access) . The AE demonstrate d its comparative advantage and capability in


---
*Page 375*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 156 
 
 
relation to this project with references to its track record  in executing projects  of comparable 
size or above (including FP073  and FP167 with GCF) and existing affiliation with the EE,  RFA . 
53. The AE provide d adequate assurance that RFA  has the necessary capa city to undertake 
the role as EE.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific execution risks (Medium risk)  
54. Co-financing: We acknowledge the sizable amount of co -financing totalling USD 
10,493,579 (grants and in -kind) for a co -financing ratio of 1:0.27. If co-financing does not 
materialize then this may impede project imple mentation . The AE identified this risk , and the 
covenants in the term sheet are adequate mitigation measures – noting  that  the term sheet for 
the proposed project has not yet been agreed.  
55. Project viability (and concessionality) : The use of grants  (and 100  per cent  
concessiona lity) is justified given the country context , the beneficiaries in Rwanda’s CND , and 
the fact that  the proposed activities are  public goods in nature , including creating enabling 
opportunities for market development beyond the project to cataly se private investments  (see 
component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods) .  
56. Capacity -building activities and technology development/transfer  (i) represent 45 per 
cent  of total GCF funding requested ; (ii) may not result in realizing expected results in case 
issues arise during implementation ; and (iii) are embedded in the project ’s design and thus 
crucial to achieving intended  objectives and outcomes . On the other hand , we note that 
identification of risks and the mitigation measures proposed by the AE are adequate.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk (medium  risk )   
57. MOE Rwanda, in its capacity as AE, confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment of 
money laundering and terrorist financ ing (ML/TF) in relation to project implementation. The 
probability of occurrence was assessed as ‘low’, and the impact severity in the event of 
occurrence was assessed as ‘medium’.  
58. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that co -financiers have been identified based on their  existing 
mandates and activities implemented in the  CND region. Co -financiers ’ commitments will serve 
as a basis of M OE Rwanda  engagement during the project implementation. During 
implementation, annual work plans  for the project  will be adjusted in col laboration with the EE, 
and all co -financiers are to align with all activities. M OE Rwanda , per its oversight role, will 
ensure that all of these stakeholders commit during planning to their co -financing and report  
this in the a nnual performance reports submitted to GCF.  
59. MOE Rwanda  indicated that the Governme nt of Rwanda currently has robust measures 
to fight ML/TF risks (e.g. law N° 001/FIC/2022 on regulations relating to anti -money 
laundering and counter ing the financing  terrorism). The Governmen t of Rwanda has also put in 
place a special agency for this purpose, the Financial Intelligence Center (FIC),  which has  a clear 
mission to promote financial system integrity by conducting effective financial intelligence to 
counter ML/TF and related financ ial crimes in governmental institutions, projects and 
parastatal agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. 
Both M OE Rwanda  and this project under its supervision will also comply with FIC regulations.  
60. MOE Rwanda c onfirmed that it has an internal audit function as well as regular audit s 
conducted by the Office of the Auditor General to ensure  the efficiency and effectiveness of 
internal controls , which includes handling ML/TF risks. In addition,  MOE Rwanda uses 
segrega tion of duties within financial management process es.


---
*Page 376*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 157 
 
 
61. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment of prohibited practices 
in relation to project implementation. The probability of occurrence was assessed as  Low , and 
the impact severity i n the event of occurrence was assessed as Medium.  
62. MOE Rwanda indicated  that to ensure materials or technology procured under the 
project are used only for the purposes intended and not diverted or misused for unauthorized, 
improper or illicit purposes, a c omprehensive set of controls will be used. This includes explicit 
terms and conditions in all procurement contracts or agreements that clearly  (i) state the 
intended purpose of the materials or technology being provided and explicitly prohibit any 
unauthor ized use or diversion ; and (ii)  define the individuals that are authorized to access and 
use the procured materials or technology. Furthermore, this will involve the implementation of 
strong authentication and access controls to ensure that only approved u sers have access . This 
refers to the record of any materials or technology procured under projects within  an assets 
register. The records include assets identification, the person using the material  and the 
location.  
63. Monitoring and auditing the usage of th e procured materials or technology will be 
undertaken to detect any anomalies or potential misuse, including periodic  site visits. Training 
sessions will also be conducted to educate all stakeholders involved in the project about the 
importance of adhering  to the intended use of the materials or technology and the consequences 
of misuse. For technologies that involve data transmission or storage,  MOE Rwanda  will ensure 
that appropriate encryption and data protection measures are in place to safeguard sensit ive 
information.  
64. MOE Rwanda confirmed that no projects will be undertaken in any jurisdiction or 
territory that is subject to or affected by sanctions or restrictive measures per the United 
Nations Security Council (UNSC) r esolutions. Additionally, no individual or entity that is lis ted 
on any UNSC sanctions list, including the U nited Nations  Consolidated Sanctions list , will be 
involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer 
or beneficiary.  
65. MOE Rwanda  acknowledged that there are United Nations  sanctions in the neighbouring 
country of the Democratic Republic of  the Congo, close to the CND. According to  MOE Rwanda,  
the U nited Nations  Consolidated Sanctions List indicates approximately 20 individuals with  ties 
to Rwanda, a small percentage of whom may live in Rwanda. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that the 
United Nations  Consolidated Sanctions List has been circulated internally and will be cross 
checked when hiring for the project and once project sites are selecte d to ensure these 
individuals will not be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a 
counterparty, implementer  or beneficiary.  
66. MOE Rwanda  indicated  that the project involves many actors for successful 
implementation , including m inistries, government agencies, non -government al organizations, 
subgrantees, vendors, service providers, community members and beneficiaries. MOE Rwanda 
confirmed that there is specifically an intention to distribute or disburse to beneficiaries , both 
dire ctly and indirectly , commodities and other items of value such as (i) the distribution of 
seedlings for trees that will produce fruits or contribute to enhancing biodiversity of farming 
systems ; (ii)  access to improved cook stoves ; as well as  (iii) the option for the distribution of 
bees to start honey operations. MOE  Rwanda  acknowledged that, as with any project infusing 
large sums of money directly or indirectly with multiple actors, corruption could occur.  
67. MOE  Rwanda  indicated that the distributions will  be coordinated through procured 
contractors. The contractors are hired based on the  Government of Rwanda /MOE Rwanda  
procurement policies , which are aligned with GCF policies and include due diligence in the 
hiring and contracting process. As for direct co mmunity contracting, the intended beneficiaries 
are screened and certified by local authorities in the area of project interventions, which 
mitigates the risk of prohibited practices.


---
*Page 377*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 158 
 
 
68. MOE Rwanda confirmed that  for report ing and remedy ing any risks that may occur, 
MOE Rwanda will maintain a project -level GRM t hrough which anyone can report the 
occurrence of prohibited activities. All complaints will be investigated accordingly. Any 
complaints believed to contribute to prohibited activities  will be referred to the appropriate 
authorities in Rwanda.  
69. MOE Rwanda indicated that all staff will be made aware of the prohibited activities, and 
all subcontractors/counterparties will be screened for current and past engagement in such  
activities and made aware of their obligations to alert the PMU and/or submit grievances 
related to such activities occurring as part of the project.  
70. Compliance risk rating : The Secretariat has conducted a review of the project in 
accordance with relevant GCF Board -appro ved policies and does not find any material issue or 
deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding 
proposal, the Secretariat has determined a compliance risk rating of ‘ Medium ’ and has no 
objection to this pro posal proceeding.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk )   
71. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
72. It is recommended that the B oard consider the above factors in its decision.   
Summary risk assessment  
Overall programme  Low  
Accredited entity/executing entity capability  Low  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
73. MOE Rwanda is the AE for the project and will provide oversight to the project 
consisting of , inter alia : (a) entering into a subsidiary agreement with the EE (RF A); (b) 
managing and disbursing GCF funds to the EE; (c) reviewing financial expenditures and 
progress reports; (d) overseeing project implementation following the project document and 
annual work plans and budgets, agreements with co -financiers and each EE’s  rules and 
procedures; and (e) providing technical guidance to ensure that the appropriate technical 
quality is applied to all project activities.  
74. RFA will serve as the EE for the project through a subsidiary agreement signed with  
MOE Rwanda . RFA will execute the tasks within the overall project management structure  as 
follows : (a) implementing  day-to-day activities as per the project work plan and budget, 
including the environmental and social management plan; (b) undertaking procurement 
activities as per the signed agreements; and (c) managing contracts of suppliers and service 
providers. The EE will enter into a memorandum of understanding  (MOU)  with different 
partner agencies, including WCS and the Catholic Or ganisation for Relief and Development,  
which will provide technical assistance services to implement the project activities. Procured 
parties will be contracted following  MOE Rwanda rules and regulations for procuring goods and 
services. The PMU will manag e, monitor and report on the day -to-day implementation  progress  
of the EE.


---
*Page 378*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 159 
 
 
75. As one of the project implementation partners, WCS will provide technical assistance to 
RFA through an MOU signed with RFA. The MOU will detail all the activities that WCS will 
dire ctly support during this project ’s implementation. The technical assistance  services will 
include advising RFA/SPIU, procuring and supervising international experts and consultants, 
and procuring materials to support the execution activities. Relevant tech nical experts from 
WCS will be embedded within RFA to advise SPIU on day -to-day project management. At the 
same time, the Catholic Organisation for Relief and Development will provide technical 
assistance to RFA through an MOU.  
76. The co-financiers (RDB, RFA, RWB and  MOE Rwanda ) will execute and manage the 
implementation of their activities.  
77. MOE Rwanda  shall ascertain that the EE has efficient internal control systems in place, 
review financial reports and proceed with funds disbursemen ts. It will also periodically inspect 
the project for compliance and coordinate audit exercises for the EE. RFA will enter into 
agreements with MOE Rwanda  that outline general modalities of the management of funds in 
line with GCF grant requirements and RF A’s policies.  
78. GCF funds will be transferred to an RFA -designated bank account. Based on agreed 
annual work plans and budgets, the funds will be disbursed to the EE, and its reporting will be 
quarterly. The project ’s financial processes will rely on the EE ’s charts of accounts, internal 
control systems, disbursement plans, budgeting, expenditure management and accounting, 
reporting, and assets management as assessed by MOE Rwanda . 
79. The project will be audited annually and commissioned by MOE Rwanda  to produce  
certified financial statements and reports to ascertain that GCF funds are well managed. The 
project will maintain a regularly updated record of all assets and documents that will be 
retained for at least five years after the end of the project.  
4.5 Results m onitoring and reporting.  
80. The Secretariat has provided various rounds of feedback on results monitoring and 
reporting, which have been generally addressed by the AE. This includes  a review of beneficiary 
numbers, revisions to the logical framework, mapping of project outcomes to GCF result s areas , 
and timelines and resourcing for the mid -term and final evaluations . However, there are some 
issues related to beneficiary calculation that are pending as of the final review . These should be 
appropriately addressed a s the project is mobili zed as follows :  
(a) It w ould  be helpful to provide gender disaggregation for beneficiary numbers wherever 
possible. This is currently done in section E (log ical frame work ), but not in section A6 
and annex 23;  
(b) In section E  (log ical frame work ), the AE should  also provide a brief description of how 
beneficiary numbers against GCF result s areas have been calculated.  These detail s are 
currently missing, and w hile we have mid -term and final targets for various indicat ors 
related to beneficiary count, we do not  have information to understand how these have 
been calculated, and how  potential double -counting will be avoided. If space is limited  in 
section E, the AE may consider including this information in a clearly marked section in 
annex 23 related to beneficiary count.


---
*Page 379*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 160 
 
 
4.6 Legal assessment  
81. The original Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 
23 June 2016, and it became eff ective on 1 August 2017, which agreement was amended and 
restated pursuant to the first amendment and restatement dated as of May 14, 2019, which 
became effective on even date. The Accredited Entity’s first term of accreditation lapsed on 31 
July 2022. The  Accredited Entity was reaccredited by the Board pursuant to Decision B.34/17. 
The second amendment and restatement agreement amending and restating the accreditation 
master agreement was signed on 22 November 2022, and the second amended and restated 
accr editation master agreement (the “AMA”) became effective on 26 January 2023.  
82. The Accredited Entity has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
83. The proposed  project will be implemented in the Republic of Rwanda. The GCF has 
signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with the Government of the Republic 
of Rwanda. It was signed on 8 November 2022 and became effective on 25 May 2023.   
4.7 List of pro posed conditions (including legal)  
84. To address matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by the 
Board is made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 380*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 161 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP217  
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda  
Country:  Rwanda  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1. This funding proposal for a small -sized project in environmental and social safeguards  
(ESS)  category B is submitted by the Government of Rwanda  as a cross -cutting project 
contributing to both adaptation ( 92 per cent) and mitigation ( 8 per cent) results areas. The 
Ministry of Environment  of Rwanda (MOE Rwanda)  (a GCF d irect access entity)  is the 
accredited entity  (AE)  for the proposed project, and the executing entit y (EE) is the Rwanda 
Forestry Agency , with several  implementing partners , including other government agencies and 
the Wildlife  Conservation  Society (WCS ) in Rwanda.  The total co st of the funding proposal is 
USD 50 million,  of which USD 39 million is GCF finance and USD 1 1 million is co -finance from 
the Government of Rwanda . 
2. The project’s goal is to apply a landscape approach to reduce the exposure of 
populations in Rwanda’s Congo  Nile Divide (CND) landscape to the impacts of unfavourable 
climatic trends and hazards intensified by climate change, including flood s, landslide s, soil 
erosion and wildfires.  This is to be achieved  through integrated land -use planning and 
management that allows for protecting, restoring and managing a matrix of interconnected 
ecosystems , including pristine forest in protected area nodes, important landscape linkages, 
pockets of forest in stepping  stones , and agro -ecosystems in farmlands . Interventions in various 
spatially defined target areas include  forest protection and fire management , assisted natural 
regeneration,  afforestation of steep slopes , and support to silvopastoralism and agroforestry 
and its value chains.  
3. The project has three planned outcomes  (see the table below ), with outputs under each 
outcome as well as the parties responsible for executing them ( see t able 5 in the funding 
proposal ). 
Project outcomes and outputs  Executing entity 
per output  Technical 
implementation 
partners  
Outcome 1 : Landscape planning, policies and management are effective and coordinated across 
sectors and scales to address climate risks and adaptation benefits  
Output 1.1. Landscape -wide land -use plan developed 
for climate -resilient livelihoods and forest 
ecosystems, integrating district development 
strategies  Rwanda Forest 
Agency (RFA)  
  Wildlife Conservation 
Society (WCS) and 
National Land Authority 
(NLA)  
Output 1.2. Local and national institutional capacities 
strengthened to integrate biodiversity and climate 
risks into land use planning and management  RFA  WCS and NLA


---
*Page 381*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 162 
 
 
Outcome 2 : Natural forests are protected, connected, and more resilient to climate impacts and risks  
Output 2.1. Protected areas management 
effectiveness improved to address climate risks and 
adaptation  RFA  WCS and Rwanda 
Development Board  
Output 2.2. Natural forest cover restored; biodiversity 
connections established  RFA  WCS  
Outcome 3:  Vulnerable rural livelihoods are more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable 
and nature -positive  
Output 3.1. Farming methods enhance productivity, 
reduce erosion and flooding risks, contribute to 
ecosystem services, and support connectivity  RFA  Rwanda Water Board  
Output 3.2. Rural livelihoods generate alternative 
incomes and reduce pressure on forests  RFA  Cordaid  
Output 3.3. Financial services and private sector 
investment engagement  RFA  Cordaid  
Monitoring and evaluation  Project Management Unit, h osted by the 
Ministry of Environment  of Rwanda  
1.1 Impact potential                                          Scale:  N/A  
4. The cross -cutting impact potential of the proposed project  and the relative weighting of 
the intended results can be s een in the attribution of GCF and co -financiers ’ contributions to the 
relevan t GCF result s areas as follows:  
GCF result s area GCF 
contribution  Co-financiers ’ 
contribution  
Mitigation Result Area 4 (MR4)  Mitigation through forestry and 
land use  8% 0% 
Adaptation Results Area 1 (AR1)  Enhanced resilience of most 
vulnerable people and communities  13%  49%  
Adaptation Results Area 2 (AR2)  Enhanced resilience of health and 
well -being, and food and water security  2% 0% 
Adaptation Results Area  4 (AR4)  Enhanced resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem services  77%  51%  
5. The emphasis on utilizing the GCF investment to enhance the resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services is reflected in the project’s focus on new mechanisms of land -use 
planning and management that consider the CND as a landscape  consisting of an 
inte rdependent mosaic of forests and farms, the management of each determining the health of 
the whole. The independent Technical Advisory Panel  (iTAP ) believes that such an approach 
(i.e. targe ting project interventions on the ground based on a systematic spa tial planning 
process that emphasizes “ecological infrastructure” functioning as well as biodiversity ) 
represents best practice for enhancing ecosystem resilience . Such an approach  ensur es that 
interventions are at sufficient scale to achieve a transformat ive effect : preserving landscape -
wide ecosystem processes and functions that help buffer impacts of climate change.  Maximizing 
connectivity is also important for maintaining the long -term health  and stability of forests as 
carbon sinks.  
6. Adaptation impact potentia l: The funding proposal  outlines the major climate change -
related hazards characterizing the landscape , in particular more frequent intense rainfall events 
increasing floods and landslides, and worsening soil erosion that is alrea dy widespread as a 
result of direct anthropogenic  pressures.  The project’s main a daptation benefits will accrue to


---
*Page 382*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 163 
 
 
vulnerable communities primarily engaged in agriculture on the CND’s steep terrain, achieved 
through improved soil management, forestry and a groforestry to reduce catastrophic events 
affecting production systems , lives and livelihoods . This will be achieved through integrated 
landscape planning and management to enhance tree cover in crop and grazing lands and 
improve the connectivity of natura l ecosystems and the key services they provide, including 
regulation of runoff and flows from increasingly extreme rainfall events; and  through  reduction 
of localized and downstream flooding, erosion and landslide incidence and risk.  
7. Indicators for the ma in adaptation results are as follows:  
(a) 135,104  hectares (ha) of land to be brought under climate -resilient management  
through targeted interventions for protection, afforestation and agroforestry (AR4): 
(i) Including  121,758 ha of core protected areas , linkages and stepping stones that 
will be brought under climate -risk informed planning and fire management  to 
maintain landscape -scale ecosystem services ; and 
(ii) Including  13,346 h a for focused interventions  (i.e. degraded forest in parks to be  
restored (5, 000 ha), riparian lands restored (1,500 ha), pastures brought under 
silvopastoralism (1,000 ha), steep slopes afforested (2,500 ha), and farmland 
with new agroforestry practices (3,346 ha) ); 
(b) 1,254,242  people , resident in the landscape where targeted  interv entions will be carried 
out, will benefit  directly  from reduced exposure to climate -intensified disasters  and/or 
enhanced adaptive capacity  (AR 1 and 2) ; and  
(c) 9,260,745 people, approximately  two thirds  of the country’s population, will benefit  
indirectly  from  a wide -scale education and outreach programme , including radio 
programming , on climate change and gender issues, climate risks, value of forests and 
forest ecosystems, and climate change adaptation op tions.  
8. Mitigation impact:  The project seeks to deliver greenhouse gas  (GHG)  emission 
reduction s and removal benefits equivalent to 224,871  tonnes  of carbon dioxide  equivalent (t  
CO 2 eq) during the five-year project implementation period, reaching a total of 1,084,291 t CO2  
eq after 20  years. The estimation of reductions and removals is made based on the difference 
between the projected emissions with and without the project interventions  – through  
impro ved cookstove s, and through on-the-ground interventions across a total of 13,346  ha of 
land . The land -based  interventions will have cross -cutting benefits , since they contribute to core 
indictor 4 on hectares of land to be brought under climate -resilient m anagement, as well as 
brin ging mitigation benefits . 
9. The following activities will contribute to achiev ing this mitigation potential: (i) assisted 
natural regeneration (ANR) in 4,500 ha of Nyungwe National Park through invasive fern 
removal; (ii) restoration of 500  ha of degraded forest through ANR in Gishwati -Mukura  National 
Park ; (iii)  afforestation on 2,500 ha of public and private land with a slope >55  per cent; (iv) 
planting 1,500 ha of  protective forest  in riparian zones (public and private) ; (v) implementing 
erosion control and  agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of  smallholder farm land ; (vi) 
implementing silvopastoral ism on 1,000 ha in the  Gishwati  area ; and (vii) adoption of improved 
cookstoves  by 8,500 households . Indicators for achievement  of these targets are included in the 
project log ical frame work  in section E.3 of the funding proposal .  
10. The methodology for calculating GHG emission reduction s and carbon sinks mirrors two 
approved consolidated methodologies for the A/R CDM, AR -ACM0003 and AR -AMS0007. This is 
considered  a good practice because the applicability conditions of the methodologies are 
appropriate to the project conditions.  The method ology is clear and conservative , considers the 
relevant guidance from the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , and was used in an 
appropriate, clear and transparent manner when estimating the mitigation potential for each 
activity.


---
*Page 383*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 164 
 
 
11. With regard to mon itoring and reporting mitigation benefits, annex 22 proposes a clear 
and straightforward approach, but does not clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various 
actors that will be involved in the process over time , nor the frequency of the steps. 
Furthermore, the activities as presented in annex 22 are not reflected in annex 11 (monitoring 
and evaluation plan_rev August 2023).  According to its updated  nationally determined 
contribution  (NDC ) (2020, p age 6)1 Rwanda has already developed a  national  mea surement, 
reporting and verification ( MRV ) framework. At the present stage it is not clear how this project 
will be aligned with the existing arrangements for the national MRV system , and/or how  it will 
support or contribute to enhancing the functioning of  this system across the country.  
12. The iTAP assesses the impact potential of the  project as  high . 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                                               Scale: N/A  
13. The proposed project is designed to bring about a paradigm shift away from the current 
situation of fragmented, unplanned decisions and a collection  of isolated sector -by-sector 
projects that fail to take into account evolving climate risk and allow contin ued degradation . 
Instead , a new approach of integrated land use planning and management  is promoted  that 
preserves ecological connectivity across the landscape and helps maximize valuable ecosystem 
services for buffering the impacts of climate change. The new approach is based on 
international best practice  and considers the  CND  as a landscape consisting of an 
interdependent mosaic of production and protected lands , the health of which is completely 
interconnected.  
14. The idea behind the project is that a new  holistic, climate -smart, evidence -based 
approach to planning and development will enable systematic, ecosystem -based, multi -sector 
analysis of land -use tradeoffs. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination across both 
geographic and sectoral boundar ies, while mainstreaming climate risks in management 
planning , represents a fundamental paradigm shift for land -use planning and management in 
Rwan da. Success in putting such a system into place could represent a crucial first step in 
reversing the previou s negative feedback loop of ecosystem degradation to  achieve  a more 
positive, climate -resilient system.  
15. Utilizing integrated landscape  management  and ecosystem -based adaptation 
approaches in addressing climate change impacts in Rwanda offers a myriad of op portunities 
for scaling up and replication to similar ecological zones across the country. The project also has 
the potential to contribut e to the regulatory frameworks and policies for driving climate 
investments in the forest and renewable energy sectors . The project will finance the 
development of an integrated  land-use plan, which will be adopted by all 10 CND districts as a 
framework for seeking synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity 
protection, reconciling land -use conflicts that arise, and guiding development decisions and 
climate  change adaptatio n. It will also update the National Land Use Master Plan, en suring it 
incorporates climate resilienc e and local plans.  
16. Systematic conservation planning : Although biodiversi ty conservation is considered a 
co-benefit of the project rather than a core focus, t he project makes innovative use of systematic 
conservation planning to identify spatial areas in the landscape that are targeted for restoration, 
afforestation and agrofor estry activities. This includes work to restore national parks as the 
core of an interconnected system , with landscape linkages and stepping stone s identified for 
interventions to promote connectivity between remaining areas of natural habitat. Optimizing 
this kind of mosaic of land uses with management actions for protection, restoration and 
sustainable use helps to maximi ze the functionality of landscape -wide ecosystem services such 
 
1 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -06/Rwanda_Updated_NDC_May_2020.pdf .


---
*Page 384*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 165 
 
 
as nutrient cycling, soil fertility, slope stability, water infiltration,  flood management and 
precipitation . 
17. Innovative f inancial mechanisms:  The project also includes an output to e stablish 
long -term plans for CND financial sustainabilit y post -GCF  by employing a technical advisor to 
support the establishment of  innovative mec hanisms such as those identified in the Biodiversity 
Finance Plan and also to refine existing financing mechanisms (for example, integrating climate 
resilience principles into the existing successful and growing Tourism Revenue Sharing 
Program ). Support wi ll be provided t o beneficiaries of the project in applying to the existing 
Community Adaptation Facility within  the Rwanda Green Fund  (FONERWA ). The Government 
of Rwanda, represented by the Rwanda Development Board, is also in advanced stages of 
negotiation with the World Bank for establishing a wildlife bond, potentially a gorilla  
conservation  bond, modelled on the successfully established rhino conservation bond in South 
Africa , with interes t shown by impact investors.  
18. Overall, based on the above, the paradigm shift potential of the project is assessed as  
medium to high. 
1.3 Sustainable development potential                                    Scale: N/A  
19. The proposed project is aligned with the Uni ted Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, including significant contributions towards Rwanda’s efforts to mee t Sustainable 
Development Goal  (SDG ) 5 (Gender Equality ), SDG 13 (Climate Action ) and SDG 15 (Life on 
Land ), and will contribute to the achievement of SDG 1  (No Poverty ), SDG 2 (Zero Hunger ), SDG 
3 (Good Health and Well -being ) and SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities ). 
20. Environmental co -benefits:  Key environmental co -benefits (beyond the core benefits 
related to ecosystem -based ad aptation) include restoration of soil fertility  through 
silvopastoralism and regenerative mixed-use agroforestry , and the enhancement of biodiversity 
through planting 50  per cent  native tree species . Promotion of improved cookstoves using 
significantly les s fuel will contribute to relieving pressure on the remaining indigenous forest.  
21. The iTAP was surprised to see the relatively low target of 50  per cent  (30 per cent  on 
private land and 70  per cent  on public land) in the  use of indigenous tree species in 
afforestation, reforestation and agroforestry interventions.  The AE explained that exotic species 
are more suitable for afforestation of steep slopes, where they can easily establish themselves , 
“but this does not mean tha t exclusively exotic species will be used on such sites ; there will be a 
mixture of both wherever applicable . In addition, while establishing blocks in the Participatory 
Forest Management Units , indigenous species will be used to separate one block from an other. 
Indigenous species will be given due consideration in agroforestry to create positive 
interactions in the farm as well as promoting native species, avoiding monoculture and 
benefiting from their positive impacts in terms of resilience.”  
22. It is under stood that  there is often a preference for fast -growing, easily available and 
usually cheaper species like eucalyptus, pine and alnus for urgent needs such as slope 
stabiliza tion and fuelwood, and also that a balance needs to be struck between promoting 
indigenous trees species and being responsive to farmers’ wishes . At the same time, the project 
could potentially make more o f the opportunity to rekindle traditional knowledge about 
indigenous species and their uses, and to build the nursery supply chain fo r quality native 
planting material  given the vast superiority of indigenous  tree species in terms of their multiple 
benefits, non -invasiveness,  positive  impact on soil and water quality, and resistance to pests and 
diseases that may worsen with a warming c limate.  
23. Social and health co -benefits:  In enabling the transition to more climate -resilient and 
productive livelihood models, the project aims to increase household incomes and the 
nutritional status of families. It is expected that significant social capi tal will be created through


---
*Page 385*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 166 
 
 
beneficiaries’ participation in co -designing and co -managing a range of adaptation strategies, 
with an emphasis on women ’s participation . Social cohesiveness will also be enhanced through  
the strengthening of joint saving and lending systems. Social benefits will also accrue to indirect 
beneficiaries, for example those listening to radio programming that leads to increased 
awareness of climate change, or of opportunities for climate -adaptive a groforestry and agri -
processing.   
24. Economic co -benefits:  Inequality and poverty will be addressed through increased 
financial inclusion and improved economic opportunities, especially for women, youth and 
historically marginalized groups. Forest and landsc ape restoration in the CND will bring 
economic benefits, since  soil erosion control measures, protective forests on public lands , and 
agroforestry on private lands will  all increase agricultural productivity and associated income. 
The project will create d irect and indirect employment opportunities, benefiting an anticipated  
24,212 households and stimulating the local economy. Private capital will be leveraged to invest 
in value chains , including those for improved cookstoves , irrigation pumps and beehives,  as well 
as honey , woodlots, macadamia, avocado  and vegetable  production and processing .   
25. Gender benefits:  The project aims to achieve positive outcomes around access to 
resources, improved livelihoods, and income generation opportunit ies and capacit ies for 
women. With support from a dedicated gender specialist , the project will engage women in 
project planning, investment and decision -making.  It is envisaged that w omen  will respond to 
incentives that address their families’ basic needs, s uch as better health and nutrition, link ed to 
agriculture and food security improvements. The project will also get support from  non-
governmental organization s that engage men in programming and discussions to increase their 
participation in household and parental responsibilities and enhance their  awareness of the 
importance of women’s fair access to and control of resources, including income. Women will 
benefi t from training and educational activities, leadership, entrepreneurship and decision -
making , as shown in annex 8  (Gender Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion 
Action Plan ). 
26. The iTAP assesses sustainable development potential a s high . 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                                 Scale:  N/A  
27. Western Rwanda and its  CND  region are highly vulnerable to climate change, and are 
expected to experience a continuing upward trend in average annual temperatures, total annua l 
rainfall (with  a longer dry season), and more intense rainfall events and storms  and increasing 
risk of flash floods, landslide, soil erosion and wildfires. Despite Rwanda’s solid economic 
progress since 2000, poverty remains widespread and pervasive. Ov erall, 38.2  per cent  of the 
country’s population lives in poverty and 16  per cent  in extreme poverty. Women are more 
affected by poverty than men, with 47  per cent  of female -headed households living in poverty 
compared with 44.9  per cent  of all households.  
28. The CND landscape supports nearly one  third of Rwanda’s population on barely one  fifth 
of its land base. Average population density is 736 people/ square kilometr e (km2), with some 
districts now exceeding 1,000 people/km². The highest rates of rural poverty in the country are 
reported from the CND, including its most vulnerable subsistence farmers. While high rainfall 
has historically permitted generally sufficient  food production, the region’s rugged topography 
requires farming on extremely steep slopes. With more frequent extreme rainfall events in 
recent years, this agricultural landscape is recognized as the region of Rwanda most vulnerable 
to flash floods and l andslides. Between 2013 –2016 , heavy rains generated landslides that killed 
at least 174 people and destroyed the homes of more than 5,000. Landslides wipe out  highly 
productive raised -bed cultivation systems in the CND’s valleys  and bottomlands, many hecta res 
of crops are washed away , and a n estimated 1.5 million ton nes of fertile soil are lost annually to 
erosion.


---
*Page 386*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 167 
 
 
29. The funding proposal  reports that d uring stakeholder consultations, communities 
indicated several socioeconomic changes stemming from changing c limate conditions. Notably, 
the longer dry season and unpredictable rains have reduced agricultural yield significantly, 
leading to more widespread malnutrition and extreme poverty, and farmers can barely meet 
their own families’ needs. In particular, wome n, youth, and historically marginalized people are 
feeling the impacts. As arable land is increasingly constrained, youth and historically 
marginalized people have few opportunities and are more focused on survival and short -term 
gains. This becomes  a nega tive feedback loop, in which poverty leads to unsustainable practices 
such as overharvesting from forests  and cultivation on extremely steep slopes, with degraded 
ecosystems then less able to provide services, worsening the cycle of poverty.  
30. As a result, t he Government of Rwanda has invested significantly in developing an 
enabling policy and institutional framework for a more climate -resilient development pathway. 
Yet, while adaptation is a top priority,  as a least developed country, Rwanda lacks sufficient  
public financial resources to implement its climate change and resilient green development 
objectives.  Currently there are no alternative funding options at the scale needed to secure 
Rwanda’s priority forests to reduce the vulnerability of rural communit ies to climate risks . 
Rwanda’s debt -to-gross domestic product  ratio stands at 64  per cent , making further loans 
difficult, and the Government of Rwanda  seeks maximum concessionality  from the GCF for the 
urgent adaptation actions proposed under the project.  
31. The Government of Rwanda  recogni zes that a piecemeal approach to decision -making 
has exacerbated competition over scarce land resources  and reduced the adaptive capacity of 
both e cosystems and rural populations . Additionally, district government staff and community 
members have limited technical understanding of the complex interactions between forest 
structure and functions, climate change , and the provision of ecosystem services , and limited  
technical capacity for complex forest monitoring.  In the face of worsening climate change 
impacts, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive approach that crosses siloes of 
government and achieves integrated land use planning and management informed by the 
evolving climate and socioeconomic conditions. The proposed interventions are well targeted to 
address the identified barriers and the great needs of these vulnerable communities .  
32. Overall, based on the above, the needs of the recipients are rated as high . 
1.5 Country ownership                                                 Scale: N/A            
33. Policy and strategy alignment:  The project is closely aligned with Rwanda’s national 
adaptation plan and three of its adaptation priorities: (i) promotion of non -agricultural income 
generating activities ; (ii) introduction of species resistant to environmental conditions ; and (iii) 
development of alternative sources of energy to firewood. It contributes to several priorities 
identified in the 2020 NDC: promotion of afforestation/reforestation; improvement of forest 
management; an integrated approach to planning and monitoring for sustainable land 
management; and development of a harmonized and integrated spatial data management 
system for sustainabl e land use management.  
34. The project will support the implementation of Rwanda’s Green Growth and Climate 
Resilient Strategy and the Rwanda National Strategy for Transformation (2017 –2022) and is 
aligned with the goals of the Rwanda National Forestry Policy  2018, the Forest Sector Strategic 
Plan 2017 –2022, the Strategic Plan for the Environment and Natural Resources Sector (2018 –
2024) and  the National Forest Management Plan 2017 –2026, thus reflecting the government’s 
intention to address climate change impac ts and mitigation targets by improving forest 
management. It is also aligned with the national Biomass Energy Strategy 2020 , which aims to 
ensure a more sustainable biomass supply and combustion technologies for homes and small 
enterprises.


---
*Page 387*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 168 
 
 
35. GCF country pr ogramme:  According to the  funding proposal  (section D.5), the project 
aligns with the forthcoming GCF country programme, which “prioritizes forest management 
through restoration and protection of natural forests, afforestation and agroforestry, as well as 
distribution of high -quality reforestation inputs and capacity development”. While this project 
proposal to GCF focuses on a different geographic area , the early and ongoing lessons from the 
experiences from existing GCF -funded projects “Strengthening Clim ate Resilience of Rural 
Communities in Northern Rwanda ”2 and “Transforming Eastern Province through adaptation”3 
will be applied during the implementation of this project in the  CND  landscape.  
36. Roles of key entities:  The proposed p roject was initiated by  MOE Rwanda  and 
supported by the  national designated authority , Rwanda Environment Management Authority, 
due to the high vulnerability to  climate change of the CND region of the country. MOE Rwanda  is 
well placed to oversee the project  as AE si nce the ministry is responsible for  (i) ensuring  the 
sustainable management of natural resources and for the development of policies, strategies  
and regulations ; and (ii) mobilizing resources for the development of the sector. M OE Rwanda  
managed USD 10 mil lion from the Adaptation Fund to implement the Reducing Vulnerability to 
Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based Adaptation Programme4 and 
has overseen a number of other climate projects , including: an early warning system project 
(fun ded by  the Least Developed Countries Fund  (LDCF )), the Landscape Approach to Forest 
Restoration and Conservation and the “Building resilience of communities living in degraded 
forests, savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem management approa ch” 
programme (funded by LDCF)5.  
37. Given the centrality of forest protection, restoration and management to the project, the  
RFA is well placed to carry out the role of EE. It is noted that this would be RFA’s first GCF EE 
role, since MOE Rwanda’s  other GCF project is executed by FONERWA. Strong support will be 
provided by a set of implementing partners – including the  WCS and government agencies such 
as RDB , which  are resp onsible for the national parks, RWB, Rwanda Environment Management 
Authority and the National Land Use Authority. The project activities overseen by each are 
shown in the table in the introduction  above and are aligned with their mandates , as well as  
secto ral plans and strategies.   
38. Consultation and engagement with civil society:  To better understand the interests 
of stakeholders and potential impacts of the proposed project, and as  a preparation for 
designing future engagement strategies, a comprehensive, gender -responsive, culturally 
sensitive, non -discriminatory, and inclusive stakeholder analysis was undertaken and is 
reflected in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan ( annex 7). In terms of future engagement, the 
funding proposal  indicates a number of specific  areas where consultations will be ongoing  to 
inform the rollout of activities , for example, consultations with communities  and civil society 
organizations representing men, women, youth, and historically marginalized people in local 
communities , as well a s district and national government agencies, on the following activities: 
Activity 1.1.1.  Synthesize and disseminate information on value of natural forests and ecosystem 
services; Activity 1.1.2. Develop climate -resilient landscape land -use plans; Activit y 2.2.3 
Promote silvopastoralism with indigenous trees around Gishwati;  Activity 3.1.1 Restore high 
slope areas (>55  per cent ) as protective forests;  and Activity 3.2.1 Develop  an agroforestry -
related value chain for market access.  
 
2Rwanda Ministry of Environment, 2018. FP073: Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern 
Rwanda. Green Climate Fund.  
3International Union for Conser vation of Nature, 2021. FP167: Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation. 
Green Climate Fund.  
4Adaptation Fund, 2014. Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based 
Adaptation. Link . 
5United Nations Environment Programme,  2016. Building resilience of communities living in degraded forests, 
savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem management approach.


---
*Page 388*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 169 
 
 
39. Country  ownership of the project is thus seen to be high. 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                          Scale:  N/A  
40. Of the project’s total  proposed budget of USD 50,000,000, 78  per cent  (USD 39,056,579 ) 
is proposed to be a GCF grant, and 22 per cent (USD 10,943,579 ) is made up of government co-
financing to the project. The Government of Rwanda is providing grant financing via RFA, RWB, 
and RDB to support activities in component 3. In addition to these c ontributions totalling USD 
10,831,307, the AE will cover office costs in the form of an in -kind contribution equivalent to 
USD 112,271 for the Project Management Unit , which will be hosted at  MOE Rwanda .  
41. Government co -finance:  In response to a question fr om iTAP about the nature of the 
co-finance and the extent to which it represent s new and additional funds, the AE explained that 
“[t]he co -financing commitments were provided based on the existing Government 
commitments provided every year in the project i ntervention area . These are earmarked funds 
that go into  forest management, community revenue sharing around the parks, monitoring 
resources for catchment restoration interventions and also different in -kind contributions. All 
the details are indicated in the Annex 4 of the budget and activities to be covered by co -
financing resources and Annex 13 indicates the commitment letters from the co -financier s.” It is 
iTAP’s understanding that these funds will not be spent in a business -as-usual manner, but will 
be newly directed towards climate risk management, through support to the project’s 
adaptation and mitigation interventions and efforts to develop officials’ capacity for climate 
risk-informed integrated land use planning and management.  
42. Role of financial institutions : Participating financial institutions (PFIs) will be 
important in two ways – firstly as providers of credit to farmer cooperatives , savings groups  
and small enterprises in the targeted value chains, and secondly as recipient s of trai ning – to 
enhance their knowledge of good agricultural practices, equip them to assess the impact of 
climate change on their clientele and loan portfolio, and help ensure equitable access to 
financial assets by women, youth and historically marginalized co mmunities .  
43. In response to a question from iTAP about whether any consultation has happened with 
the potential PFI s, which are not mentioned in the extensive stakeholder consultations reported 
in annex 7,  the AE stated that “At this stage [neither] Cordaid  nor RFA have notified the 
participating financial institutions. As per the project implementation plan, a 6 -month to 9 -
month inception phase will include in -depth analysis of existing financial institutions including 
microfinance institutions  and saving a nd credit cooperative societies . They will be scored 
against a list of criteria to understand their leadership, financial  position and financial products 
portfolio on a case -by-case basis.”6   
44. The iTAP  believes this engagement will be crucial to the success of Output 3.3 on 
“Financial services and private sector investment engagement ” in order to ensure sustainability 
of livelihood interventions, and urges the AE to start dialogue with potential partner s as soon as 
possible since they will have experience and advice that can guide the way this output is 
approached for maximum effectiveness.  
45. Level of concessionality : The project’s proposed 100  per cent  concessionality level is 
justified because the projec t is investing  in multiple ecosystem goods and services  that are 
public in nature , including  landscape mosaics , at the core of which are public assets, in the form 
of national parks and other protected areas , as well as landscape linkages and stepping stones 
to promote connectivity and flood management, and steep slopes t o be afforested t o prevent 
landslides and er osion. Benefits will accrue also to privately owned small -scale family farms , but 
these are on a very small  scale , and any profits made through processing and sale of 
 
6 MOE Rwanda responses to iTAP, 4 September 2023 .


---
*Page 389*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 170 
 
 
agroforestry products will need to be retained at household level to buffer  against shock s and 
stresses to increase and diversify incomes , and to improve families’ nutri tional status.  
46. Market transformation for cookstoves : The project aims to avoid challenges which 
the feasibility study s ays were experienced with previous improved cookstoves (I CS) 
program mes in the region , which “have historically been characterized by poorly designed 
subsidy/incentive programs which in some instances have provided 100% subsidies to end -
users” and have sometimes led to “unnecessary long -term dependence and poorl y managed 
exits, which consequently created long -lasting ICS market distortions”. Instead, the project  
adopts a market -oriented approach to strengthening the improved cookstove supply chain in 
the region, creating “strong linkages and business relationship s among the key actors, including 
cookstove producers/youth  small and medium -sized enterprises , farmers/savings groups, and  
microfinance institutions  to ensure sustainable access and finance of cookstoves”.  
47. In collaboration with technical and vocational education and training  institutes , youth 
producers , central and local authorities , and experts on biomass and micro -finance will refine 
and test, for each type of ICS/fuel to be promoted, the category/profile of households to be 
targeted and the related subsidy/microcredit schemes to be implemented to facilitate stove 
adoption with minimum concessional ity. Subsidized  cookstove s will be supplied to 4,000 poor 
households identified as being in a category of vulnerable groups , including yout h, women , 
landless and disabled people. The stoves will be locally manufactured, with a competitive 
process leading t o the award of a supply contract to local  women - and youth -owned 
cooperatives or start -ups. A partnership with t wo integrated polytechnic regional colleges will 
enable the design of prototype affordable Tier 2 ICS customized to local conditions and 
customer preferences .   
48. After year 4, the start -ups that will have graduated from the training and incubation 
programme (also conducted for the manufacture of beehives and irrigation pumps) will be fully 
empowered to maintain the supply of new equipment an d repair of old equipment , as well as to 
market their products to producer organizations and households. Access to microfinance 
institutions will be facilitated to allow emerging cookstove  business to grow. The members of 
village savings groups will be abl e to use income generated from the sale of fast -maturing crops 
(chili and French beans) , coupled with savings accumulated from their groups , to buy new or 
replacement stoves over time. A specialized small business development fund  will be 
established to su pport dissemination, accompanied by public awareness -raising of the benefits 
of ICS.  
49. Return on investment : The project cost per direct beneficiary of USD 31 ( USD 40 with 
co-finance ) and 20 -year economic rate of return of project interventions for agroforestry  (49 
per cent ), protective forests (72  per cent ), and silvopast oralism  (51 per cent ) all highlight the 
project’s  viability , as does t he economic  net present value  of USD 10,586  for the improved 
cookstoves  intervention . The mitigation cost is hi gh, at an estimated USD 43.84 per t CO 2 e, but 
comes with a multiplicity of adaptation benefits and socioeconomic and environmental co-
benefits . The cost of restoring natural forest for providing both adaptation and mitigation 
benefits is significantly gre ater than the cost of simply planting trees for mitigation , since a 
complex multi -strata, multi -trophic level natural ecosystem (like a tropical rainforest) provide s 
more varied and in many cases more robust ecosystem services than a simpler ecosystem (lik e a 
monocrop plantation) . Restoration of natural forest in Rwanda is essential for sustaining the 
critical ecosystem services on which vulnerable rural communities and the national economy 
depend , and are now even more essential for  buffer ing intensifying climate change impacts .  
50. Best practices : The project will use Rwanda’s best practice guidelines for tree nursery 
establishment , tree planting and tree management. For assisted natural regeneration, methods 
developed and proven through multi -year research in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura National 
Parks will be used . The project will use multiple contemporary methods for monitoring the  
success of project interventions , as well as  forest coverage and condition . Forest plantations will


---
*Page 390*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 171 
 
 
be mapped and monitored using the Rwandan Government ’s newly developed Forest 
Monitoring and Evaluation Software specifically developed for this purpose. T he project will 
develop a modern indigenous forest monitoring system, utilize the most high -resolution data  
sets currently available (<3  metres ) and take advantage of recent  remote -sensing advances , 
including cloud computing and machine learning. Although replication of effective and cost -
effective project techniques through knowledge -sharing with other countries in Africa is not 
planned in the project design , this could be a by -product of the project . 
51. The project’s overall efficiency and effectiveness is r ated as  medium  to high. 
II. Overall  remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
52. The iTAP believes this cross -cutting public sector project from the Government of 
Rwanda  is an important one that  will make significant strides towards effective management 
and sustainable financing of forest -and-farm  landscapes that play a vital  role in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation  in the  Congo Nile Divide . 
53. The iTAP recommend s to the AE that they undertake the  following actions to strengthen 
the measurement, reporting and verification  (MRV ) of the project’s core mitigation benefits:  
(a) Clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various  actors who  will be involved in the  
steps of the  MRV process over time , and t he frequency of the se steps ; 
(b) Capture the MRV activities as presented in annex 22 , also in  annex 11, such that they 
become part of the project’s overall monitoring and evaluation system ; and  
(c) Clarify how this project will be aligned with the existing arrangements for the national 
MRV system and/or will support or contribute to enhancing the functioning of this 
system across the country.


---
*Page 391*
---

GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add. 08 
Page 172 
Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP21 7) 
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda 
Country/(ies):  Rwanda 
Project/programme size: Small  
Impact potential  
The iTAP assessment of the impact potential of the project as high is well acknowledged and no 
further comments from the AE.  
Paradigm shift potential  
 iTAP assessment as Medium to High is acknowledged  by AE . The project is going  to utilize 
integrated landscape management and ecosystem -based adaptation approaches in addressing 
climate change impacts in Rwanda which offers opportunities for scaling up and replication to 
similar ecological zones across the country. 
Sustainable developm ent potential  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE . 
Needs of the recipient  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE 
Country ownership  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
iTAP assessment as Medium to High is acknowledged  by the AE . The AE has received t he 
confirmation letter regarding the co-financing from the Rwanda Development Board, Rwanda 
Water Resources Board and Rwanda Forestry Authority to support com plementary activities of th is 
project . The AE will  report on the co -financing in line with GCF Policy on co -financing  annually in 
APRs. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
The AE acknowledges iTAP overall assessment and recommendation for the Board approval.


---
*Page 392*
---

BUILDING RESILIENCE OF VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES TO 
CLIMATE VARIABILITY IN RWANDA’S CONGO NILE DIVIDE 
THROUGH FOREST AND LANDSCAPE RESTORATION
ANNEX 8 - GENDER ANALYSIS/ASSESSMENT AND GENDER & 
SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  Gender Documentation for FP217


---
*Page 393*
---

2 
 Table of Contents  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  3 
INTRODUCTION  4 
1.1 Purpose of the Gender Analysis  4 
1.2 Meth odology  6 
SITUATION ANALYSIS  7 
1.3 Policy framework  7 
1.4 National and international legal framework for gender equality  9 
1.5 Institutional framework for implementing gender policies in Rwanda  11 
1.6 Poverty and labor force participation  12 
1.7 Beliefs, perceptions and cultural norms  15 
1.8 Gender roles, responsibilities and labor allocation  16 
1.9 Access to and control over capital and natural assets  17 
1.10 Women’s health and access to health services  20 
1.11 Women’s educational attainment and access to education services  21 
1.12 Patterns of power and decision -making  24 
1.13 Social service and support systems that contribute to gender empowerment, wellbeing, and security  25 
CONCLUSIONS - ONGOING CHALLENGES TO GENDER EQUITY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE GCF CND 
PROJECT  26 
1.14 Afforestation, agroforestry and tree tenure  26 
1.15 Improved cook stoves  27 
1.16 Honey production and marketing  28 
1.17 Coronavirus (COVID -19) implications  in advancing gender equity  29 
1.18 Promoting gender equity within the CND GCF project  29 
5 LITERATURE CITED  31 
 GENDER, YOUTH AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  34 
1.19 Methods  34 
1.20 Gender Issues  35 
1.21 Youth Analysis and Key Issues  37 
1.22 Internal program considerations  40 
1.23 Gender and Youth Action Plan  42


---
*Page 394*
---

3 
 ● EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Since 1994, Rwanda has made significant progress in empowering women and countering the numerous 
inequities and discrimination to which women were historically subjected. Today Rwanda has one of the 
most progressive, gender equitable policy frameworks of a ny country in Africa, and has established and 
funded the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion and the Gender Monitoring Office to oversee the 
implementation of these gender progressive policies.  
There is no single definition nor understanding of gender equity and women’s empowerment, and the 
meaning, and reality of these terms differs across communities and cultures and over time. That said, 
the Government of Rwanda holds the simple belief in the fundamental equality of all people. In a just 
society, men  and women of all ages, at a minimum, should have the same rights to self -determination, 
should be equally represented at all levels of political leadership, and should not be subject to 
discrimination or gender -based violence.  
Today rural women continue t o play a vital role in ensuring the wellbeing and security of their famil ies. 
But being the caretaker of the family is getting harder for women as farmland becomes increasingly 
scarce, as soil erosion and declining soil fertility lowers crop yields, and as  fuelwood, fodder and clean 
water take ever longer to find and carry home. Changes in rainfall timing and intensity, driven by climate 
change, will further exacerbate the challenges women will face to meet the needs of their famil ies. 
Women, youth and marginalized groups are the primary targeted beneficiaries of the Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) proposal “Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate Variability in Rwanda’s 
Congo Nile Divide Through Forest and Landscape Restoratio n.” Empowering women, youth and 
marginalized groups to play an equal role in land and resource use decisions will ensure that their 
interests and concerns are incorporated into plans designed to increase the wellbeing and security of 
families in the Congo Nile Divide (CND) by helping them to evolve their livelihood strategies and 
practices in ways that adapt to climate change.  
Investing in women’s lives and strengthening their capacity to overcome existing and looming challenges 
will do much to implement Rw anda’s progressive gender policies and help reduce the continuing 
inequities and discrimination that rural women, in particular, still face in their daily lives. It will also reduce 
poverty, the incidence of child failure to thrive, and food and income ins ecurity within families across the 
CND.  By ensuring a robust integration of women and youth in programming, the resilience of 
households in the Congo -Nile Divide will be strengthened.  
The following summarizes the primary desired outcomes for women and you th that will be generated by 
implementing the four components of the GCF program in the CND.  
 
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning  
● Outcome 1: Climate adaptation programs in LUPs reflect and address the priorities of women and 
youth  
● Component 2: Forest Landscape Management and Restoration  
● Outcome 2: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage in 
forest management and restoration  
● Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods  
● Outcome 3: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacit y to engage in green 
jobs


---
*Page 395*
---

4 
  
Component 4: Monitoring & Evaluation  
● Outcome 4: Disaggregated and specialized monitoring generates data showing whether and 
how women, youth and marginalized people are benefiting from adaptive management systems  
 
● INTRODUCTION  
Decades of project design, implementation and impact evaluation have demonstr ated conclusively that 
gender equality and women's empowerment are necessary conditions for effective investment and 
action to achieve environmental conservation, economic development and climate change resilience. 
This program seeks to ensure that women p lay equal roles in determining how to improve the wellbeing 
and security of their families and communities in ways that maintain the agro -ecological systems, 
biodiversity, and environmental services essential to the economies, nutrition and safety of their  families 
in the Congo -Nile Divide (CND) now and in the future.  
Our approach goes beyond trying merely to ensure that women are no longer ignored or marginalized 
but seeks to empower women so that they can decide how they can best engage in determining what 
support would best help them and their families to increase fo od and income security and resilience to 
climate shocks. To do this we need to complete a thorough gender analysis that identifies the differences 
in men and women’s lives, including those that lead to sociocultural and economic inequalities, and 
applies t his understanding to project development.  
This gender analysis attempts to answer four questions:  
 
1. What roles do men and women play in determining wellbeing objectives and the allocation of 
labor and capital, and how do these differ in male versus female headed households?  
2. What are the inequalities, discriminations and rights denials faced by men and wo men in 
different social, economic and political contexts? How do these issues intersect with other factors such 
as age, ethnicity, disability, wealth class, etc.?  
3. How might gender inequity impact on the effectiveness and sustainability of the project 
inves tments, actions and desired outcomes?  
4. What are the risks that project efforts to reduce gender inequality by empowering women, 
actually exacerbates inequities and further undermines the status, and agency of women?  
 
The purpose of this gender analysis is to ensure that the project proposal des ign and implementation 
will be informed by a thorough understanding of gender roles, power relations and dynamics. This 
assessment provides information to address the relevant environmental and climate change critical 
issues from a gender perspective. Info rmation generated during the analysis will ensure that sufficient 
and appropriate attention is paid to gender issues within all CND project interventions.  
Furthermore, these gender inclusion methods fall in line with the GCF’s gender mainstreaming 
guidelines, designed to involve women, youth, and the historically marginalized in all climate adaptation, 
mitigation, and resilience strategies.  The gender asses sment will provide the foundation for a credible 
and practical gender action plan to be implemented by the GCF CND project.  
 
1.1 Purpose of the Gender Analysis  
Increased greenhouse gas emissions linked to human activity continue to threaten the livelihoods,


---
*Page 396*
---

5 
 safety, and wellbeing of communities worldwide. However, climatic impacts will vary based on numerous 
factors, including geography, socioeconomic status, age, and gender. Women experience unequal 
access to resources, land, and power, reducing their ability t o adapt to climate change as effectively as 
men. Women face greater domestic responsibility to maintain the home and raise children, reducing 
their time for education and careers. As a result, women are more tied to their land and more vulnerable 
to climat ic impacts, yet also represent a potential group of leaders to spur mitigation and adaptation 
efforts.  
Given the potential of women as environmental pioneers, climate resiliency efforts require a thorough 
understanding of gender roles in the region. MoE recognize the inextricable link between sustainable 
development of communities through gender pla nning and the conservation of wild places. Effective 
conservation strategy requires working to balance gender inequity and providing opportunities for 
women in the conservation space. Furthermore, the high dependence of women on agriculture as 
livelihood i n Rwanda impacts both conservation and climate change mitigation efforts. Smart 
conservation programs therefore target agricultural interventions to aid marginalized groups such as 
women and youth. Such projects offer employment opportunities and reduce th e threat of illegal or 
paramilitary activities that threaten conservation outcomes.  
Shifting the imbalance of power and access for women is not only a conservation target, but a human 
rights issue. Sustainable development at all levels, local, national, an d international, requires the 
empowerment of women. When women receive higher education, they have more flexibility in careers 
and are more likely to escape poverty. These women strengthen economies through diversified incomes, 
marry and have babies later,  and have greater independence (NISR, 2018). However, climate change 
is likely to worsen financial stressors, particularly in rural communities, and increase the risk of gender 
based violence (GBV). As the frequency of extreme weather events increases, und erstanding how 
climate change impacts women is essential to combatting the human rights issue of gender equality.  
There are numerous international human rights agreements that provide a framework for gender equity. 
Rwanda has signed on to several of these commitments, including the Convention on Elimination of all 
Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW), the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, 
and the Convention on Slavery and Repression of Human Trafficking (IUCN, 2021). Participating in 
these commitments requires periodic progress reporting and helps hold countries accountable.  
In Rwanda, the government has made significant strides to address gender disparity following the 
Genocide. Thirty -four percent  of households became run by widows post -Genocide, demonstrating an 
obvious need for the Rwandan government to address the newfoun d elevated standing of women 
(Vanhees, 2014). Several laws help ensure that on paper, Rwandan women have increased access and 
protection under the law. Such policies include the 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law ( Law/nº 
22/99 of 12/11/1999) , the 2008 Girls’ Education Policy, and the 2010 National Gender Policy (IUCN, 
2021). However, these policies are new and compete with a long history of patriarchal norms in Rwandan 
society, particularly outside of urban areas. Practice of these policies r emains inconsistent, especially 
when women do not know their rights. Helping men and women understand gender policy is the first 
step to shifting cultural perceptions. But gender equality cannot be achieved by women alone, it also 
requires the active parti cipation of men to accept the deconstruction of traditional gender roles and be 
aware of the intersectionality of women and other groups. For example, considering how to  includ e 
youth and marginalized communities, espec ially the women in those groups,  in equality strategies will


---
*Page 397*
---

6 
 help lift up the most at -risk groups and reduce illegal activity.  
 
1.2 Methodology  
This Gender Assessment uses a range of primary (24 focus groups and 18 key informant interviews) 
and secondary (published reports, policies and academic literature) information sources to triangulate 
our understanding of the gender context for climate resi lience and the project design.  
Key Informant Interviews (KII) were conducted, using purposive sampling, with senior decision makers 
in governmental organizations at local, district and national levels. Results from these interviews were 
validated and enric hed by 24 Focus Groups (FG) with 58 men and 91 women of different age groups 
within 21 communities bordering Nyungwe, Gishwati and Volcanoes national parks. Originally a large 
number of consultations was envisioned, but because of COVID constraints, includ ing limitations on 
travel between districts, a smaller sample was completed. Additional stakeholder consultations will be 
conducted at national, district and project site level to inform the implementation of the project and to 
adapt activity implementatio n to the local context.  These consultations will include the review of 
Environmental and Social Frameworks included in Annex 6. A desk study of secondary data sources 
gleaned from government reports and published policies, grey literature produced by civi l society groups, 
and peer -reviewed academic papers has also fed into the report.  
The following desired outcomes helped guide our interviews, the desk study and the analysis of all 
information garnered:  
● Gender roles, needs, concerns and aspirations in the context of the proposed project are well 
understood and documented;  
● Root causes of  existing gender inequalities in the context of the proposed project are identified;  
● Proven options for redressing traditional power imbalances between men and women are 
identified;  
● Increased confidence that gender focused investments and actions proposed by the project will 
deliver the desired results.  
 
The information generated from the gender analysis and assessment will be considered in all stages of 
the CND project cycle: design, work planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. In each 
of these stages, managers will both be enabled and en couraged to view the project through a ‘gender 
lens’ so that project investments and actions:  
● Reconcile gender inequalities that pre -date and might emerge from the project;  
● Ensure the differential needs and concerns of women and men are addressed;  
● Ensure women and men have equal access to resources, services, and human capital 
development;  
● Ensure equal participation of women and men in management arrangements and as 
beneficiaries, partners and key stakeholders; and  
● Ensure women’s equal participation in decision -making processes.  
 
 
 
● SITUATION ANALYSIS


---
*Page 398*
---

7 
  
1.3 Policy framework  
The implementation of gender focused policy and legislation after 1994 has provided Rwanda with a 
strong legal framework for advancing women’s status and rights. The high prevalence of female and 
orphan headed households, as a result of the Genocide, requi red the Rwandan government to reassess 
the country’s property ownership laws. The 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law provided women 
with the right to own and inherit property, protecting widows and orphans from losing their land to male 
family membe rs (Vanhees, 2014). However, this law only applies to formally registered, monogamous 
unions, and the children of such unions, denying inheritance rights to women engaged in consensual 
cohabitation or polygamous relationships and illegitimate children. Ful l equal rights to land titles and use 
of land for women were established by Law N° 43/2013 of 16/06/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda 
(IUCN, 2021). Furthermore, while the 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law established equal 
inheritance rights for male a nd female children, it was not mandated that all children should inherit equal 
amounts of property until Law N° 27/2016 of 08/07/2016 Governing Matrimonial Regimes, Donations 
and Successions (IUCN, 2021).  
The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda of 2003, revised in 2015, outlawed all forms of 
discrimination, provided legal equality within recognized marriages, and set a minimum of 30% female 
participation in the Senate and other public governance (East Af rican Community, 2009). These high 
gender equality standards have helped propel Rwanda to both become the first country with a majority 
of female representation in Parliament and rank 7th out of 156 countries for the smallest gender gap 
(World Economic For um, 2021). The 2010 National Gender Policy functioned to further advance gender 
mainstreaming and equality, confirming the Rwandan government’s stance on gender as a cross - cutting 
issue that must be addressed for successful development (Republic of Rwanda , 2019).  
This foundational principle of gender equality as a driving factor for growth is highlighted in Rwanda 
Vision 2020 and Vision 2050, which have been used as frameworks for Rwanda’s development 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2000; Republic of Rwanda, 2020). W hile the primary objectives of these 
frameworks were to elevate Rwanda to a middle -income country by 2020 and a high -income country by 
2050, these goals could not be accomplished without addressing gender inequality. Strategies for 
mitigating gender inequa lity included updating existing laws to account for gender aspects, increasing 
women’s representation in decision -making positions, developing gender training programs, increasing 
women’s involvement in associations and cooperatives, and increasing women’s  access to resources, 
such as education (IUCN, 2021). The 2008 Girls’ Education Policy further aimed to increase girls’ access 
to education by promoting elimination of gender disparities through the development of a 12 year basic 
education system, a school  feeding program, separate girl’s bathrooms, and increased infrastructure 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2019). Separate girl’s bathrooms were introduced to limit gender - based violence 
(GBV) in schools, while the 2011 National Policy against Gender Based Violence a imed to progressively 
eliminate GBV through the development of a preventive, protective, supportive, and transformational 
environment (Republic of Rwanda, 2019).  
To provide oversight and coordination of the gender policies, the Rwandan government establish ed a 
number of gender machinery institutions. The Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF) 
implements national gender policy and ensures gender mainstreaming (IUCN, 2021). The main 
responsibilities of the Ministry are to implement and assess poli cies and provide resources for programs. 
The Gender Monitoring Office (GMO) implements gender audits in the public and private sector, and the


---
*Page 399*
---

8 
 National Women’s Council (NWC) advocates for women’s rights and recruits female participation in 
development prog rams (IUCN, 2021). The National Gender Cluster is a forum of representatives from 
private sector, government, and development groups that meets to discuss the prioritization and 
coordination of gender equity efforts (IUCN, 2021). The Rwanda Women Parliamen tarians oversee legal 
issues related to gender and help create new gender policy. Together, these groups work to ensure 
gender policy is not only implemented, but practiced in Rwanda.  
At the international level, Rwanda has ratified several humanitarian agreements in support of gender 
equality. The Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW) is an 
international bill of rights for women. All signatory countrie s are evaluated for national issues that may 
conflict with the agreement. In Rwanda, GBV and lower rates of education among women are areas for 
concern (UN Human Rights, 2017). Almost every country in Africa has committed to the African Charter 
on human an d peoples’ rights on the rights of women (ACHPR), which provides a continental framework 
for human rights. Most recently, Rwanda prioritized several of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals, namely Quality Education (4), Gender Equality (5) and Reduced Inequalities (10) 
(United Nations Rwanda, 2021). These international agreements provide Rwanda with a level of 
accountability to implement and practice national gender policies.  
While the Rwandan government has made significant progress to advance women’s rights under the 
law, a gap remains for women not engaged in formal marriages. Approximately 30% of women in 
Rwanda participate in consensual partnerships but are not legally married, or are in polygamous 
marriages; neither of which are recognized under the law (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). This creates 
conflicts regarding land inheritance for women in these situations. Polygamous marriages do take place 
in Rwanda, and the status of wives is fluid; inheritance (without official marriage) can change base d on 
seniority or who had children in the partnership (Vanhees, 2014). However, the 2008 Gender Based 
Violence Law does assert that if a person in a polygamous relationship wants to officially marry one of 
the partners, common belongings must be divided eq ually between the other spouses (Vanhees, 2014). 
This law does establish a precedent to address the rights of polygamous women, but remains 
insufficient. The Rwandan government sought to increase legal protections for women by hosting group 
weddings in rur al areas, but further legislation to recognize women’s rights as human rights, regardless 
of marital status, are necessary (IUCN, 2021).  
 
1.4 National and international legal framework for gender equality  
The Government of Rwanda, State of Gender Equity Report (2019) provides a comprehensive summary 
of constitutional provisions, and national laws that support the principle of gender equality  and women’s 
empowerment in Rwanda. Information for the legislative  and policy review was drawn primarily from this 
report. Additional information was gleaned from Rwanda Vision 2020, the National Policy against Gender 
Based Violence (2011) and the National Gender Policy (2010).  
Rwanda is internationally recognized as a w orld leader in promoting gender equality principles and 
women's empowerment. In the aftermath of the 1994 genocide, the Government undertook radical and 
far-reaching reforms to address the political, social, legal, and economic status of women. Legal refor ms 
to give women property rights, and to enable them to inherit property, including land, were especially 
important. The Constitution, adopted in 2003 and amended in 2015, proactively promotes gender 
equality. It outlaws any form of gender discrimination, and enshrines the principle of equality within


---
*Page 400*
---

9 
 marriage.  
With 53% of the Rwanda population being female, the Vision 2020 national government strategy 
emphasizes  that Gender equality will be one of the driving factors towards achieving rapid growth and 
sustainable development. Vision 2020 commits to continuously update and adapt laws on gender, 
strategies for an increased access to productive resources by women, r epresentation in decision - 
making positions and apply positive discrimination in favour of women.  
The National Gender Policy (NGP) of 2010 formulated to support government programs in various 
sectors that are directly aimed at addressing gender inequalities and women’s rights. T he NGP seeks 
to free Rwandan society from all forms of gender based discrim ination and create an environment where 
both men and women equally contribute to and benefit from the national development goals.  
The main goal of the NGP is to contribute to reducing gender inequalities in all sectors, as a key 
component of sustainable de velopment. THe NGP was informed by the Economic Development and 
Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS I) of 2007 It helped to shape theThe Agriculture Gender Strategy 
(2010), the EDPRS II (2013), the National Strategy for Transformation (2017 -2024), the Strate gic Plan 
for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA3), the National Information and Communication Technology 
in Rural Agriculture (ICTRAg) Strategy (2016 -2022), the National Policy against Gender - Based Violence 
(2011), the National Strategy on Climate Ch ange and Low -Carbon Development (2011) and several 
others.  
Constitutional provisions and gender  
The Constitution of Rwanda of 4 June 2003, as amended on December 24, 2015, affirms the 
fundamental rights of all citizens of Rwanda, consistent with the United Nations Declaration of Human 
Rights and other human rights instruments. According to Article 11  of the Constitution: “All Rwandans 
are born and remain free and equal in rights and duties. Discrimination of whatever kind based on, inter 
alia, ethnic origin, tribe, clan, color, sex, region, social origin, religion or faith, opinion, economic status, 
culture, language, social status, physical or mental disability or any other form of discrimination is 
prohibited and punishable by law.” Article 16 further enshrines the principle of gender equality, and the 
Government has committed to establishing equity and equality at all levels of society.  
Key provisions within the constitution that relate to gender equality include the following:  
● The preamble reaffirms Rwanda’s adherence to human rights conventions, including the UN 
Convention on the Elimination of All  Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW 1979) and 
declares Rwanda’s commitment to ensure equal rights between women and men;  
● Articles 11 and 16 outlaw any form of gender discrimination;  
● Articles 9, 76, and 82 mandate a minimum quota of 30% female representation in the Senate 
and other areas of public governance;  
● Article 37 prohibits discrimination in employment; and  
● Article 26 enshrines equality within monogamous marriage.  
 
Since 1994, the Government of Rwanda has enacted a series of gender progressive policies. These 
include the following three key laws:  
Gender equity in the right to inherit property  
Enacted in 1999 Law n°22/99 (supplements book one of the civil code regarding succession) and revised


---
*Page 401*
---

10 
 in 2016 (Law Nº27/2016 of 08/07/2016 Governing Matrimonial Regimes, Donations and Successions) 
provides that both male and female children have the rights  to inherit their parents property. This in terms 
of that law obviates customary practices where only sons inherit land and tangible assets.  
Gender equity in the right to own land  
Enacted in 2013, Law N° 43/2013 OF 16/06/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda, ensu res that all women 
have equal rights to land titles registered in their name. This law enables women to secure loans from 
financial institutions using their land as collateral, which in turn removes a significant barrier from women 
engaging in commercial e nterprise that require capital investment.  
Gender -based violence  
Enacted in 2008, Law n° 59/2008 of 10/09/2008 on Prevention and Punishment of Gender -Based 
Violence makes explicit that gender -based violence is a crime that is punishable under Rwanda law.  
At the international level, Rwanda is party to key international i nstruments addressing women’s and 
children's rights, including:  
● The Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).  
● The Convention on Slavery and Repression of Human Trafficking and its Additional Protocol 
repressing and punishing the sale and trafficking of children and women.  
● The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the Optional Protocol within the 
UNC RC on Child Trafficking, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography.  
● The African Charter on Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC)  
● The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the Protocol to the African Charter on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa.  
● ILO Convention 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor.  
 
The government has also ratified and/or implemented numerous international conventions and 
instruments. Those include:  
● The Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW),  
● The Beijing Platform for Action, the African Charter on human and people’s rights on the 
rights of women (ACHPR),  
● The International Convention on Social and Cultural Rights (ICCPR),  
● The United Nations Security Council Resolution on Peace and Security (UNSC R 1325 and 
1820) and  
● The UN declaration on human rights (UDHR).  
 
Lastly, the Government of Rwanda is committed to delivering on the 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) which includes gender equality. To fast track attainment of the SDGs, the Government of 
Rwanda argues that policies must be in place and effectively implemented to ensure that both women 
and men equally participate in and benefit from development investments and processes.  
 
1.5 Institutional framework for implementing gender policies in Rwanda  
Key efforts to implement the Government of Rwanda’s gender progressive policies are included in the 
remit of the Agriculture, Justice, Health, Education, and Local Government ministries and  their


---
*Page 402*
---

11 
 executing agencies.  
To help coordinate and oversee Rwanda’s gender equality and women’s empowerment efforts and 
ensure their compliance with national policies and regulations, Rwanda has established four key 
governmental and civil society entities. These include the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion 
(MIGEPROF), the Gender Monitoring Office (GMO), the National Women’s Council (NWC) and Rwanda 
Women Parliamentarians (RWPF/FFRP).  
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF)  
The Ministry responsible for Gender has the mandate of coordinating the implementation of the national 
gender policy and advocating on gender issues at local to national levels. MIGEPROF formulates 
regulations and its staff support gender mainstreaming acr oss the Government of Rwanda.  
The Gender Monitoring Office (GMO)  
The GMO documents and reports the extent to which a “gender lens” influences the investments and 
actions of public agencies and private organizations. The GMO undertakes monitoring and evalua tion 
to assess the implementation and social impact of public and private sector implementation of activities 
that seek to comply with Government gender policies.  
The National Women’s Council (NWC)  
The National Women’s Council is a local to national organization of women that advocates for women’s 
rights and the promotion of gender equality. Its members help mobilize women across the nation at all 
social, economic and political levels to ensure that their voices are heard and acted on in development 
and conservation programmes and activities. The National Women’s Council provides a formal structure 
to give voice to women and through which women can raise ideas and concerns to inform policy. Lack 
of financial resources remains a constraint to the active engagement of village women in this process.  
Rwanda Women Parliamentarians (RWPF/FFRP)  
The RWPF/FFRP works to build the capacity of women Parliamentarians to navigate the halls of 
government successfully , to represent women’s voices in the formulation of all policies not just those 
related to gender equality, and to hold the parliament and its members accountable for redressing 
historical inequities in the rights of women and the power that they wield in determining the future of all 
Rwandans.  
The National Gender Cluster  
This is a Government convened forum in which the Government of Rwanda, development partners, the 
Private Sector and Civil Society meet and discuss planning, coordination and prioritization of Gender 
Equality interventions.  
 
1.6 Poverty and labor force particip ation  
The poverty rate in Rwanda averages 39% (NISR, 2018). The Western (CND) region is the poorest in 
the nation with a poverty rate that averages 47.7% and ranges from 33.5% in Rusizi to 69.3% in 
Nyamasheke. Between 2013/14 and 2016/17 (NISR, 20 18) 50.5% of female headed households had 
been poor during that time period, compared to 48.8% of male headed households. Poverty was more 
prevalent in households with more people and where the household head was older, had little education,


---
*Page 403*
---

12 
 was a farmer, and was not economically active (NISR, 2018).  
Figure 1: Poverty rates by district (Source: EICV5 NISR, 2018)  
 
 
Figure 2: Poverty in d istricts within Congo Nile Divide (Source: EICV5 NISR, 2018)  
 
Labor force participation is lower in women (48.2%) than in men (65.6%) 16 years and older (NISR, 2020), 
and unemployment is higher in women (20.3%) than in men (15.9%). Young women and men are less likely 
to be in the labor force and more likely to be une mployed. In 2020, women were less likely to be employees 
and employers, and significantly more likely to be a contributing family worker than were men.


---
*Page 404*
---

13 
  
 
 
Table 1: Population 16 years old and over by labour force status, sex, age group, and urban/rural area 
(Source: NISR Labor force survey report 2020)  
 
 
Table 2: Employed population by sex, status in employment, and urban/rural area  
(Source: NISR Labor force survey report 2020)


---
*Page 405*
---

14 
 1.7 Beliefs, perceptions and cultural norms  
Pre-1994 Rwandan families and society in general were characterized by a patriarchal social structure 
that translated into male dominance and female subordination (Mukabera, 2016). In principle, in 
traditional Rwandan society, women’s responsibilities incl uded raising and educating children, 
welcoming visitors, managing the household, advising their husbands and maintaining traditions 
(Mukabera, 2016). In practice, though women were allowed substantial autonomy in their roles as child 
bearers and food produ cers men remained the ultimate arbiters of most family decisions.  
Traditionally, the Rwandan woman was a symbol of fertility and weakness, while the man was a symbol 
of strength and protection who makes all major decisions. Rwandan women were valued as chi ld bearers 
and more specifically the number of boys they gave birth to (Mukabera, 2016). Boys were taught to 
defend the interests of the family. It was their job to build or repair a house, to engage in activities related 
to cattle, cut firewood, go to bat tle, milk the cows, make decisions on farm management, and generate 
income for the family. Girls were raised to help their mothers with household chores, raise children, and 
most importantly to be modest, reserved, silent, obedient, and present a submissiv e attitude toward men 
(Mukabera, 2016).  
These traditions effectively excluded women from accumulating material wealth and participating in 
economic and political decision making. The Family Code of 1992 precluded women from owning land. 
If a male head of household died, property passed to male h eirs or to the man’s brothers (Uwineza, 
2009). In the case of divorce or the husband’s death, a woman had no claim over the family property if 
she had not borne children; she would be forced to return to her birth family. Likewise, ‘the Commercial 
Code‘, d ating back to the colonial period, required the written consent of the husband whenever a wife 
wanted to engage in commercial activities, take up employment outside the household, or obtain credit, 
or take legal action (Mukabera, 2016).  
Prior to 1994 men m onopolized the public and political arena. Despite this, there have been some 
powerful women throughout Rwandan history, particularly the Queen Mothers who held substantial 
influence as advisers to the King in pre -colonial Rwandan society (Uwineza, 2009). In the customary 
system of justice, known as gacaca , women were not allowed to participate directly in public 
deliberations. Rather, they were expected to play an indirect role lobbying their husbands (Mukabera, 
2016). Women could and did hold powerful pos itions as high priestesses within the religious realm, but 
this was undermined with colonization and the introduction of christianity.  
Post-1994, the Rwandan government has taken large strides in improving gender equality and women’s 
rights policies, howev er these policies have yet to reach their full potential in making substantial changes 
in women’s lives. This may be due to gaps in policy and a dearth of resources applied to ensure proper 
functioning of the legislation and gender machinery institutions. There is a lack of capacity -building 
strategies to develop gender machinery institution staff’s gender based knowledge and skills, and these 
staff include only a limited number of gender experts that rarely occupy decision -making positions (IUCN, 
2021). St rategies to mainstream gender in capacity -building strategies of these institutions are not 
comprehensive, which contributes to functional issues such as lack of trained staff, staff retention 
measures, proper orientation for new hires, and clear handover procedures. This suggests that although 
the Rwandan government has passed strong gender -based legislation, implementation is limited by lack 
of concrete guidelines and limited resources.  
While setbacks to establishing fully functional gender machinery institutions limit the effective execution


---
*Page 406*
---

15 
 of gender equality laws, the current cultural norms and belief systems in place in Rwandan society 
profoundly diminish the positive effects that the se laws have on women’s daily lives. Discrimination 
against women continues to exist in multiple aspects of Rwandan society including economic 
opportunities, agriculture, politics, and division of labor. The long history of patriarchal dominance in 
Rwanda has led to the development of robust cultural norms, many of which define men’s and women’s 
roles in society, limiting women from taking advantage of the full range of opportunities within their legal 
rights. Other societal factors, such as the high preval ence of GBV, further limit women’s ability to venture 
outside of their perceived household roles. In a recent study 52% of women surveyed in districts within 
the CND agreed that men were justified in beating them if they: burned the food, argued with him, went  
out without telling him, neglected  the children, or refused  to have sex with him (Government of Rwanda, 
2016). Today, male and female policymakers are quick to acknowledge that many aspects of traditional 
Rwandan culture repressed women and abrogated their human rights (Uwineza, 2009).  
 
1.8 Gender roles, responsibilities and labor allocation  
Rwandan cultural norms divide household duties into activities that fall under either men’s or women’s 
responsibilities. Men are considered the breadwinners of the fam ily, and engage in significantly more 
off-farm and wage employment than women (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). Men also hold domain over 
any valuable property or resources that the family owns or acquires, including cash crops, livestock, and 
valuable trees (IU CN, 2021; Kiyani et al., 2017). Men possess the majority of the decision -making power 
within the family, and are largely able to engage in any activities they desire.  
Women’s role in society is predominantly seen as being a mother and caretaker of both the family and 
the home. Primary duties include caring for children and elderly, cooking, growing food for the family, 
and providing labor on their husband’s land. While the law allows for women to engage in other 
endeavors outside of their traditional duties, several factors often limit them from diverting from the 
cultural norm. The dominant barrier for women is lack of time, as the majority of their time is spent 
fulfilling their household responsibilities (IUCN, 2021). Women spend anywhere from 1 to 8 hours each 
day at their cookstove, not including the time it takes to collect the food, water, and fuel wood required 
for cooking (Campbell et al., 2012). Additionally, wo men are responsible for growing and tending to 
subsistence crops for the family, and are often required to take on other informal jobs on their husband’s 
farms. These duties, on top of childcare, take a large toll on women’s available time, preventing many  
from engaging in wage labor, training, and other forms of off -farm activities (Republic of Rwanda, 2019).  
Innovations that reduce the time spent on these tasks, such as improved cookstoves and agricultural 
technologies, may increase women’s ability to eng age in activities outside of their traditional roles. 
Furthermore, male involvement in work traditionally delegated to women, such as childcare, would allow 
women to spend more time outside of the household. However, men are not expected, and are often 
unwilling to engage in what they perceive as women’s work (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). As a result, some 
Rwandan women believe that government promotion of women’s equality has increased their workload, 
as they are now expected to be bringing home money on top o f their childcare, domestic, and farming 
duties (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). Furthermore, any additional income earned by women outside of 
traditional female tasks may be taken by the husband or result in increased domestic violence due to a 
perceived emascul ation of the male role as breadwinner.  
Violence is an issue for both men and women (30% vs 37%, respectively), but women are more prone 
to being victims, particularly sexual and gender -based violence (SGBV) (6% for men vs 23% for women,


---
*Page 407*
---

16 
 DHS Survey, 2021). Although there are strong laws and policies against SGVB, trends of violence are 
not decreasing. Factors that impact higher rates of violence include lower education, earning money, 
household alcohol levels, and familial historical violence. In seeking sup port, both men and women turn 
to neighbors (32% vs 40%) and family (24% vs 33%), whilst some go to the local authorities (17%, 18%), 
police (17%, 11, ibid).  Women also seek out their partners’ relatives for support whilst men seek out 
friends. This demons trates the importance of social networks much more than government agents.  
 
 
Figure 3, Trends in spousal violence over time.  Source: Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey, 
2021  
 
1.9 Access to and control over capital and natural assets  
The 1994 genocide left behind unprecedented distortions in social relations and exacerbated the alrea dy 
existing gender imbalances and inequalities. This is illustrated by the fact that today, 25% of households 
in Rwanda are headed by women. Women performing non traditional roles such as decision making, 
managing financial resources, constructing houses a nd many others have characterized the post 
genocide roles of women period in Rwanda.” (Gender and Community Development Analysis in 
Rwanda, EAC 2009).  
Although collection and dissemination of credible data disaggregated by ethnicity is not available.1 There 
has been some recognition of some ethnic minorities as Historically Marginalized People (HMPO, see 
Annex 6 for further details). While there is limited data based on ethnicity of HMPO, which critically 
impacts the baseline for monitoring activities p otential impacts (positive and negative), we will refer to 
trends aligned with governmental policies supporting pro -poor programming, and rely on data from 
reports conducted by African Initiative for Mankind Progress Organization (AIMPO), Women’s 
Organizat ion for Promoting Unity (WOPU) and Minority Rights Group International (MRG) leading a 
project titled, ‘Strengthening the Capacity of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), Human Rights 
Defenders (HRDs) and Media Houses to Challenge Discrimination against HMP O and Promote their 
 
1 The project will be unable to disaggregate data based on traditionally marginalized people, however, all data collected 
will be disaggregated by sex and wealth category where possible


---
*Page 408*
---

17 
 Human Rights in Rwanda’.  
Women are likely to constitute the majority of genocide survivors which informs a  need for intersectional, 
or the interconnected nature of social categorizations’ integration of history, gender norms, social 
disparity, power dynamics, rural/urban divide, and most importantly access to land rights.  Despite  
policies and initiatives implemented by the government, other entities and projects, including this  project 
to ensure HMPO are equitably included in project  design, implementation and benefits, there are 
potential barriers which include: (1) Inadequate disaggregated data (2) Limited capacity and resources 
to analyze intersectionality (3) Limited access to decision -making (women) (4) Social inequality from 
increased long -term poverty of HMPO (5) Lack of promotion and protection of  HMPO rights, including 
land tenures.  
In addition, climate change is adversely impacting CND’s landscape with increasing temperatures and 
changing rainfall patterns contributing to e cosystem degradation and reduced livelihoods for the most 
vulnerable populations. The agricultural sector in Rwanda is primarily focused on subsistence farming, 
and most cultivated land is rain -fed, exposing farmers to significant climate -related food secu rity risk. In 
addition, Rwanda’s efforts to reduce poverty are affected by high dependence on agriculture, especially 
when combined with climate change, declining plot sizes, and limited investment in intensification and 
erosion prevention. Thus, the impac ts of climate change is a risk multiplier as it has exacerbated the 
social, cultural, and economic conditions of HMPO communities in Rwanda. In the face of the climate 
crisis, culturally -based climate resilient approaches should be adopted in policies alon g with ways to 
address the potential barriers listed above.  
Compared to men, women are significantly less likely to own land (productive assets), they are less often 
engaged in income -earning activities, have less access to higher education (Govt of Rwanda , 2018), 
financial services (though this is rapidly becoming more equitable), health services, employment, direct 
payments, and non - school training opportunities. But that is changing according to the 2019 State of 
Gender Equity in Rwanda report.  Women -headed households are more likely to use firewood (85% vs 
78%), less likely to use charcoal than male -headed households (13% vs 19%), suggesting increased 
labor burdens for searching for fuelwood.  However, women and male -headed households have the 
same acc ess to water sources (EICV 5, 2018).  
There are no significant differences by household’s poverty status [between male and female headed 
households], education or ownership of land (Abbott 2018). However, a s men receive 75% of agricultural 
loans, and women  only 25% this strongly suggests that land owned by married couples is in reality 
“owned” by the husband and not jointly, and the man in a married household is still culturally considered 
the head of the household. For married couples it is unclear whether  women, on the death of their 
husbands, inherit their assets or are these, according to tradition, bequeathed to the sons. In addition, 
should women grow crops or trees, or raise livestock on marriage land do these assets belong to her or 
him or both. The power of women in illegal but still common polygamous marriages is even less than 
those in monogamous marriages.


---
*Page 409*
---

18 
  
Figure 4.  Land ownership by men, women, and co -owned parcels in 2021  
(Source: Rwanda Land Dashboard https://rwandalanddashboard.rlma.rw/p20_o19 , accessed October 10, 2021)  
 
Though women are not the primary land or livestock owners in Rwanda they still play a key role in food 
production primarily to feed their family. In fact few Rwandans and almost exclusively men are involved 
in cash crops as land holdings are typically smal l and often barely enough to produce food sufficient to 
meet the nutritional security of the land owners’ families.  
Access to microloans and credit for women contributes to economic development of Rwandan society 
as a whole and helps women escape poverty ( Mpakaniye, 2016). However, microloans remain difficult 
for the poor to attain for a number of reasons. Transaction fees reduce the value of already small 
accounts, while complicated account registration procedures, minimum balance requirements, and 
illiteracy all hinder access to loans, especially for women, who are more likely to be illiterate or have less 
experience handling money (Mpakaniye, 2016). Women typically rely on more informal loans from family 
because they lack collateral to access credit from a financial institution (IUCN, 2021). In 2018, of rural 
Rwandan women who accessed loans from a financial institution, 44.2% used saving and credits 
Cooperatives (SACCOs), compared to 39% of rural men (IUCN, 2021). 22% of rural men used a 
commercial bank, as opposed to only 16% of rural women (IUCN, 2021).  
Helping women access loans from formal financial institutions will allow greater independence for 
women and more economic security for families. Several banks in Rwanda have already signed on to 
the Afric an Guarantee Fund, aimed to reduce poverty and increase female access to loans (Mpakaniye, 
2016). The fund helps those who lack collateral still receive credit (Mpakaniye, 2016). Annually, the 
number of microloans accessed by women in Rwanda is increasing,  but additional support to enhance 
female financial literacy will help maintain the upward trend (Mpakaniye, 2016).  
Agricultural extension services include training  to innovate farming practices, and improve profitability 
and efficiency. The 2010 National  Gender Policy (MIGEPROF), the 2018 Strategic Plan for the 
Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA3) and the 2010 Agriculture Gender Strategy (MINAGRI) have 
committed to increase extension staff in Rwanda, particularly women (IUCN, 2021). At present, women 
are significantly underrepresented as extension personnel, which furthers a cycle of reduced female 
access to extension services; 82% of extension workers are male in Rwanda (IUCN, 2021). Male 
extension workers are more likely to approach male farmers regardi ng men’s crops, perpetuating the 
exclusion of women.


---
*Page 410*
---

19 
 Similarly, farm promoters, village leaders who promulgate knowledge from extension services, are also 
dominated by men (IUCN, 2021). Women tend to be less educated than men and have greater domestic 
obligations that inhibit them from working with the community as promoters. Promoters are perceived as 
having elevated social status, leading men to more quickly jump on the opportunity than women (IUCN, 
2021). By enabling more women to hold leadership positio ns as extension workers and farm promoters, 
more women can subsequently benefit from extension services, training and innovative farming 
practices.  
This sector has vast potential for greater female involvement, but legal frameworks may be necessary 
to ensure more equal representation. Women represent 66% of the agricultural workforce, but only 
19.7% of women in the sector occupy paid jobs (IUCN, 2021) . Therefore, enabling women to become 
agricultural leaders through extension services and farm promoters may offer greater independence, 
financially and socially. Female -only extension service training  may motivate women to participate and 
bring more atten tion to female crops, and establishing hiring quotas may enable more female leadership.  
Women are equally likely as men to have access to a mobile phone and use mobile financial services. 
But are less likely to be mobile money account holders, or have acce ss to bank services such as an 
ATM bank card. This is particularly true for women in rural areas, and ownership of capital goods  is 
much less for women -headed households (see Table 3) , demonstrating their marginalization across 
communities.   
 
Head of 
hous ehold 
sex Living room 
set % owning at least one  Total 
surveyed  
Radio  TV Computer  Mobile 
phone  Bicycle  
Male  19.6  78.6  11.9  3.6 71.1  16.2  2,031  
Female  12.8  59.3  5.7 2.3 54.3  4.9 677 
Table 3:  Comparison of assets held by women and male -headed households (Data from EICV 5, 2018)  
 
1.10 Women’s health and access to health services  
In 2010 life expectancy at birth was 71.13 years for women, and only 66.82 years for men 
(https:// www.statista.com/statistics/971106/life -expectancy -at-birth-in-rwanda -by-gender/) .  
Based on the 2019/2020 Demographic and Health Survey report (NISR, 2020), the maternal mortality 
rate or ratio (MMR), which measures the obstetric risk associated with each live birth and is the age - 
standardized maternal mortality rate divided by the age -standardized fertility rate, declined from 10.7 per 
thousand live births in 2000, to 2.03 per 1000 in 2019 -2020.  
The mortality rate of children under 5 years of age continues to decline from 50 deaths per 1,000 live 
births in 2014 to 45 per 1,000 in 2020.  
Women’s health, proxied using Body Mass Index shows that on average 76% of women within CND 
districts are within the normal BMI range, 19% are considered obese and only 5% fall below 18.5 which 
is considered nutritionally compromised (Republic of Rwanda, 2016). The averages for Rwanda as a


---
*Page 411*
---

20 
 whole are 73% normal, 21% obese, and 7% too thin. Similarly,  only 18% of women exhibit signs of 
anemia, compared to 19% for the nation. Prevalence of malaria in children and women is low (0.5% and 
0.4% respectively ) compared to 2.2% and 0.6% for the country as a whole (Republic of Rwanda, 2016).  
In 2017 74% of women had health insura nce and 94% of women had access to community health 
services. The percentage of health insured households is lowest in Rubavu district (54%) and highest in 
Ngororero district (82%) according to the 2014 -15 demographic and health survey (Government of 
Rwand a, 2016).  
 
Figure 5: Percent population with health insurance by district ( Source: Government of Rwanda, 2016)  
 
 
Overall access to sanitation facilities is high among Rwandans (IUCN, 2021). However, due to unequal 
income distribution between men and women, households led by women are less likely to have 
sanitation access than male led households; 80.6% of female head ed households have improved 
sanitation facilities compared to 88.0% of male headed households (IUCN, 2021). Traditional pit latrines 
are seen as more cost effective than modern sanitation systems, but pose risks of disease, overflow 
during the rainy season , groundwater contamination, mosquito breeding, and an increased risk of GBV 
for women due to distance from the house and night use (Tsinda et al., 2013). Lack of sanitation services 
poses both a serious social and environmental threat in Rwanda, particula rly in informal settlements.  
 
1.11 Women’s educational attainment and access to education services  
Education can lead to better health and greater access to resources (Allan et al., 2018:26). In Rwanda, 
the rate of people who have ever attended school is high, at 87%, but rates are higher in urban areas 
than rural areas (IUCN, 2021). The rates of primary education are approximately equal between boys 
and girls in Rwanda, and in secondary education women actually attend in higher numbers than men, 
53% women to 46 % men (Education Statistical Yearbooks, 2018). However, the disparity between men 
and women shifts with regard to technical training and tertiary education, in which men are more 
dominant.


---
*Page 412*
---

21 
  
 
Figure 6: Gender balance in education in Rwanda ( Source: State of Gender Equality in Rwanda, 2019)  
 
In 2018, 92% of children (1.64 million boys and 1.68 million girls) were enrolled in pre -nursery to 
secondary education (Ministry of Education, 2018). Literacy rates continue to climb from 38.2% in 1978 
to 73.2% in 2018. By this time youth literacy was at 85%. Girls and women lag behind boys and men. 
Only 56% of girls, 41% of women, and 28% of elderly women are literate.  
 
 
Levels  Schools  Males  Females  Total  Percent  
Pre-Nursery  96 3,199  3,292  6,491  0.2%  
Nursery  3,210  112,044  114,662  226,706  6.3%  
Primary  2,909  1,259,344  1,244,361  2,503,705  69.0%  
Secondary  1,416  264,782  314,115  578,897  16.0%  
TVET  360 57,643  44,842  102,485  2.8%  
Tertiary  30 41,458  34,255  75,713  2.1%  
Adult literacy  4,991  51,220  81,145  132,365  3.7%  
Total  13,012  1,789,690  1,836,672  3,626,362


---
*Page 413*
---

22 
 Table 4: Levels of schooling in Rwanda ( Source: Ministry of Education, 2018 Education Statistics)  
 
 
The equal rates of primary education for boys and girls in Rwanda suggest a cultural value of education 
for all children, not only prioritization for boys. A lack of tuition fees for childhood education enables poor 
families to send boys and girls to schoo l, and increasing rates of education contributes to falling illiteracy 
rates in Rwanda (IUCN, 2021). Higher levels of girls in secondary education may be attributed to 
Rwandan policies such as the 2008 Girls’ Education Policy and the implementation of a sc hool meal 
program (IUCN, 2021). Despite lower rates of women enrolled in tertiary education, the percentage is 
increasing due to flexible programming, such as online learning or night school, which enables women 
with domestic responsibilities to participat e. According to the IUCN, the higher level of education men 
and women receive, the less likely they are to work in the agriculture sector (IUCN, 2021). In comparison, 
92% of women with no education work in agriculture (IUCN, 2021).  
Strong gender stereotype s in Rwanda still push girls into “traditional” soft trades including hairdressing, 
secretarial work and nursing (IUCN, 2021). 87% of women with a university degree work in the service 
sector (IUCN, 2021). Though women are more likely to be primary school teachers than men, they are 
rarely secondary, tertiary or technical/vocational teachers. In agriculture, women predominantly occupy 
informal roles, such as unpaid farming for the family, whereas the men typically hold higher paying 
positions or manage high er value products such as timber (IUCN, 2021). As a result, the majority of 
agroforesters are male in Rwanda (Anastase & Nahayo, 2020).  
One of the greatest challenges to achieving economic stability lies in challenges in achieving quality 
educational attai nment by female youth which leads to their lower literacy, especially in rural areas. 
Overall, social factors including traditional gender roles such as domestic chores and family care, historic 
marginalization of girls and women, patriarchal social tradit ions, and gender -based violence entrench 
girls’ underperformance throughout their schooling which has a cyclical effect, as low performance in 
the primary leaving exam results in girls being admitted to lower quality secondary schools, and 
ultimately into higher education institutions (HIEs) in lower numbers (Huggins & Randell, 2007).  
This results in limited access to paid labor and employment in sectors such as services or public 
government. Similarly, lower literacy has put them at a greater disadvantage  in agriculture, as 
commercialization of farming has made it more difficult to feed families. While there are national laws 
and policies to protect employment, there is little protection for the vast majority of women who work in 
informal sectors which sig nificantly affects women’s rights within the country (Abbott et. al., 2008). 
Women in rural areas are primarily care -providers for children and the elderly, which is unpaid labor and 
invisibilized due to gender norms (Abbot, 2015). Thus, understanding thes e barriers and challenges and 
how to overcome them will inform interventions at project -level.  
 
1.12 Patterns of power and decision -making  
Rwanda is internationally acclaimed for being the first nation to have a majority female Parliament, with 
61% of these positions held by women from 2018 -2022 (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). The Constitution 
of the Republic of Rwanda established a minimum of 30 % female representation in public governance, 
and this high level of female participation in upper levels of governance far exceeds this minimum (East 
African Community, 2009). However, female participation drastically decreases in many communities’


---
*Page 414*
---

23 
 level gov erning bodies.  
 
Figure 7: Female and male representation in different levels of local government in Rwanda in 2018 -
2019 (Republic of Rwanda, 2019)  
 
 
Although overall female representation in the Rwandan government is increasing, higher levels of female 
representation in upper levels of governance mirror the disparity between gender equality policy and 
practice in the country. In higher levels of govern ance, these policies are implemented well and appear 
effective, but at community levels, larger gender gaps in prominent roles are clearly evident. Comparable 
gender gaps exist in central government roles that undergo recruitment processes, with many of th ese 
positions not reaching the 30% female representation minimum (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). 
Furthermore, female participation in the police force is extremely low, although representation is high in 
most other areas of the justice sector.  
Similarly, in the private sector, women hold very few high level positions, particularly at the provincial 
level. Nationally, 30% of executive committee presidents are women, but there are 0 female presidents 
at the provincial level (Republic of Rwanda, 20 19). Women have high levels of representation in second 
vice presidency in the private sector, with 70% of national and 80% of provincial second vice presidential 
roles occupied by women, but have low levels of representation in more powerful executive pos itions 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2019). In more local organizations, such as cooperatives, men hold the majority 
of the decision -making positions, while women tend to hold stereotypically female roles, such as 
secretary, vice president, and treasurer (IUCN, 202 1). 
At the household level, women have very little decision -making power. Although under the 1999 
Inheritance and Marital Property Law women are legally allowed to own land, cultural barriers still inhibit 
their ability to control how this land is used. Th ese barriers are predominantly based in the belief that 
men are the head of the household, and thus are the primary owners of all of the family’s land and assets 
(IUCN, 2021). Women’s lack of power within their households limits their ability to make decis ions about 
the planting of crops and the use of land as collateral for credit, which would allow increased female 
engagement in other economic activities. Based on female reports, the majority of households (70%) 
make decisions jointly, while in 25% of hou seholds the husband makes the majority of the decisions


---
*Page 415*
---

24 
 (IUCN, 2021). However, even in households that make joint decisions, women’s decisions tend to 
revolve around day-to-day issues, while men’s decisions are primarily focused on productive assets and 
income.  
Women’s ability to make decisions within both their own households and broader Rwandan society is 
further hampered by GBV. The effects of a longstanding patriarchal regime in the country has created 
and perpetuated the notion that men must be dominan t and women must be submissive. Women break 
these gender norms by asserting their right to be involved in decision -making, and this can be seen as 
diminishing their husband’s masculinity, which can result in violent retribution. In 2010, around 57% of 
Rwan dan women reported experiencing GBV from their partner, and women who bring in more money 
tend to experience higher levels of GBV (RWAMREC, 2010). This suggests that increasing women’s 
opportunities to make decisions and earn their own income will have a v ery limited effect on female 
empowerment until GBV is addressed. Engaging men and boys in gender equality advocacy and action 
highlights that GBV is not only a women’s issue, and is believed to be successful in reducing the 
prevalence of GBV (UNDP, 2018).  
 
1.13 Social service and support systems that contribute to gender empowerment, wellbeing, 
and security  
Government mandated and running social support programs have reduced the percentage of extremely 
poor households from 23% and 26% in 2010 to 15% and 18% in 2 017 for MHHs and FHHs respectively. 
Three state managed social support systems have contributed significantly to these observed reductions 
in poverty and increasing wellbeing and security.  
The Girinka Program (One Cow per Family Program) of the Ministry of  Agriculture (MINAGRI) started in 
2006. By 2017 over 290,000 cows have been provided to vulnerable male and female headed 
households (approximately 6% of all Rwandan families) as a way to reduce child malnutrition, increase 
the productivity of agricultural  labor, generate a new stream of income through surplus milk sales and 
strengthen social cohesion amongst Rwandan families and communities as cow owners pass on surplus 
calves to other needy families. Male headed households were, however, more likely than female headed 
households to receive a cow through this government program.  
The largest social support program of the Government of Rwanda is the Vision 2020 Umurenge 
Programme (VUP) which was started in 2008 and is managed by the Local Administrative Entities 
Development Agency (LODA) within the Ministry of Local Government (MINA LOC). VUP has four 
components: wage labor through public works, direct cash transfers, financial services and awareness 
raising. The majority of public works support agricultural production, land conservation and the 
maintenance of physical infrastructure.  A review by FAO showed that VUP wages paid to women were 
often captured by men. Retaining control over VUP income was easier for women who owned an 
individual savings account (e.g., within a Savings and Credit Cooperative - SACCO), though most 
women only had accounts in Village Savings and Loan Group or informal tontines. Rural women were 
more disempowered than men through cultural constraints to speaking in public meetings, workloads 
that limited participation in community meetings and self -help associati ons, and limited access to credit 
and savings accounts. The FAO study also found that the majority of both MHHs and FHHs were 
unaware of the existence of a VUP GRM, or were skeptical about the effectiveness of this complaint 
process. The most important rec ommendations were to a) enable women to open their own formal bank 
accounts to increase their control over their incomes and strengthen their decision -making capacity, and


---
*Page 416*
---

25 
 b) redirect households with high dependency ratios and/or low labor capacity away fr om public works 
wage labor and toward VUP direct cash transfers.  
MINAGRI further supports poor rural families by offering subsidies for agricultural inputs, improved seeds 
and irrigation as well as offering credit through the Agriculture Guaranty Fund whic h provides specific 
opportunities for women.  
 
 
● CONCLUSIONS - ONGOING CHALLENGES TO GENDER EQUITY IN THE CONTEXT OF 
THE GCF CND PROJECT  
Despite tremendous efforts from the policy and legal perspectives, a patriarchal culture and persistent 
disparities continue to characterize gender relations in Rwanda. Disparities persist in post -primary 
education; in access to and control of property inc luding land and economic resources; in employment 
opportunities and entrepreneurship; in decision -making at household and community levels; in family 
responsibilities and unpaid care work; and in the experience of violence, harassment, conflict, and 
insecu rity. Sexual and gender -based violence persists at high levels in Rwanda. While women have 
made impressive political progress, especially at the national level, their progress in terms of local 
political representation and engagement remains unequal. Econo mic opportunities remain markedly 
gender -differentiated.  
In Rwanda and in the Congo -Nile Divide, structural barriers to economic and political equity and female 
empowerment have significantly impeded measures to adapt to climate change impacts. In Rwanda, 
these structural inequalities are at a lower level compared to other countries in the world, because of 
leading gender -considerate policies across sectors. However, the point remains that women’s ability to 
access, use and control natural resources, infras tructure and services differently is still low compared to 
men. This means the degradation of natural resources and new infrastructure will affect women and 
men differently, and will generally result in greater vulnerability of women. Women are vital agent s of 
change and can be powerful leaders from the community to global level in mitigating and adapting to 
climate change.  
 
1.14 Afforestation, agroforestry and tree tenure  
Kiptot et al (2012) noted that an ICRAF survey conducted across countries in eastern Africa concluded 
that women rarely have tenure over trees unless they exclusively have tenure over the land. Moreover, 
they stated that “Women’s rights to tree products ar e usually limited to products that are considered to 
have little or no commercial value. These products are mainly indigenous fruits….fodder and mulch.” 
They also noted that: a) the survivorship of trees and fodder shrubs planted by men and women was 
effec tively the same, b) low cost/input agroforestry techniques for replenishing soil fertility were attractive 
to women farmers given that they are both labor and capital limited. Fuelwood, fodder, green manure, 
and coppicing shrub production substantially inc reases benefits to women that cannot be captured by 
men. Women appear to grow trees/shrubs for domestic consumption (fuelwood, fodder, bean poles, 
fruit) and sell the surplus in local markets. It is unclear whether women who sell wood products from 
land th at is owned by their husbands are able to capture that revenue stream.  
Agroforestry offers multiple benefits to Rwandan farmers, in particular, women. Planting trees within 
farms represents a low effort pathway to high reward. To enhance climate resilience  of communities, 
agroforestry practices sequester carbon, prevent erosion, and enhance soil quality for sustainable


---
*Page 417*
---

26 
 farming. For women, trees provide additional income to elevate socioeconomic status and reduce the 
risk of GBV by eliminating the need to wa lk far distances for fuel wood (Anastase & Nahayo, 2020). 
Despite the majority of farms under female management in Rwanda, women are often excluded from 
agroforestry, as trees traditionally fall under male domain, women lack the necessary training and have  
less access to the retail market (Kiptot & Franzel, 2012). In order to better include women in agroforestry, 
training on forestry and marketing should be targeted to women. Tools and practices that reduce labor 
requirements for women, such as shorter tree s (which decrease the need for male labor) or more modern 
processing techniques, will save women time and make the field more accessible (Kiptot & Franzel, 
2012).  
Afforestation and reforestation on public lands should include measures where women and youth  
formally have the right to capture a proportion of the value of the trees at harvest time. Assuming a 
harvest cycle of 15 -20 years this will provide women with a long -term asset that could be used as 
retirement income, and/or given as gifts or bequeathed to children. Young men could use the trees as 
savings to be used to build or buy a house when they marry.  
Investments in agroforestry on private farmlands should reflect the different interests and concerns of 
women and men. During focus groups women reported shortages of fuelwood, fodder and wood suitable 
for bean poles. They were also concerned about soil er osion on their steeply sloped farmland, and 
declining soil fertility and crop yields. On -farm tree planting, to address the concerns of women, should 
focus on fast growing, nitrogen fixing, coppicing species that can be planted in contours between rows 
of crops. The nutrient rich leaves of leguminous species can be used as fodder for livestock, and as 
green manure. Cutting the stems to ground level before planting ensures that the trees do not compete 
with the crops for sunlight and soil nutrients, but the tree roots that remain intact help stabilize the soil 
and prevent erosion caused by heavy rains. The cut stems can be dried for fuelwood or used as bean 
poles. Surplus fodder, fuelwood and bean poles can be sold to neighbors or at local markets. Coppicing 
species readily re -sprout from the roots allowing an annual harvest.  
 
1.15 Improved cook stoves  
In rural areas of Rwanda, 98% of households rely on wood as their main cooking fuel. The GoR 
completed a comprehensive report on Gender in the Energy Sector. The rep ort noted that almost 60% 
of FHHs spent 1 -3 hours per day collecting firewood compared to 36% of MHHs. The latter purchased 
fuelwood twice as often as FHHs who primarily rely on gathering fuelwood. Over 50% of both Rwandan 
FHHS and MHHs still cook using th e three -stone method, and only 13.5% use efficient cookstoves. Over 
50% of FHHs are unaware of the health benefits of improved cookstoves. The report argued for 
supporting women to transition from fuelwood to Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) primarily to reduce smoke 
inhalation and respiratory disease. The report did not address the fact that in higher altitude areas 
cooking fires also provide a heating source for the home. The use of clean cookstoves has major positive 
impacts on gender equality, by reducing hou sehold work for women and providing opportunities for 
women to engage in paid work.  
Poor rural families, particularly FHH, are unlikely to be able to afford LPG stoves. Moreover, LPGs do 
not remain warm after the gas is turned off and thus do not provide a  heat source for the home during 
the night or during cold spells. Tier 1 Canarumwe clay stoves are relatively inexpensive, substantially 
reduce woodfuel use, and provide a thermal mass that keeps radiating heat long after cooking is


---
*Page 418*
---

27 
 completed. Though imper fect they are an improvement in efficiency compared to the 3 stones cookfire 
method. As men do not gather firewood nor do they cook they are often unwilling to spend “their” money 
to purchase an improved stove even though it substantially reduces fuelwood use and the time women 
must spend gathering fuelwood. Efforts to introduce improved cook stoves into MHHs in the CND must 
address this barrier.  
 
1.16 Honey production and marketing  
The Rwandan government has identified beekeeping as a potential source of additional revenue for 
farmers (Mushonga et al., 2019). The European demand for honey far outpaces the production in 
Rwanda, indicating a market incentive to raise bees beyond subsis tence level (Mushonga et al., 2019). 
Furthermore, global decline of bee populations reflects a high biological need for more apiarists in 
Rwanda. Despite the economic and environmental benefits, along with low startup costs, beekeeping is 
perceived as a vo cation for poor people. Out of 83,000 beekeepers in Rwanda, 86% are adult males 
and 71% lack primary education (Mushonga et al., 2019). To overcome the negative stigma around 
beekeeping, materials and training for modern hives need to be provided to women and youth. Modern 
hives produce a higher yield of honey, have lower risk of causing fires, and do not need to be placed as 
high up in trees as traditional hives, which deters some women due to cultural restrictions barring women 
from climbing trees (WCS, 2 018). In a WCS study, 83% of beekeepers used traditional hives in Rwanda, 
demonstrating a need for more modern tools (WCS, 2018). Additionally, marketing training may help 
women to better sell the honey, as women still have relatively low market and distri bution access in 
Rwanda. Despite the stigma, beekeeping remains a strong potential source of income, which could 
reduce reliance on more harmful forest livelihoods, such as deforestation and poaching (Fakhry et al., 
2010).  
A study by Mushonga (2019) sugges ts that people consider beekeeping for the poor and illiterate are 
largely the domain of older men no longer able to labor in agricultural production. Women do appear to 
be engaged in the production and marketing of honey beer. ADF provided $343,000 in 201 7 to 
strengthen the honey production sector in Rwanda. Production remains relatively low because of 
dependence on traditional hives rather than modern hives such as Kenya Top Bar or Langstroth (CODIT, 
2009). The CODIT report funded by the SNV noted that in  2009, of the estimated 30,293 beekeepers in 
Rwanda only 23% were women. The report recommended that the GoR do away with subsidies to 
beekeepers and their co -operatives, focus on addressing the root causes of the prevailing problems not 
the effects, encou raging beekeepers to actively participate in their own development and advocating for 
the replication of knowledge and skills from common to individual apiaries.  
During focus groups both women and marginalized groups noted that the cost of modern hives and other 
beekeeping equipment such as smokers was a barrier to entry as was lack of access to credit. A big 
concern was farmers’ use of pesticides that kill bees, m aking it impossible to locate apiaries near 
farmland.  
 
1.17 Coronavirus (COVID -19) implications in advancing gender equity  
The global coronavirus (COVID -19) pandemic left no country untouched from its impacts. While research 
is still emerging, the severity of t he pandemic is clear; struggling economies, vast unemployment, and 
threats to health and wellbeing continue to affect the global community. Women in particular are already


---
*Page 419*
---

28 
 vulnerable to socioeconomic inequity that is currently exacerbated by COVID -19. Ther efore, the impact 
of the pandemic must be considered in gender planning into the future.  
Rafaeli and Hutchinson (2020) compared the secondary impacts of COVID -19 to the Ebola crisis on 
women and girls in Africa, finding that women and girls are more likely to experience higher poverty and 
school dropout rates, an increase in unintended pregnan cies, reduced income and financial 
empowerment, greater domestic responsibility (increased childcare due to school closures), and food 
insecurity due to the pandemic. In times of crisis, school closures and financial stress also lead to 
increased rates of gender based violence (Rafaeli & Hutchinson, 2020). Women face greater exposure 
to COVID through their roles as caretakers in families and in healthcare, and have less decision -making 
power, rendering their needs unmet during COVID -19 (Parry & Gordon, 2020 ). Yet few countries have 
enacted policies to address the gendered impacts of the pandemic.  
In Rwanda, the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF), in partnership with UN WOMEN 
and UNFPA, conducted a 2020 study on the gendered impacts of COVID -19. The report indicates that 
44.2% of female respondents completely stopped their economic activities due to the pandemic, 
compared to only 17% of men (Bayisenge, Lo & Schreiner, 2020). In rural areas, the percentage was 
higher for women; 50% stopped their  work and thus sources of income, compared to 17.7% of rural men 
(Bayisenge, Lo & Schreiner, 2020). As women occupy more informal and unsecured jobs in Rwanda, 
they are at greater risk of income loss than men.  
The use of health care and maternal services i n Rwanda considerably declined during the COVID -19 
outbreak (Wanyana, Wong & Hakizimana, 2020). Declines in child health care services, particularly 
vaccinations, could be detrimental to avoiding future outbreaks of vaccine -preventable diseases 
(Wanyana, W ong & Hakizimana, 2020). Many women feared contracting the virus while attending 
regular checkups, which contributed to the decline of health services in Rwanda (Wanyana, Wong & 
Hakizimana, 2020).  
Recommendations to mitigate the impacts of COVID -19 on wome n in Rwanda include (Bayisenge, Lo 
& Schreiner, 2020):  
● Implement programs that offer employment or financial security in spite of COVID -19. 
● Provide online or socially -distant courses to prevent school dropouts.  
● Establish women -specific financial packages in the national economic recovery plan.  
● Strengthen the mobilization of men and boys in childcare and domestic responsibilities to offset 
increased labor caused by the pandemic in parallel with on -going “Men engage” national programmes.  
● Accelerate government interventions to address elevated levels of GBV.  
 
1.18 Promoting gender equity within the CND GCF project  
 
Gender equality and women’s empowerment should be considered in all stages of the CND project 
cycle: design, formulation, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. In each of these stages, 
project ma nagers should keep a ‘gender lens’ in mind, looking at ways the project can:  
● Address gender inequalities that emerge from the project;  
● Ensure the differential needs of women and men are addressed;  
● Ensure women and men have equal access to resources, services, and capacity development;  
● Ensure equal participation of women and men in management arrangements and as


---
*Page 420*
---

29 
 beneficiaries, partners and  key stakeholders; and  
● Ensure women’s equal participation in decision -making processes.  
 
Based on key expected outcomes, this gender assessment provides the foundation for a realistic gender 
action plan to be implemented in the CND project.


---
*Page 421*
---

30 
 5 LITERATURE CITED  
 
Abbott P, Malunda D. 2016. The Promise and the Reality: Women’s Rights in Rwanda. African Journal 
of International and Comparative Law 24:561–581. Edinburgh University Press.  
African Development Bank. 2014. Analysis of Gender and Youth Employment in Rwanda. Statistics 
Department, Rwanda Country Office, African Development Bank  
Allan EJ, Raupp M, Protik A, Ndirangu K (2018) Soma Umenye impact evaluation. United States Agency 
for International Development, Kigali, Rwanda  
Anastase GM, Nahayo L. 2020. Impact Assessment of Agroforestry Practices on Community Socio - 
Economic Livelihoods in Rwanda. International Journal of Environmental & Agriculture Research 6:59 –
71. 
Bayisenge J, Lo FA, Schreiner MB. 2020. Rapid Gender Assessm ent (RGA) on the Impact of COVID -
19 on Women and Men in Rwanda. Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Kigali.  
Campbell CA et al. 2021. Investigating Cooking Activity Patterns and Perceptions of Air Quality 
Interventions among Women in Urban Rwanda. Inte rnational Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health 18.  
CODIT. 2009. Beekeeping/ Honey Value Chain Financing Study Report. SNV Rwanda/IFAD  
East African Community. 2009. Gender and Community Development Analysis in Rwanda. Republic of 
Rwanda.  
Fakhry N, Gusak K, Hadjinian L, Vazquez M. 2010. Business Plan and Marketing Strategy for 
Beekeeping and Pottery Prod uct Development: Nyungwe Forest National Park, Rwanda.  
FAO. Public works and rural women’s economic empowerment: Rwanda’s Vision 2020 Umurenge 
Programme. FAO, Rome.  
Green, K, E Bagaye, R Blum, L Woolf, and C Jessee. 2019.  USAID/Rwanda Youth Assessment.  United 
States Agency for International Development, Wash ington DC.   
IUCN. 2021. Gender Analysis Report for TREPA Project Proposal on“Transforming Eastern Province 
Through Adaptation” (TREPA). International Union for Conservation of Nature.  
Kiptot E, Franzel S. 2012. Gender and agroforestry in Africa: a review of women’s participation.  
Agroforestry Systems 84:35–58. 
Kiyani P, Andoh J, Lee Y, Lee DK. 2017. Benefits and challenges of agroforestry adoption: a case of 
Musebeya sector, Nyamagabe District in southern province of Rwanda. Forest Science and Technology 
13:174–180. Taylor & Francis.  
Mukabera J (2016) Womens Sta tus and Gender Relations in Post -Genocide Rwanda: Focusing on the 
Local and Everyday Life Level. Seoul National University  
Mushonga B, Hategekimana L, Habarugira G, Kandiwa E, Samkange A, Ernest Segwagwe BV. 2019. 
Characterization of the Beekeeping Value Chain: Challenges, Perceptions, Limitations, and 
Opportunities for Beekeepers in Kayonza District, Rwanda. Advances in Agric ulture 2019 :5982931. 
Hindawi.


---
*Page 422*
---

31 
 Mpakaniye JP. 2016. The contribution of microcredit advanced to women on poverty reduction in rural 
areas  of Rwanda. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2811980 .  
National Institute of Statistics Rwanda (NISR). 2018. EICV5 Integrated Household Living Conditions  
Parry BR, Gordon E. 2020. The shadow pandemic: Inequitable gendered impacts of COVID ‐19 in 
South Africa. Gender Work Organ.  28:795–806. 
Survey Thematic Report GENDER -2016/2017. General technical report. Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Planning, Kigali, Rwanda.  
Rafaeli T, Hutchinson G. 2020. The Secondary Impacts of COVID -19 on Women and Girls in Sub - 
Saharan Africa. Education Development Trust.  
Randell, S. K. (2007). Gender Equality in Education in Rwanda: What is happening to our Girls? South 
African Association of Women Graduates Conference on “Drop -Outs from School and Tertiary Studies: 
What Is Happening to Our Girls?” Cape Town.  
Republ ic of Rwanda. 2000. Rwanda Vision 2020. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. 
Available from https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/handle/2152/5071/4164.pdf . 
Republic  of Rwanda.  2021. Rwanda  demographic  and health  survey  2019 -2020, 
Final Report. https:// www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2019. The State of Gender Equality in Rwanda from Transition to Transformation.  
Gender Monitoring Office.  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. Gender Profile in the Energy Sector. Gender Monitoring Office. Republic of  
Rwanda  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. 2018 Education Statistics. https:// www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. EICV5 Integrated household living conditions survey 2016/2017. 
https://www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic  of Rwanda.  2016.  Demographic  and health  survey  RDHS,  Western  Province. 
https://www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2020. Vision 2050. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. Available from 
https://www.nirda.gov .rw/uploads/tx_dce/Vision_English_Version_2050_ -31_Dec_2020.pdf . 
Republic of Rwanda. 2010. National Gender Policy.Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Republic 
of Rwanda.  
Republic of Rwanda. 2010. Strategic plan for the implementation of the National Gender Policy. 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Republic of Rwanda  
Republic of Rwanda. 2009. The state of gender equality in Rwanda: from transition to transformation.  
Gender Monitoring Office, Government of the Republic of Rwanda  
RWAMREC. 2010. Masculinity and Gender Based Violence in Rwanda. Rwanda MenEngage Network. 
Available from https://promundoglobal.org/wp -content/uploads/2015/01/Masculinity -and- Gender -
Based -Violence -in-Rwanda -IMAGES.pdf.  
Tsinda A, Abbott P, Pedley S, Charle s K, Adogo J, Okurut K, and Chenoweth J. 2013. Challenges to


---
*Page 423*
---

32 
 Achieving Sustainable Sanitation in Informal Settlements of Kigali, Rwanda. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health 10: 6939 -6954.  
UNDP. 2018. Gender Equality Strategy: UNDP Rwanda (2019 -2022). Unite d Nations Rwanda. 
https://www1.undp.org/content/dam/rwanda/docs/demgov/Gender%20Equality%20Strategy.p  df.  
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner. 2017. UN Human Rights Report. Office of the High 
Commissioner on Human Rights, G eneva, Switzerland.  
United Nations Rwanda. 2021. How the UN is supporting The Sustainable Development Goals in 
Rwanda. Available from https://rwanda.un.org/en/sdgs . 
University of California, Berkeley – Haas School of Business Consultants for the Wildlife Conservation 
Society, Berkeley, California.  
USAID. 2021. LEARN Project Gender and Social Inclusion Analysis. USAID, Rwanda 
USAID.  2019. Gender and social inclusion analysis report. USAID, Rwanda  
USAID. 2017. Integrating Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in USAID’s Program Cycle: ADS 
Chapter 205. USAID, Washington, D.C.  
USAID. 2015. Gender analysis for USAID/Rwanda Feed the Future (FtF) Project. USAID, Rwanda  
USAID. 2015. WCS Central Africa Ge nder Assessment. Central African Regional Program for the 
Environment, (CARPE III), USAID  
Uwineza P, Pearson E, Powley E (2009) Sustaining women’s gains in Rwanda: The influence of 
indigenous culture and post -genocide politics. Institute for Inclusive Security, Washington, DC  
Vanhees, Katrijn. 2014. Property rights for women in Rwanda: access t o land for women living in de 
facto  unions. Universiteit Gent, Academiejaar: 1 -108. 
Wanyana D, Wong R, Hakizimana D. 2020. Rapid assessment on the utilization of maternal and child 
health services during COVID -19 in Rwanda. Public Health Action 11: 12-21. 
Wildlife Conservation Society and Forest of Hope. 2018. A quick needs assessment in modern 
beekeeping around Gishwati -Mukura National Park, Rwanda. WCS . 
Wallace, C., Haerpfer, C., & Abbott, P. (2008). Women in Rwandan Politics and Society. International 
Journal of Sociology, 38(4), 111 –125. https://doi.org/10.2753/IJS0020 -7659380406   
World   Economic  Forum.  2021.  Global  Gender  Gap Report
 2021.  Available  from http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf.


---
*Page 424*
---

33 
 ● GENDER, YOUTH AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  
The goal of the programme is to increase climate resilience of vulnerable rural communities in the CND, 
reduce CO2 emissions, build capacity for integrated spatial planning and increase the extent and 
integrity of forest ecosystems in the CND. The programm e has three components directly targeting 
vulnerabilities within climate impact chains. Component (1) Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into 
Integrated Land Use Planning and Management will lead to enhanced adaptive capacity of both 
ecosystems and rural pop ulations, by strengthening coordination among sectors and integrating climate 
resilience considerations into planning and development. Component (2) Landscape Management and 
Restoration will implement high priority actions to enhance the resilience of vuln erable communities by 
increasing the extent and integrity of forest ecosystems and landscapes and by reducing demand for 
wood fuel. In addition, component (2) is designed to reduce the time women spend collecting and 
preparing fuelwood, and simultaneously to empower women to provide input to local -level decision 
making (see also Component (1)). As a co -benefit, greenhouse gas emissions will be reduced through 
restoration of natural forests, agroforestry, reduced fuelwood demand and fuel efficient cookstoves  
under components (1 and 2) are expected. Component (3) will focus on Enhancing climate adaptation 
through resilient livelihoods . 
Women, youth and marginalized groups, inclu ding women -headed households  in the CND are key 
stakeholders in the success of this  project, and are the primary target beneficiaries of the project. The 
project will be implemented across various sectors along the CND, particularly focusing on communities 
around Nyungwe National Park and Gishwati -Mukura National Park --critical for Rwand a yet highly 
vulnerable forests due to high population and increasing demography who depend upon fuelwood, and 
actions taken by poor households that illegally use forests to improve income streams.  
 
1.19 Methods  
This Action Plan operationalizes the findings from the Gender Assessment, the ESIA, and youth -based 
information collected during the feasibility studies and stakeholder engagement during the Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) phase. The Assessment used fiv e standard lenses (USAID 2017[1]) to conduct 
the analysis:  
1. Institutions, Laws and Policies  that influence the context in which men and women act and make 
decisions.  
2. Beliefs, Perceptions, and Cultural Norms  that shape how men and women, youth and elders 
are able (or expected) to practice activities, particularly those to be developed by this GCF  project.  
3. Gender Roles, Responsibilities, and Time Use  in reproductive, productive, and community work.  
4. Access to and Control over Assets and Resources  are different between young and old, men 
and women.  
5. Patterns of Power and Decision -making  focused on how individuals are able to be represented 
and be in decision -making positions.  
Based upon this framework of five lenses, the Gender Analysis  identified and analyzed the gender  risks 
and impacts of the program and climate change through four main steps:  
Scoping: The GYA included a scoping process to review relevant literature and data for the project 
area, including local reports and data, co nsult with government and other partners, and conduct field 
visits to understand the project, identify and characterize the project area, and identify stakeholders,


---
*Page 425*
---

34 
 including program -affected parties and other interested parties, who may have different con cerns and 
priorities about project and climate change impacts, mitigation mechanisms and benefits.  
Legislative and policy review: The GYA conducted a review of (1) Rwanda’s applicable policy 
framework, national laws and regulations and institutional capabi lities relating to gender and youth, (2) 
variations in country conditions and program context across the affected area, (3) relevant gender and 
youth studies, (4) Rwanda’s obligations and commitments under relevant international agreements and 
treaties, (5 ) applicable requirements under GCF standards and (6) internationally accepted best 
practices.  
Stakeholder consultation and analysis: Based on the identification of stakeholders identified in the 
scoping exercise, the GYA conducted initial consultations with stakeholders to gather information on 
concerns and priorities about the project and climate change, analyze the outcomes of the con sultations 
and develop a strategy for continuing stakeholder engagement.  
Baseline analysis: Drawing on the scoping exercise, the GYA assembled and analyzed existing 
information. The information was analyzed in light of the stakeholder consultation and anal ysis and 
legislative and policy review, to identify information gaps and ways in which these may be filled.  
This information was then used to guide the Gender Youth Social Inclusion Action Plan. The details of 
the stakeholders consulted, including key info rmant interviews (18), focus group discussions (24), and 
district workshops (4) can be found in Annex 7. A literature review is available in the Gender Assessment 
(above) and ESIA (Annex 6).  
 
1.20 Gender Issues  
There are three key gender -based themes that influenced the design of the Gender Action Plan:  
a. Change negative gender and social norms . The most profound barrier for this project is rural 
norms about the roles of men and women. Whilst the Government of Rwan da has made many advances 
and has implemented many policies (see Section 3 of the Gender Assessment) to achieve gender 
equality , particularly in national -level representation and inclusion, patriarchal privilege and decision -
making remains embedded in rura l society (IUCN, 2021). The consequences of this for this project is 
far-reaching. Men are generally seen as the head of household with the decision -making powers over 
all assets, resulting in male appropriation of household and farm -based assets (IUCN, 20 21; Kiyani et 
al., 2017). Though female headed households face the same issues and challenges as male headed 
households, they are disproportionately impacted because of prevalent gender inequality issues (GMO 
2017). Men in the CND are positioned to be sign ificantly more involved in programs that result in 
monetary benefits, such as fern clearing, casual labor, and plantation projects. Although under Rwanda 
law, sons and daughters receive equal inheritance rights (Law/nº 22/99 of 12/11/1999) the PPF focus 
groups highlighted that due to cultural practices, parents favor sons in land inheritance, leaving young 
women in a position where they depend on marrying a man to gain access to farmland; without a formal 
marriage, these women have no land tenure. Broadly, these gender and social norms leave most women 
with little decision -making power and no real control over assets. The threat of sexual and gender based 
violence (SGBV) at the household level where women try to assert independence and achievement is 
high. F or this project, the implications are that trees planted by women become men’s property; money 
gained in employment (tree planting, nursery maintenance) or through farmland production (fruit trees, 
honey, etc) are ultimately controlled by men; and women sh ouldn’t participate in activities without a


---
*Page 426*
---

35 
 husband’s permission. Although this seems bleak, this situation is not universal. The 24 CND community 
focus groups held in the PPF highlighted that many households decide together on how money should 
be spent; l and tenure is broadly seen as joint ownership; and men realize the impact of dwindling 
fuelwood resources on women and girls. Gender equity is not yet universal and rural culture has a long 
trajectory to achieving it.  
As a result, this program will focus heavily on social and behavior change communications (SBCC) as 
a means to positively change perceptions towards  gender equity. Community members, including 
community leaders and women and men community influencers  spec ifically will be targeted for 
sensitization  on gender equit y  in order to shift their attitudes and to build a conducive environment for 
women and HMPO to be able to participate in project activities. Women  have been engaged in the 
development of this proj ect to ensure time constraints, work burden and reproductive responsibilities do 
not impede their ability to engage in the various activities designed by the project. Women will be 
regularly consulted throughout project implementation to ensure they are ab le to actively participate in 
project activities and activities take place at times which are convenient for them and at locations that 
are safe and contextually appropriate. At project start, once communities are selected for 
implementation, barriers face d by women and HMPO to participate in project activities will be reviewed 
and solutions to overcome barriers incorporated into programming through an additional screening 
process outlined in Annex 6. The project ESS Coordinator and Gender Officer will prov ide support to 
ensure all project staff understand barriers faced by women and HMPO and programming works to 
address barriers to ensure their active participation in activities. The project will also get support from 
NGOs that help men on masculinity and a ddressing SGVB which will include targeted outreach to 
mobilize their participation in household and parental responsibilities to ease women’s responsibilities 
and sensitization on the importance of fair access and control of resources, including income. T he 
engagement of community leaders and women and men community influencers to further promote equal 
and fair control of resources between men and women will further mitigate the risk of men taking over 
control of incomes earned and targeted for women. Last ly, the project will clearly explain participant 
selection, intended benefits and how participants can help monitor benefits and risks and reduce risks if 
necessary, including reducing the risk of men taking over control of incomes targeted for women.  The 
program will  have a safe, accessible Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for all project stakeholders, 
particularly women, to access to pursue redress as needed. The project will also collaborate with existing 
Isange One Stop Centers in the project area in GBV prevention and immediate assistance to victims. All 
project staff will be trained and project beneficiaries informed on the purpose and use of the GRM, 
including reporting gender -based violence. The project will ensure confidentiality of the informatio n and 
identity of the complainant. The grievance process will include options for victims to remain anonymous 
which will add a layer of protection for individuals who may be subject to gender -based violence. 
Throughout project implementation, project staff  will disseminate information to beneficiaries on how 
they can use the GRM and solicit feedback on how the mechanism can be improved if needed.  
 
b. Provide access to skills building, leadership and programmatic inclusion . Because of 
existing gender norms, th ere is much to do to build technical skills of rural women to be able to participate 
in the project. In addition to that, finding women leaders and building their leadership skills to be at the 
forefront of rural gender equity is crucial for addressing the  root c auses of women’s exclusion in land 
use planning and decision -making . This project however will not just focus on rural women. Ensuring


---
*Page 427*
---

36 
 that women play a strong role at all levels of climate programming in the country is important. Thus 
developing pr ofessional networks and internships to provide opportunities to strengthen leadership and 
technical skills will be incorporated into the program.  
 
c. Facilitate women’s financial autonomy . In order to support rural women to capture financial 
benefits of this project, this project will incorporate three activities: financial skills building, support in 
joining cooperatives; and facilitating access to entrepreneurship through financial/entrepr eneurship 
training, access to village savings/loans and small grants, and mentoring.  The project will ensure all 
trainings are gender -responsive and inclusive. Gender considerations will be integrated into training 
curriculum, content and delivery methods.  Flexible training schedules and convenient venues will be 
selected to accommodate women's needs. Staff in charge of gender aspects will ensure gender 
mainstreaming and ensure the project addresses barriers to women's participation. Training will also 
use p articipatory approaches to create an inclusive learning environment and incorporate components 
on women's empowerment and leadership development, promoting gender equality and active 
participation . By facilitating independent access to financial services, women’s income can be managed 
independently until shifting norms and household situations reach gender equity for households in  
adapting to climate change . Within the program, microenterprise, access to finance, beekeeping, and 
agroforestry/cookstove value  chain support were chosen as key activities  because they  are feasible 
livelihoods within the target rural households and help strengthen resiliency of the rural economy. Further 
information on women in the value chains targeted by the project, including g ender characteristics, 
composition of workforce and ownership etc. is detailed in the project Feasibility Study where possible 
and will be refined during project implementation.  
 
1.21 Youth Analysis and Key Issues  
Rwanda is a young country; 82% of the population is under the age of 40 and 51.5% are 19 or under 
(NISR, EICV5 2018, see Table 5). The sex ratio for youth, classified as people from 14 -35 years old, is 
92 males for every 100 females. The literacy rate for youth is quite high; averaging 91% in urban areas 
and 82% in rural areas (ibid). Numeracy rates are linked to wealth, with poorer families having lower 
capacity (72.4% vs 92.7%). Larger urban -rural discrepancies are found in computer literacy (28.5% vs 
7%) and mobile phone ownership (70% vs 41%).   
Table 5: Youth population in Rwanda by district. (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)


---
*Page 428*
---

37 
 Table 6.  Youth Usual Economic Activity by Sex and Province.  Source: (NISR EICV5 2018).  
 
 
Employment figures for rural youth indicate that 54.7% are engaged in agriculture, and 32.9% in elementary 
activities. The rest are in services (7.8%), and very few  in managerial, professional etc jobs. According to a 
recent analysis, youth “envision self -sufficiency achieved through economic independence and the ability to 
provide for and support their families, and they see this path as most available to them throu gh self -
employment (USAID 2019)”.  The Youth Assessment highlighted key priority areas that youth identified for 
achieving their goals:  
 
● Livelihoods and skills development for productive self -employment activities  
● Education and skills for entering into the formal work sector  
● Reproductive autonomy and health to avoid early pregnancy which is a key hurdle towards economic 
self-sufficiency  
Poverty amongst youth has remained stable between EICV4 and EICV5, with about 30% of all youth below 
the poverty level, and 11.3% in extreme poverty. There are substantial gender differences, with young women 
increasingly vulnerable as they age (see Figures 7  and 8 with data from NISR’s EICV 5, 2018). Thus, 
programming ensuring attention on both young men and young women is vital for rural climate resiliency.


---
*Page 429*
---

38 
  
Figure 8: Percentage of youth below the poverty line by age (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)  
 
 
Figure 9:  Percentage of youth in extreme poverty line in Rwanda by age. (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)  
 
Translating this information into a climate adaptation program that supports  young men and women in the 
CND, three key topics influenced the action plan:  
a. Diversified  opportunities. With over 51.9% of the Rwandan population under the age of  
b. 15 and 18% between the ages of 15 -24, youth make up a significant percentage of the 
population. There is already a scarcity of arable land, with many households owning less  than what is 
needed for their subsistence. With the Rwandan population expected to increase from 12 million in 2019 
to 20 million in 2042. The future for the upcoming generation of rural youth is worrisome --agricultural


---
*Page 430*
---

39 
 lands will continue to grow scarcer  and demand for resources and land increase. The youth interviewed 
are very cognizant of these constraints, and many are keen to diversify their livelihoods yet they are 
most interested in short -term gains. This GCF program intends to seek out vulnerab le youth in critical 
areas of the CND to support entrepreneurship and diversified  opportunities to reduce pressure on highly 
marginal lands.  
c. Access to skills building . Many youth attend schools, but training in practical agroforestry, 
financial management, and forestry is lacking. This program intends to target youth for diversifying their 
skill sets and strengthening their resilience to adapt to climate change.  
d. Youth leadership and Programmatic Inclusion . Many youths  voiced their concerns over not 
being included in decision -making processes and programming, resulting in key stakeholders not being 
engaged in civil society. In order to engage the new generation of rural f armers and consumers, this 
project will identify and work with youth leaders in the CND to use SBCC to engage youth to benefit and 
support long -term tree initiatives. With youth involved in decision - making processes, innovative ideas 
to involve youth with  best practice on government lands and to get youth to appropriate long -term 
thinking through tree planting as future investments.  
 
1.22 Internal program considerations  
In addition to programmatic activities with women and youth, this program will also have an internal 
focus to ensure best practices. These include:  
a. Avoid perpetuation of gender inequalities and women’s exclusion in the agro/forestry sector. 
SBCC will be us ed heavily to shift norms towards inclusivity and skills building to facilitate women and 
youth to join the sectors.  In addition, women need to be engaged in the decision -making  bodies of the 
project itself, including a Steering Committee, which will be a t least 50% women, and the Project 
Management Unit with targets to achieve 50% women by the end of the program as mentoring and 
training increase capacity .  The Gender Monitoring Office will be a part of the Steering Committee and 
along with the The National Women’s Council and The Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion were 
consulted during proposal development and will continue to be involved at project implementation stage 
at the national and local level. There will be comprehensive consultation and feedback processes with 
these stakeholders through meetings and workshops to ensure perpetuating gender inequalities is 
avoided.  
b. Build partnerships . This GC F project provides a unique opportunity to engage civil society at 
national and local levels. The team will work with men’s, women’s, and youth organizations to build their 
capacity and facilitate their engagement with project beneficiaries and local gover nment actors.  
c. Gender and Diversity training . Training will be an important component of a large, 5 -year 
program. Building online training modules that can be viewed across the CND, and using new platforms 
like WhatsApp  to communicate with urban and rural p roject staff will ensure that static, one -off training  
is avoided.  
d. Staffing . Diversity and inclusion are important for the project, and hiring practices at all levels 
of the program will be reflected in hiring policies. The program management unit will hir e a full-time 
dedicated gender expert and a full-time dedicated  youth focal point (both AE staff)  and associated costs 
are included in the project budget .  These two staff will participate in all management meetings to support 
inclusion goals across the pr oject, and will lead and oversee the implementation of the Gender, Youth, 
and Social Inclusion Action Plan.  Another key role of these two positions will be to engage civil society


---
*Page 431*
---

40 
 partners, particularly women’s, men’s, and youth groups to build capacity and increase the sustainability 
of achievements during this five -year project.  Along with these positions, RFA staff will include a 
Community Mobilization Specialist and a Community Engagement Specialist who will be in charge of 
and support project gender  mainstreaming. Their responsibilities include reviewing site specific barriers 
faced by women to participate in project activities, ensuring these barriers are addressed in order to 
support full participation of women, ensuring gender equity in all projec t activities and where needed 
help women access the Grievance Redress Mechanisms to pursue redress and connect women with 
Isange One Stop Centers in the project area to prevent gender -based  violence and provide immediate 
assistance to victims.   
e. M&E. Many stakeholder meetings highlighted the lack of community engagement as a key 
reason for project failures in the past. This project will incorporate suggestions from our stakeholder 
engagement meetings to ensure best practice is followe d. This includes not only deeper local 
government engagement but also using a rights -based approach to ensure that communities are at the 
heart of planning our interventions. Targets for youth and gender are incorporated into the Gender and 
Youth Action Pl an below and are set to ensure women and youth are equally targeted where possible 
and encouraged to actively participate. Exceptions include situations where group composition, such as 
government agents or community leaders, are outside the project’s cont rol or the activity solely targets 
men, such as masculinity  sessions held with men to improve gender equity in program participation and 
benefits or assisted natural regeneration activities inside the park far from villages that will take male 
participan ts several weeks away from their homes. Overall targets for key activities (i.e., G4. 4.1.1.5, 
G4. 4.1.1.6) have not been set as the target will depend on the number of villages/sites where project 
activities take place, however disaggregated targets per v illage/site have been set. A project baseline 
will be conducted and baselines for all targets will be determined at project onset.


---
*Page 432*
---

41 
 
 
 
 1.23 Gender and Youth Action Plan  
 
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning  
Impact 1: Climate adaptation programming is successfully implemented because it is  
fundamentally informed by rural women and youth stakeholders  
Indicator: Equal participation by gender groups in contributing to expected outcomes  
Gender/Youth Outcome 1: Climate adaptation programs in LUPs reflect and address the priorities of women and youth  
Indicator: % of men, women and youth participating in LUP processes who feel LUPs incorporate their needs as they relate to c limate programmin g 
Activity  Gender/Youth Outputs  Indicators  Targets  Timeline  Responsi
ble Costs  
G1. 1.1.1.7  Conduct climate 
literacy seminars for local 
government and civil society 
organizations, aimed at increasing 
women and youth participation  Local institutions are 
trained to build capacity 
of rural people, 
specifically women and 
youth, to participa te in 
climate adaptation 
processes  # of CSOs 
and 
government 
agencies 
trained  60 people (50% male, 50% 
female) from  CSOs/Local 
institutions trained in Y1 and 
Y3 to increase participation of 
women/ youth/ marginalized in 
stakeholder consultations & 
activitie s Y1,3 PMU/RFA  $10,187   
  
G1. 1.1.1.8 Provide financial and 
logistical support to trained 
organizations in grassroots 
mobilization to increase women 
and youth participation in climate 
adaptation planning  Trained institutions hold 
meetings to train women, 
youth and marginalized 
people on forests and 
mobilize them to 
participate in planning 
processes  # of meetings 
held by 
trained 
organizations 
with local 
communities 
on climate 
adaptation 
programming  At least 10 grassroots 
meetings per district are held 
in Y1 and Y3 in the CND  Y1,3 PMU/RF A/
Local 
CSOs 
(TBD)  $12,262


---
*Page 433*
---

42 G1. 1.1.2.4 Develop and rollout a 
series of trainings (virtual sessions 
and online modules) on gender 
sensitivity and mainstreaming 
women and youth into planning  Program Staff and 
government officials  
understand gender 
barriers, understand how 
to mainstream g ender 
equality principles into 
planning  and are strong 
facilitators to support 
women, youth and 
marginalized participation 
in meetings  # of people 
trained 
(disaggregat
ed by 
gender)  
# project staff 
trained in 
social 
inclusion  - 65 government agents 
trained  per year .  
- 100% project staff trained  Y1-5 PMU + 
Local 
Women's 
NGO 
(TBD)  $40,523   
 
Component 2: Forest Landscape Management and Restoration  
Gender/Youth Impact 2: Sustainable gains in restoration and landscape management are made  
because women and youth are enabled and motivated to adopt best practice  
Impact Indicator: Targeted women and youth report an improved enabling environment for their participation in forest management and restoration  
Gender/Youth Outcome 2: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage in forest management and 
restoration  
Outcome Indicator: Equal participation by gender groups in forest lan dscape management and restoration  
G2. 2.2.2.15 & 3.1.1.11 Develop 
and implement strategy (including 
social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth benefit from 
forest restoration projects   
Women and youth have 
the capacity, motivation, 
and opportunity to 
participate and benefit 
equitably in  restoration  
programs. Programs will 
actively seek out direct 
participation  of and 
benefits for women and 
youth through paid labor 
and direct involvement.  % Women 
beneficiaries  
% Youth 
beneficiaries  50% of beneficiaries are 
women  
50% of beneficiaries are 
youth2 
 
 Y1 
Strategy 
Y2-5 
Implemen
tation  PMU, 
Women/Yo
uth NGOs 
(TBD)  $37,735  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods  
 
2 The total number of beneficiaries will be determined at project onset


---
*Page 434*
---

43 
 
 
 
 Gender/Youth Impact 3: Women, marginalized and youth are empowered to actively participate in green jobs  
Impact indicator: Target groups perception of economic empowerment  
Gender/Youth Outcome 3: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capa city to engage in green jobs  
Outcome Indicator: Number of new women, youth and marginalized households that have engaged in green jobs  
G3. 3.2.1.2 Develop and 
implement strategies to ensure 
that women,youth, and other 
marginalized groups benefit from 
rural livelihoods and financial 
services  
 Women and youth have 
the capacity, motivation, 
and opportunity to 
participate and benefit 
equitably i n rural 
livelihoods and financial 
services  % Women 
beneficiaries  
% Youth 
beneficiaries  50% of beneficiaries are 
women  
50% of beneficiaries are 
youth3 
 
 Y1 & Y2  RFA & 
CORDAID  $53,053  
G3. 3.2.3.2 Organize 
Microenterprise training and 
develop and implement green 
grants programs targeting landless 
youth and poor, as well as women 
who are unable to access direct 
benefits from land -based project 
activities.  Landless poor, youth, 
and women have 
enterprise skills and 
grants to engage in 
green value chains  # of 
enterprises 
formed, 
beneficiaries 
disaggregate
d by gender 
and social 
class  5,600 beneficiaries of which at 
least 50% are women  
500 off -farm jobs created  
in production quality  
control  
 Y2,3 & 4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $66,398  
G3. 3.3.2.2 Provide 
organizational/technical/financial 
capacity building to women, youth, 
and CSOs (such as cooperatives 
or VSLA) with focus on financial 
literacy and provide long -term 
coaching to beneficiaries  
 Women and youth 
groups have the 
organizational, technical 
and financial skills to 
receive support from 
project  # 
CSOs/VSLAs 
trained  
# beneficiaries 
receiving 
coaching  300 CSOs/VSLAs  
6,900 of which 40% youth  
50% women  Y2,3 & 4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $30,040  
 
3 The total number of beneficiaries will be determined at project onset


---
*Page 435*
---

44 G3.3.3.2.3. Support women, youth, 
other marginalized groups 
strengthen savings and loan 
groups and register for MFI 
accounts  
 Men, women and youth 
have access to thriving 
financial services  # people with 
new 
bank/MFI  
accounts  50% women  Y2,3,4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $13,713  
 
 
 
 
 
Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation  
Gender/Youth Impact 4: Women and youth benefit from an adaptively managed program  
Impact indicator : Reported attitudes, confidence, and a sense  of empowerment towards engaging in climate programming  
Gender/Youth Outcome 4: Disaggregated and specialized mo nitoring generates data showing whether and how women, youth and 
marginalized people are benefiting from adaptive management systems  
Outcome indicator: Gender and youth disaggregated participation data  
G4. 4.1.1.4: Develop an 
overarching gender and youth 
program unit within the GCF 
Project to ensure the project uses 
adaptive management to ensure 
strong inclusion of women, youth, 
and marginalized households such 
that equitable benefits are shared 
across the communities.  Gender/Youth program 
unit provides oversight 
and support to ensure 
gender/ youth targets are 
met N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $3,380  
G4. 4.1.1.5: With the local 
government, project partners, and 
Youth CSO leaders, identify key 
male and female youth leaders in 
each project village to be project 
champions  Key youth leaders are 
identified and engaged  Youth 
leaders 
identified  2 Youth leaders ( 50% male, 
50% female) per targeted 
village. 4 
 
 
 Y1 PMU, 
Youth 
NGO 
(TBD)  $88,68 3  
 
4 The number of targeted villages will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of youth leaders to b e reached. 50% male and 50% female youth leaders will be targeted per 
village.


---
*Page 436*
---

45 
 
 
 
 G4. 4.1.1.6: With local 
government, project partners and 
women’s civil society, identify key 
women leaders amongst project 
beneficiaries to be project 
champions  Key women leaders are 
identified and engaged  Women 
leaders 
identified  2 women leaders per village  5 
 
 Y1 PMU, 
Women's 
NGO 
(TBD)  $87,903  
G4. 4.1.1.7: Engage Youth & 
Women’s NGOs  to build 
leadership and coaching skills of 
identified project champions and 
facilitate their project involvement 
in order to advance project goals  
of greater participation amongst 
marginalized groups amid greater 
community -wide support for their 
participation  Leaders are equipped 
with skills and financial 
resources to build 
empowerment and 
facilitate women and 
youth  
engagement in the 
project  # of wo men 
and youth 
trained in 
coaching and 
leadership 
skills  
 
 200 (50% women, 25% male 
youth leaders, 25% female 
youth l eaders) women and 
youth leaders trained as 
trainers  Y1-2 PMU  $6,660  
G.4. 4.1.1.8: Overarching social 
behavior change communications 
strategy and materials are 
developed to overcome barriers 
and enhance motivations for 
women, youth and marginalized 
people to participate in program 
activities  Gender sensitive and 
responsive 
comm unications 
programming supports 
new norms for social 
inclusion in project 
activities  # programs/ 
materials 
delivered in 
communities  At least 10 materials 
developed and distributed 
annually  Y1-5 PMU  $97,552  
 
5 The number of targeted villages will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of women leaders to b e reached. 100% of women leaders will be female


---
*Page 437*
---

46 G4. 4.1.1.9: Informational 
campaigns on equity (land rights, 
access to resources, and decision -
making) and programmatic 
opportunities to showcase the 
benefits of everyone (women, 
young men/women, marginalized) 
participating in programming to 
improve lives  Gender sensitive and 
responsive c ampaigns 
and informational 
material on inclusion of  
different social categories 
is developed and 
disseminated  # of people 
reached by 
campaigns  At least 200,000 (50% female, 
50% male)  
people reached by campaigns 
over 5 years  Y1-5 PMU  $17,030  
G4. 4.1.1.10 Engage men's NGO 
to roll out programming for men as 
allies in women's economic 
empowerment and sexual/gender 
based violence reduction 
programming  Men in target areas 
participate in masculinity 
sessions to improve 
gender equity in program 
particip ation and benefits  # men 
participating 
in training 
sessions  At least 200 men participate in 
masculinity sessions each 
year from Y2 -5 Y2-5 PMU  
Men's 
NGO  $115,57
4 
G4. 4.1.2.2 Identify and train men 
and women (adults and youth) to 
implement key M/E tools in their 
communities  Women and youth are 
active participants in M/E 
at central, sectoral, and 
community level  # Women 
and Youth 
trained on 
M/E tools  At least 5 women, 5  men and 
5 youth (15 people total) per 
district  
are trained6 
 
 Y1-5 PMU  $3,380  
G4. 4.1.3.2 Engage youth leaders 
in designing and monitoring targets 
for youth engagement, 
participation, and outcomes  Youth targets are 
identified and 
incorporated into M/E 
system  N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $ 16,533  
G4. 4.1.3.3 Engage women 
leaders in designing and 
monitoring targets for women 
engagement, participation, and 
outcomes  Women targets are 
identified and 
incorporated into M/E 
system  N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $ 
16,533  
 
6 The number of targeted districts will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of women, men and youth to be trained.  The target for the number of ind ividuals trained overall is 
50% female, 50% male.


---
*Page 438*
---

47 G4 .4.1.3.4: Monitor program using 
Gender Checklist to ensure gender 
is integrated in programming, HR, 
policy, and activity performance  Project has a strong 
gender monitoring 
program  -Project
gender
checklist
developed
-Annual
checklist
scoresProject scor es on gender 
checklist increases  
yearly  Y1-5 PMU  $ 16,533  
G4. 4.2.2.1 Project partners 
(government and NGOs) are 
trained on gender -sensitive 
approaches  Project staff have skills to 
monitor inclusion of youth 
and women into 
programming  # staff trained  100% of M/E focal points from 
participating 
organizations/entities are 
trained  Y1-5 PMU  $25,780 
Project Gender and Youth staff time is incorporated into ea ch activity cost  
Total Estimated Cost for Implementation of GAP:  $ 759,452  
__________


---
*Page 439*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
23 – 26 October 2023  
Tbilisi , Georgia  
Provisional agenda item 12 GCF/B.3 7/02/Add. 08 
2 October 2023  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum  VIII 
Funding proposal package f or FP 217 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to 
Climate Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and Landscape 
Restoration "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Indepen dent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 440*
---

 
       GCF/B.37/02 /Add.08  
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  140 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  141 
Secretariat’s assessment  144 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   161 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  172 
Gender documentation  173


---
*Page 441*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project title:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Country(ies):  Rwanda  
  
Accredited Entity:  Ministry of Environment  
Date of first submission:  2022/02/25   
Date of current submission  2023/09/11  
Version number  V.6


---
*Page 442*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 1 
 
  
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G  GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H  ANNEXES


---
*Page 443*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 2 
 
  
(a) PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)   
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   GCF  
contribution  Co-financiers' 
contribution  
Mitigation total  8 % 0 % 
☐ Energy generation and access  0 % 0 % 
☐   Low-emission transport  0 % 0 % 
☐   Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  0 % 0 % 
☒ Forestry and land use  8 % 0 % 
Adaptation total  92 %  100 %  
☒ Most vulnerable people and communities  13 %  49 %  
☒ Health and well -being, and food and water security  2 % 0 % 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  0 % 0 % 
☒ Ecosystems and ecosystem services  77 %  51 %  
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome        1,084,291 tCO2eq  A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  Direct 
Beneficiaries:  
1,254,242 
(654,404 
females)  Indirect 
Beneficiaries: 
9,260,745 
(4,769,284 
females)  
30.9 % of the 
CND population  69.9% of 
Rwanda’s 
population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance)  50,000,000 USD  
A.9. Project size  Small (Up to USD 50 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  39,056,421 USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  ☒  Grant  39,056,421 USD   
☐  Loan  - 
☐  Guarantee  - ☐  Equity       - 
☐     Results -based payment    - 
A.11. Implementation 
period  5 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval   
 
TBD 
 A.14. ESS category   
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☒    No ☐M 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence   
Yes ☒    No ☐


---
*Page 444*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 A.20. Executing Entity 
information  Rwanda Forestry Agency (RFA)  
Country of Registration: Rwanda  
Ownership Type: Government agency.  
A.21. Executive summary  
Rwanda’s Congo -Nile Divide (CND), an area of 444,600 hectares, is a high -elevation landscape of remnant 
natural forest reserves embedded in a mosaic of intensively managed smallholder farms and commercial 
plantations. Extending along a north -south ridge with an altitudinal gradient from 1,900m to 4,507m, the CND 
separates the drainage basins of the Congo and Nile Rivers. It is part of the Albertine Rift, which is one of 
the most biologically rich regions in Africa and “ one of the most important regions for conservation” on the 
continent1, containing more than half of Africa’s birds and 40% of its mammals.  At its highest elevations, the 
region is crowned by the Volcanoes, Gishwati -Mukura, and Nyungwe National Parks, con taining Rwanda’s 
only remaining montane forests, one of the most biodiverse ecosystems on the African continent, with high 
levels of endemism (species found nowhere else on Earth) and dozens of threatened species, including 
populations of mountain gorillas  and chimpanzees. Nyungwe has been recognized as one of the six highest 
priority protected areas in the Albertine Rift due to its high endemism and globally threatened species 
(Plumptre et al 2016). Though covering barely 5% of the country, this archipelag o of protected forests is of 
critical importance for:  
● Its globally recognized high biodiversity values2,3, 4, 5; 
● Its role in Rwanda’s acclaimed ecotourism offerings serving as the primary source of Rwanda’s 
foreign revenue and as a major economic devel opment driver6, 7; 
● The ecosystem services provided for surrounding subsistence farmlands, as well as for commercial 
tea and coffee plantations offering employment opportunities for women while providing the 2nd and 
3rd highest sources of foreign revenue8,9;   
● The regulation of water capture and release to growing urban centers on the CND periphery10, the 
nation’s extensive river network, and downstream hydroelectric operations11; and  
● The sequestration and storage of nearly 60% of Rwanda’s national carbon stocks12. 
These values and services are already compromised by a combination of anthropogenic and climatic factors; 
they will be much more severely threatened by the potential negative feedback loops associated with 
projected climate change  impacts. The Project will promote an ecosystem -based approach to forest 
protection and restoration and will enhance the extent and resilience of forest ecosystems and species, 
including functionally linking currently isolated forest fragments. Through the se approaches, the Project will 
protect, restore and rehabilitate forest ecosystems, enhancing biodiversity and reducing key threats, while 
 
1  Plumptre, A.J., et al. 2007. The biodiversity of the Albertine Rift. Biological Conservation 134:178 -194. 
2  Plumptre, et al. 2016. Conservation Action Plan for the Albertine Rift. Wildlife Conservation Society  
3  UN/CBD. 2020. Rwanda 6th National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity  
4  2012. .Eastern Afromontane Biodiversity Hotspot. Critical Ecosystems Partnership Fund.  
5  2023. Nyungwe National Park. BirdLife International. www.birdlife.org.  
6  RDB. 2021. Rwanda Development Board Annual Report  
7  2010. In the Kingdom of Gorillas . Weber & Vedder.  
8  Andrew, G., Masozera, M. 2010.  Payment for Ecosystem Services and Poverty Reduction in Rwanda . Journal of 
Sustainable Development in Africa (V12, No.3)  
9  RDB. 2021. Annual Report . 
10  Karamage, F., et al., 2017. Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water 2017, 9(2), 14.  
11  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2009. Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report, 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.  
12  Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. N at. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w


---
*Page 445*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 4 
 
 increasing the provision of critical ecosystem services to strengthen adaptation of vulnerable communities.13 
14 
The CND landscape supports nearly one -third of Rwanda’s population on barely one -fifth of its land base. 
Average population density is 736 people/km2, with some districts now exceeding 1,000 people/km²15. The 
highest rates of rural poverty in the country are reported from the CND, including its most vulnerable 
subsistence farmers. While high rainfall has historically permitted generally sufficient food production, the 
region’s rugged topography requires farming on extremely steep slopes. With more frequent extreme rainfall 
events in recent years, this agricultural landscape is recognized as the region of Rwanda most vulnerable to 
floods and landslides16. Between 2013 -2016 heavy rains generated landslides that killed at least 174 people 
and destroyed  the homes of more than 5,000. Many of these landslides caused flooding of highly productive 
raised -bed cultivation systems in the CND’s many valleys and surrounding bottomlands and many hectares 
of crops being washed away annually17. An estimated 1.5 mill ion tons of fertile soil are lost annually to 
erosion18. 
CND forests are essential to the region’s climate resilience. Since independence, the total natural forest 
cover has declined 40%, from 219,000 ha to 130,700 ha, mostly from episodic planned excision s as well as 
uncontrolled incursions. The loss around the Gishwati and Mukura core forest area has been most extreme. 
Of the original 32,098 ha in the 1980s, now only 3,460 ha remains as natural forest: almost a 90% loss (see 
Annex 2). In comparison, the V olcanoes and Nyungwe boundaries have been stable for decades. The recent 
creation of the Gishwati -Mukura National Park is an important step toward halting and partly restoring this 
forest, particularly for its land stabilization and other ecosystem service s within the CND’s most vulnerable 
lands and dependent communities.  
IPCC models predict rising temperatures and increasingly intense precipitation events for the CND through 
the rest of this century. The rainfall implications are especially threatening for  smallholders farming on steep, 
heavily deforested slopes, where they are most exposed to landslides, leading to loss of crops, homes, and 
lives. Yet their adaptive capacity is low because crop yields are vulnerable to rainfall variability and because 
high population density severely limits their options for relocation in the event of disaster. This is particularly 
true for women who, until very recently, had fewer legal land rights than men. The expected 2 ℃ increase in 
temperature would further result in a  more than 470m rise in vegetation zone elevations, impacting traditional 
crop selection and management practices for future farmers. An increase of this scale would also 
dramatically alter the optimal ranges for tea and coffee production, introducing pote ntial competition between 
these important export crops and alternative land uses.  
This Project is designed to sustain and expand critical forest ecosystem functions in the CND, and ultimately 
enhance the resilience of the vulnerable communities who depend on them. This will be done by 
strengthening government capacity for spatial planning, resulting in institutional and regulatory policies to 
promote and integrate climate adaptation strategies, based on the latest science, through coordinated 
planning at th e national and district levels. It will also protect, restore and expand natural forest in and around 
 
13  2003. Interlinkages Between Biological Diversity and Climate Change. CBD Technical Series Number 10 . 
14  2022. Ecosystems and ecosystem services Sectoral Guide. Green Climate Fund. 
15 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR); The Fifth Rwanda Population and Housing Census, Main 
Indicators Report, February 2023  
16  https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/National_Risk_Atlas_of_Rwanda_electronic_version_0.pdf  
17  Nsengiyumva JB, et al., 2018  Landslide Susceptibility Assessment Using Spatial Multi -Criteria Evaluation Model 
in Rwanda. International Journa l of Environmental Research and Public Health. 15(2):243. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15020243  
18  Bizimana, H.; Sönmez, O. 2015 Landslide Occurrences in the Hilly Areas of Rwanda, Their Causes and Protection 
Measures.  Disaster Sci. Eng. 2015, 1, 1 –7


---
*Page 446*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 the core national parks; consolidate and expand some smaller but critical "stepping stones"19 of remaining 
natural habitat between these national parks (m ainly small forest patches and wetlands/ riparian areas); 
improve the landscape linkage function of key high altitude landscape linkages between the protected areas, 
while at the same time securing ecosystem services through afforestation and improved nati ve species mix 
for plantation forests on steep slopes; silvopastoral interventions on cultivated pasture; and agroforestry 
interventions in regenerative agricultural areas. Complementary activities will address key drivers of 
deforestation while creating a lternative livelihood pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and 
income -generating, climate -resilient crops, as well as strengthening supportive financial services.  
Project interventions will include 10,000 ha of land (including both forest and si lvopastoral sites) under 
improved, climate -resilient management; and improve agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of on -farm 
plantations, directly benefiting 1,254,242 people (654,404 women) in CND with more climate resilient 
livelihoods from reduced expos ure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and more knowledge on climate 
risks, value of forests and forests ecosystems, climate adaptation options, access to indigenous and 
agroforestry quality materials and improved ecosystem services. The project will a lso indirectly benefit 
9,260,745 people  nationally mainly from the education and outreach program on climate change and gender 
issues, climate risks, value of forests and forest       ecosystems, climate adaptation options , and will create 
approximately  24,212 job opportunities in CND forest -dependent communities. The total mitigation impact 
from reduced deforestation, forest restoration introduction and adoption of improved cookstoves is estimated 
to be      1,084,291 t CO 2-eq by 2043.  
 
(b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1 (a). Climate context  
This section draws from the Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment presented in Annex 2.1, where more 
comprehensive elaboration can be found. Discussion on climate predictions is based primarily upon multi -
model means from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project’s sixth phase (CMIP6)20, used in the Sixth 
IPCC Assessment Report. Results are shown for paired Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) and 
Representative Concentration Pathway (RC P) emission scenarios; for some variables emphasis is placed 
on a “pessimistic” high SSP -high RCP scenario (SSP5 -8.5), for greater distinction between present day and 
future conditions as a consequence of anthropogenic climate change. Specialized modeling performed at 
ultra-high resolution for the East African Great Lake Environments project (EAGLE)21, and findings from 
scientific literature are utilized as well. Key findings are outlined in Table 1, and each climate component 
theme is discussed in the sect ion on projected climate change impacts below.  
 
19  Bagchi, R., et al. 2018. Forecasting potential routes for movement of endemic birds among important sites for 
biodiversity in the Albertine Rift under projected climate change.  Ecography. 41: 401 -413. 
20  Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6. Link 
21  Grim, J. A., Pinto, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon , A., 2020:  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset. Link


---
*Page 447*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 Table 1.  Principal Climate Hazards of the Congo Nile Divide through Mid -century  
Climate 
component  Character of 
change  Level of 
confidence  Near -term 
concern  Mid-century 
concern  Project Response  
Temperature  Upward trend 
from global 
greenhouse gas 
emissions and 
land-use change  Very high for  
+2.6 °C net 
increase 
1970 -2040  Elevational 
range of biota 
including   
pests and 
pathogens 
increasingly out 
of balance  Major uphill 
displacements 
of biota 
including 
cultivars due to 
~470 m rise in 
thermal 
conditions  Promotion of agroforestry 
practices : contribute to the 
conservation of soil moisture 
and its recharge through the 
infiltration of rainfall and runoff 
water, the creation of sheltered 
microclimati c conditions, and 
the inclusion into the soil of 
organic matter that contributes 
to moisture retention.  
Promotion of silvopastoral 
practices : Improve soil 
properties due to greater 
uptake of nutrients from deeper 
soil layers, enhanced 
availability of nutr ients from 
leaf-litter and increased 
nitrogen input by N2 -fixing 
trees.85 Moreover, 
silvopastoral systems enhance 
the resilience of the soil to 
degradation, nutrient loss, and 
climate change, while 
enhancing water holding and 
infiltration capacity of the s oil 
which contributes to the 
regulation of the hydrological 
cycle by reducing runoff 
intensity22,23.  
Protective restoration 
measures at erosion -prone 
areas :  Reduce exposure to 
soil erosion and floods of 
communities and their assets 
living in the road and  river side.  
Restoration  of degraded 
natural forests in protected 
areas  
Improve protected areas 
management to reduce 
potential human threats (forest 
encroachment , mining, fire).  
The project will support 
activities aimed at  
(1)promote alternative 
livelih oods that are resilient to 
climate change  
(2) decrease of demand and (3) 
increase of wood supply 
capacity. Dissemination of 
Improved Cook Stoves  
The project will support the 
development of an integrated Annual 
precipitation  Increasing totals  Moderate, 
but 
considerable 
model 
variation  Low concern, 
with natural 
interannual 
variability still 
dominant  Moderate 
concern, with 
majority of 
models showing 
upward trend  
Precipitation 
intensity  Increasing short -
period rainfall 
and storm totals  Almost 
certain to 
occur  Severe 
landslide 
hazard already 
present and 
increasing, 
building flash 
flood potential  Extreme hazard: 
widespread and 
frequent 
landslides and 
flash floods  
Cloud base 
height  Rising cloud 
base and levels 
of fog immersion 
in forests  Likely 
ongoing, will 
continue with 
temperature 
increase  Already 
significant in 
deforested 
highlands with 
some loss of 
moisture 
provision  Of major 
concern to forest 
ecology in 
protected 
landscapes  
Drought/dry 
spells  Increasing 
intensity  Moderate  Some increase 
in vegetation 
desiccation 
potential, 
possibly 
enhancing fire 
risk Sustained risk of 
increase in 
desiccation and 
fire risk, possibly 
offset by rainfall 
increases  
Wildfire  Increasing 
occurrence and 
extent in 
forested areas  Low Relatively 
random 
occurrences, as 
in the recent 
past, that could 
be managed by 
improved 
vigilance  If rainfall 
increases do not 
occur, increased 
vegetation 
desiccation 
would intensify 
risk for 
widespread fire  
Climatic 
seasonality  Disappearance 
of mid -year dry 
season  Low, but 
explicitly 
shown in 
some models  No concern  Increasing 
convective 
storm 
occurrences in 
June -Aug may 
eliminate dry 
season


---
*Page 448*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
land use plan at landscape 
level  that identifies and 
integrates the trade -offs 
necessary to improve delivery 
of ecosystem services, 
conserve natural resources and 
sustain economic growth.   
● Climate baseline and current impacts  
The climate of western Rwanda and its CND landscape features conditions highly supportive of tropical 
montane forests, rich biodiversity and human activities alike.  Despite being located deep in the tropics just 
south of the equator, the elevated terrain of the CND landscape, mostly above 2,000 meters, ensures 
relatively cool temperatures through the year ( Figure 1 ).   
 
 
 
Figure 1 (left) Topographic map of Rwanda with riverine drainage channels overlaid. Source : Rwanda (2019)24; (right) Congo Nile 
Divide, identified by the 1,900 m elevation contour and showing the presence of natural and plantation forests.  
Rainfall is abun dant for nine out of 12 months, and a reliable mid -year dry season adds dynamic character 
to phenological cycles, pollinator activity and agricultural practices ( Figure 2 ). Prior to landscape conversion 
for agricultural purposes, continuous dense forest co ver yielded augmentation of precipitation through fog 
interception in tree canopies, and near -daily cloud immersion sustained cloud forest ecosystems and species 
assemblages. The forests also maintained slope stability in steep terrain and yielded percolat ion and 
groundwater recharge rather than direct runoff of heavy precipitation.  Such conditions are now constrained 
to within the CND’s protected forests within national parks, covering just 30% of the CND landscape and just 
5% or Rwanda’s total land surfa ce. These are Rwanda’s only remaining montane forests yet represent 
 
22  Ibrahim M, Guerra L, Casasola F, Neely N, 2010.  Importance of silvopastoral systems for mitigation of climate 
change and harnessing of environmental benefits. In: Abberton M, Conant R, Batello C (Eds) Grassland carbon 
sequestration: management, policy and economics. Proceedings of the workshop on the r ole of grassland carbon 
sequestration in the mitigation of climate change. Integrated Crop Management, Vol. 11. FAO, Rome, Italy. 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1880e/i1880e09.pdf .  
23  Jose S., 2009. Agroforestry for ecosystem services and environmental be nefits: an overview. Agroforest Syst 76 
(1):1 –10. 
24  Vital Signs, 2019: Rwanda Atlas. Environment, Agriculture and Livelihood Options . Vital Signs and WCS Rwanda. 
Link.


---
*Page 449*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
58.7% of national tree carbon stocks25 and are imperiled by intense population pressures, with 30.7% of the 
country’s population residing within the CND landscape districts.  
   
 
Figure 2. Annual ( left) and monthly ( right ) rainfall (mm) climatology over Rwanda (period of record: 1981 –2017), based on 
algorithms that calibrate satellite -based rainfall estimates with surface observations.  Source : Jonah et al., 2021.26  
A reconstructi on of temperatures for the past 140 years for Rwanda, based on quality controlled instrumental 
records and centered on Kigali, shows that global climate change already has strong local expression. Rapid 
temperature increase commenced in the 1970s, with a n et gain of approximately +1.1 °C since 197027 
(Figure 3 ). 
 
25   Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.o rg/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
26  Jonah, K., Wen, W., Shahid, S., Ali, M.A., Bilal, M., Habtemicheal, B.A., Iyakaremye, V., Qiu, Z., Almazroui, M., 
Wang, Y. and Joseph, S.N., 2021. Spatiotemporal variability of rainfall t rends and influencing factors in Rwanda.  Journal of 
Atmospheric and Solar -Terrestrial Physics , 219, p.105631.  
27  Berkeley Earth (website): Rwanda Country Profile. www.berkeleyearth.org


---
*Page 450*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 3. Berkeley Earth temperature reconstruction based on instrumental measurements for Kigali in central Rwanda. The 
“Climate Stripes” offers a visual display that effectively communicates bot h individual year temperature anomalies and the overall 
multi -decadal trend behavior. Source: Berkeley Earth Rwanda Country Profile. www.berkeleyearth.org   
The regional warming of the climate over the past half -century coincided with widespread forest conversion 
to farmland along the CND. As a consequence, at fine spatial scales climatic conditions across the CND at 
present mimic the landscape mosaic, whereby onl y the protected forests will retain much of the past climatic 
character while converted landscapes are likely to be significantly warmer by day, have reduced cloud cover 
and higher cloud bases, and experience slightly reduced rainfall as well.  Due to the increased moisture 
carrying capacity of warmer air (7% increase per °C of warming)28, ongoing climatic warming promotes 
increasingly intense short -period rainfall, which acts synergistically with landscape conversion on steep 
slopes to cause quickflow runo ff, yielding large increases in landslide occurrence and soil erosion more 
generally ( Figure 4 ). With its high topographic relief, the CND is highly susceptible to soil erosion. 
Throughout Rwanda, soil erosion has increased by 54% since 1990 with the bulk of the increase 
experienced and highest erosion levels over western Rwanda.29 Between January and June in 2018, 
landslides caused more than 200 mortalities, and in May 202030, 65 deaths from landslides and flash flooding 
occurred during a single night of s torms focused on the eastern slopes of the CND.31   
 
28  Trenberth, K.E., 2011. Changes in precipitation with climate change. Climate Research , 47, pp.123 -138. 
29  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2019: Rwanda Natural Capital Accounts -Ecosystems. p. 23  
30  Reuters 2018. https://www.reuters.com/article/us -rwanda -floods -idUSKBN1I81I  
31  Associated Press 2020. https://apnews.com/article/b7658b76a403fd9bc8cba249f9d484fd


---
*Page 451*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 4.  (left) Intensity of soil erosion in Rwanda assessed for the year 2015. Source: NISR: National Institute of Statistics of 
Rwanda, 2019. ( right ) Observed landslide occurrences in Rwanda against a topographic background, showing intense clusters 
along both the east and west sides of the CND landscape. Source : Nsengiyumva et al., 2018.32 
Wildfire occurrence in forested lands exacerbated by climatic  warming is a rapidly mounting concern globally, 
and montane forests of the CND carry increasing vulnerability to loss from burning. Absence of fire -adapted 
flora in CND highland forests, however, suggests that fire has not been a major selective force wit hin the 
forest ecosystem. The 1997 visitation of weeks -long uncontrolled wildfires in the Nyungwe forest had an 
ecological imprint that remains evident 25 years later, as burned areas revegetated with dense ferns rather 
than replacement forests,33 represen ting a net loss of 12% of Nyungwe’s forest cover and corresponding 
loss of its carbon endowment.  Despite increased propensity for drying of vegetation as the climate warms, 
forests remain sufficiently moist such that fire causing forest losses are infrequ ent, and when they occur are 
usually tied to anomalous dry spells paired with human ignition, as was the case in 1997.34  
Cloud base altitude, which is highly influential in CND montane forest ecology and species composition, is 
likely rising above recent past conditions due to both climatic warming and conversion of forests to 
agricultural lands. Fog interception by vegetation augments montane forest precipitation in central African 
highland forests by an estimated 10%35, so highland forest loss by human a ction therefore represents a local 
reduction to the ecosystem service of rainwater provision).  
Projected climate change impacts  
Temperature increases . Localized projections for the CND landscape of climatic changes for coming 
decades, generated for the mo st recent IPCC assessment, present a strong consensus on temperature 
increase for the next two decades. The magnitude of net temperature change by late -century, and the 
tendency of warming to accelerate, hold steady, decelerate or even begin an overall tem perature decline is 
unknowable at present, but a large number of climate model simulations show common patterns, whereby 
divergence in possible temperature outcomes will only become apparent around 2040 ( Figure 5 ).  These 
 
32  Nsengiyumva, J.B., Luo, G., Nahayo, L., Huang, X. and Cai, P., 2018. Landslide susceptibility assessment using 
spatial mu lti-criteria evaluation model in Rwanda.  International journal of environmental research and public health , 15(2), 
p.243.  
33  Masozera, A.B. and Mulindahabi, F., 2012. Post -fire regeneration in Nyungwe National Park -Rwanda. WCS White 
paper report.  
34  Seimon, A., 2012: Climatology and Potential Climate Change Impacts of the Nyungwe Forest National Park, 
Rwanda. WCS White paper report, Wildlife Conservation Society, New York, USA, 44 pp.  
35  Bruijnzeel, L.A., Mulligan, M. and Scatena, F.N., 2011. Hydromet eorology of tropical montane cloud forests: 
emerging patterns.  Hydrological Processes , 25(3), pp.465 -498.


---
*Page 452*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
results are also consistent with o utputs from the previous CMIP5 model suite for western Rwanda (e.g., 
IFAD report 2020)36. As such, using the consensus values of such models is a sensible choice for 
environmental planning, with a +2.0 °C increase over the IPCC -referenced 1995 -2014 baselin e conditions 
offering a representative value for warming by mid -century. However, the observed warming of +0.6 °C 
registered between 1970 -95 prior to the IPCC baseline period must be recognized as well, suggesting net 
warming of +2.6 °C from a more represe ntative 20th century baseline.   
 
Figure 5 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble predictions for mean annual temperature over western Rwanda across the 21st century 
under a variety of SSP -RCP combinations. Source : World Bank37  
Annual mean precipitation changes. The CMIP6 results for precipitation changes over coming decades 
are less consistent than the temperature projections. Recent studies focused in East Africa have identified 
limitations to global model utilization for regio nally specific predictions, such as failure to represent observed 
precipitation magnitude and distribution in the present, and reliance on approximations (i.e., 
parameterizations) that inadequately represent the role of convective storms in precipitation d elivery38. The 
CMIP6 ensemble means for annual precipitation over western Rwanda have a baseline value of 
approximately 2,000 mm per year, which is considerably higher than actual values ( Figure 6 ; compare 
values with Figure 2 above). The higher emissions scenarios show increasing totals over time, which is 
plausible given the increasing water vapor carrying capacity of the warming atmosphere. Strangely, the most 
optimistic scenario (SSP1 -1.9) shows strongly varying trends at decadal scales, increasing far more rapidly 
 
36  Hunter. R., Crespo. O., Coldrey , K, Cronin, K, New, M. 2020. Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future 
Crop Suitability in Rwanda. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome.  
37  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
38  Wainwright, C.M., Marsham, J.H., Rowell, D.P., Finney, D.L. and Black, E., 2021. Future changes in seasonality in 
East Africa from regional simulations with explicit and param eterized convection.  Journal of Climate , 34, pp.1367 -1385.


---
*Page 453*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
in the near -term than other scenarios. Such inconsistencies reduce confidence in the overall product suite 
for precipitation predictions.  
 
 
Figure 6 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble prediction for mean annual precipitation over western Rwanda across the 21st century under 
a variety of SSP -RCP combinations. Left -axis scale is thousands of mm per year.  Source : World Bank39 
There is also major inconsistency between CMIP model suites. As assessment for western Rwanda from 
CMIP5 under RCP 8. 5 comparing historical and mid -century outputs suggested rainfall decreases of 5 -10% 
in most months, with net annual decrease of 86 mm 40; the baseline time periods and geographic domains 
of these two CMIP ensemble compilations for western Rwanda differ, b ut the reversal from drier to wetter 
gives low confidence in the utilization of precipitation predictions specific to the CND if derived from global 
models.  
To generate more refined results, Grim et al., (2020)41 performed regional simulations of East African climate 
at ultra -fine, convection -allowing scale (WRF model at 3.3 km model resolution); these were based off the 
global CESM2 model (part of the CMIP6 suite) boundary conditions under the high emissions RCP8 .5. The 
regional model was configured to optimize parity with regional climate station data. The resulting high spatial 
resolution output suggests a strongly amplified rainfall signal over the 21st century over western Rwanda 
relative to the CMIP6 ensemble  mean for RCP 8.5 ( Figure 7 ). Also notable is that the rest of Rwanda exhibits 
 
39  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
40  Hunter. R., Crespo. O., Coldrey, K, Cronin, K, New, M. 2020. Research Highlights – Climate Change and Future 
Crop Suitability in Rwanda. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Rome.  
41  Grim, J. A., P into, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon, A. (2020).  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset (NCAR Technical Note TN -563+STR).  Link


---
*Page 454*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
far smaller increases, suggesting that the CND’s hydrological significance as a water tower for the nation 
will be reinforced over time.  
 
Figure 7.  EAGLE projects high -resolut ion WRF simulation of annual mean precipitation ( left) and difference between end of century 
and recent past ( right ) across East Africa, where values are in mm per year. The CND landscape and Lake Kivu show comparable 
increases to eastern Lake Victoria, an d represent the largest rainfall increases across the modeled domain.  Source : Grim et al. 
(2020)42 
Precipitation intensity changes . Due to well -understood physical properties of the atmosphere, as 
warming progresses short -period rainfall rates and individ ual storm totals, especially for the fraction of 
higher -end events that can cause flash flooding and promote landslides, will increase and should amplify 
very significantly over time43. The CMIP6 ensemble means for monthly counts of days with heavy 
precipi tation suggest an upward trend is now underway ( Figure 8 ). Forthcoming increases are most 
pronounced for November through January. Such increases in heavy precipitation events are to be expected 
under a warming climate and are of major social and ecologica l concern, being a driver of landslide 
occurrences and major contributors to soil erosion intensity.  
 
42  Grim, J. A., Pinto, J. A., Jensen, A. A., & Seimon, A. (2020).  The East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) 
Climate Downscaling Dataset (NCAR Technical Note TN -563+STR).  Link 
43  Fowler, H.J., Ali, H., Allan, R.P., Ban, N., Barbero, R., Berg, P., Blenkinsop, S., Cabi, N.S., Chan, S., Dale, M. and 
Dunn, R.J., 2021. Towards advancing scientific knowledge of climate change impac ts on short -duration rainfall extremes. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A , 379(2195)


---
*Page 455*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 8 . CMIP6 multi -model ensemble prediction for monthly changes in the number of days with rainfall >20 mm over western 
Rwanda across the 21st century under RCP8.5. Source : World Bank44 
Drought/dry spells.  Warming will also increase the propensity for vegetation to desiccate during dry spells, 
intensifying wilting of natural vegetation and cultivars. The capacity of air to extract moisture from landscapes 
through direct evaporation and evapotranspiration of vegetation will also increase exponentially as 
temperatures rise. This means that land surfaces and vegetation will dry out more quickly between rainfall 
episodes in the future than in the pas t. It also means that to maintain hydrological balances that natural and 
human systems depend upon, total rainfall must increase in proportion to intensifying evaporation rates. The 
CMIP6 ensemble results for the CND region suggest such a favorable balance  may indeed be maintained 
through at least mid -century ( Figure 9 ). Under the full range of emissions scenarios considered, there is 
almost no change in ensemble means through mid -century.  
 
Figure 9.  Western Rwanda CMIP6 model -model ensemble mean time series of the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration 
index (SPEI) for a range of climate change scenarios across the 21st century. The SPEI is a measure of the integrated water deficit 
 
44  World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link


---
*Page 456*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
in a locati on, taking into account the contribution of temperature dependent evapotranspiration of a 12 -month period. Source : World 
Bank45  
A more useful variable for assessing drought potential at daily -seasonal times scales is the Vapor Pressure 
Deficit (VPD). This  is an absolute measure of the difference between the water vapor content of the air and 
its saturation value, and as such, represents a direct metric of the ability of the atmosphere to extract 
moisture from the land surface46. High resolution VPD predictions for present day, mid -century and late -
century under boundary conditions prescribed by the CESM model under the high emission RCP 8.5 
scenario are shown in Figure 10 . Annual cycles of VPD for model grid points high in the N yungwe Forest 
and at lesser elevation in Kigali east of the CND both show remarkably little variation in VPD over the course 
of the century. Owing to the cool, persistently moist highland climate that characterize the CND landscape, 
the VPD values are cons istently low in Nyungwe throughout the year for the three decadal time periods 
2009 -18, 2055 -64 and 2090 -99. This contrasts significantly with results from Kigali, where VPD registers 
four times higher than in Nyungwe during the mid -year dry season (20 vs.  5 hectopascal pressure deficit). 
This represents a favorable outlook over several decades to come for the CND in terms of limiting desiccating 
conditions that would elevate fire potential, stress crops and rapidly draw down hydrological resources.  
Importa ntly, however, not clearly evident in these model outputs is that rising cloud bases and associated 
warming temperatures increase the rate of drying of vegetation, increasing wildfire risk during rain -free 
periods, especially in lower reaches of forested t errain bordering settled areas where risks of anthropogenic 
ignition are highest.  
 
  
Figure 10.  Modeled Vapor Pressure Deficit (VPD) on slope of Mt Bigugu in the Nyungwe Forest ( left) and Kigali ( right ) for the recent 
past (2009 -18, blue, mid -century (20 55-64, green) and late -century (2090 -99, red). Source : EAGLE project47 
Precipitation seasonality.  The annual cycle of climate along the CND sees abundant rainfall for much of 
the year interrupted by a marked dry season in the June -August months when rainfa ll becomes light and 
sporadic, and during which hydrological deficits develop as evaporation far exceeds precipitation and 
resultant runoff. While highland orography largely explains the enhanced rainfall along the CND, the 
 
45  World Bank  Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Link 
46  Seager, R., Hooks, A., Williams, A.P., Cook, B., Nakamura, J. and Henderson, N., 2015. Climatology, variability, 
and trends in the US vapor pressure deficit, an important fire -related meteorological quantity.  Journal of Applied 
Meteorology and Climatology , 54(6), pp.1121 -1141.  
47  East African Great Lake Environments (EAGLE) project. Link


---
*Page 457*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
occurrence of the dry seasons oc curs region wide irrespective of terrain elevation ( Figure 11 ). This finds 
explanation in the seasonal north -south migration of a pan -equatorial band of enhanced cloudiness and 
rainfall known as the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)48. The slight reduction in rainfall experienced 
over several weeks along the CND in January and February reflects much more pronounced dryness to the 
north in Uganda; conversely, the more defined mid -year dry season along the CND spanning June through 
Augus t is associated with enhanced southeasterly airflows that effectively push the zone of atmospheric 
convergence promoting rainfall across the equator into Uganda.  
In this light, an unusual finding from the EAGLE project’s high -resolution modeling studies i s that the CND 
landscape has a heightened risk of major change in climatic seasonality. By the 2055 -64 period: the mid -
year dry season effectively disappears. Being the output of a single model run under a high -end greenhouse 
gas emissions scenario may mak e this seem implausible; It is highly dissimilar from mid -century predictions 
of the consensus of global models, which sustain the dry season. It finds corroboration, however, in a new 
study on East African rainfall, which found that the parameterization o f convection in global models may be 
a source of uncertainty for projections of changes in seasonal timing, and that potentially impactful changes 
in seasonality are therefore quite plausible49. Such an eventuality is exceptionally difficult to plan for, a nd 
since it would only come to fruition well after the project period, if at all, additional studies could be conducted 
to provide needed guidance.  
 
  
Figure 11 . (left) The average number of “wet” days in Rwanda with rainfall exceeding 3 mm for the month s of June -August. The 
wettest parts of the CND only receive significant rainfall on ~10% of days during the dry season. Source : Meteo Rwanda50: (right ) 
Annual cycle of rainfall rate (mm/day, note logarithmic scale) at Nyungwe Forest National Park showing d aily means (thick lines) 
and extremes (thin lines) for 10 -year time periods centered on 2014 (blue), 2060 (green) and 2095 (red). The dry season evident in 
the 2014 mean reaching below 1 mm/day, effectively disappears by the 2060 time period.  Source : EAGL E project51  
 
48  Siebert, A., Dinku, T., Vuguziga, F., Twahirwa, A.,  Kagabo, D.M., delCorral, J. and Robertson, A.W., 2019. 
Evaluation of ENACTS ‐Rwanda: A new multi ‐decade, high ‐resolution rainfall and temperature data set —
Climatology.  International Journal of Climatology , 39(6), pp.3104 -3120.  
49  Wainwright, C.M., Marsham, J.H., Rowell, D.P., Finney, D.L. and Black, E., 2021. Future changes in seasonality in 
East Africa from regional simulations with explicit and parameterized convection.  Journal of Climate , 34, pp.1367 -1385.  
50  ENACTS online tool  at Meteo Rwanda. Link 
51  EAGLE project: Link


---
*Page 458*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
● Climate risks, vulnerability and impacts  
Without strategic actions to confront mounting stresses borne by climate change interacting with 
unsustainable land -use practices, the CND would doubtless undergo a profound transformation over coming 
decades with significant loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services, reducing agricultural potential, severe 
hazards to humanity and loss of livelihoods. Temperature increase and loss of fog immersion will cause 
desiccation of the lower margins of protected forests promoting die -offs, arrival of pests, pathogens and 
invasive species, and increasing fire ignition potential. Current cultivation practices of both subsistence crops 
and valuable cash crops like tea and coffee will be drawn uphill, adding  to pressure to convert protected 
forests to farmland. Whereas climatic changes will act as inexorably mounting stressors, unsustainable land 
surface conversion and land use practices will greatly exacerbate their impacts. The steep hillsides that 
characte rize much of western Rwanda will experience intensifying erosion and risk of landslides, while built 
infrastructure such as road and bridges will be overwhelmed since they were engineered to withstand rainfall 
intensities expected under past climatic condi tions that are sure to be exceeded, and with increasing 
frequency, as time progresses and temperatures steadily increase.  Precipitation intensity will increase for 
short -period rainfall rates and individual storm totals, especially for the fraction of hig her-end events that can 
cause flash flooding and promote landslides. This is certain to occur, is probably already discernible, and 
likely to amplify very significantly over time as warming progresses. This ties directly to landslides in 
particular, which already cause high mortality and significant destruction each year, and the CND’s elevated 
vulnerability due to high topographic relief and deforested slopes makes this hazard of paramount concern 
to address ( Figure 12 ).  
 
Figure 12 . Rwanda landslide susceptibility map showing past observed landslides. Source:  Nsengiyumva et al., 2018.52 
Significant temperature increases are almost certain to continue for decades to come, and will have mounting 
impacts on both natural and human syste ms along the CND, and some are already discernible. Over 
equatorial Africa observed environmental lapse rates feature temperature decreases by approximately 
5.5 °C per kilometer of elevation increase53, so 2 °C of warming expected by mid -century translates  to a 
vertical rise on the order of 473 meters, promoting large uphill displacements of a wide range of organisms, 
 
52  Nsengiyumva, J.B., Luo, G., Nahayo, L., Huang, X. and Cai, P., 2018. Landslide susceptibility assessment using 
spatial multi -criteria evaluation model in Rwanda.  International journal of environmental research and public healt h, 15(2), 
p.243.  
53  Camberlin, P., 2018. Climate of Eastern Africa. In  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science . Link


---
*Page 459*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
ecological processes, cultivars and human activities.  While temperatures over the CND region are not 
expected to rise to levels for heat stre ss to elevate mortality54 or reduce labor productivity, the indirect effect 
of rising temperatures through increased disease incidence is substantial55.   
Western Rwanda is the most productive region in the country for the cultivation of both tea and coffe e, where 
conditions are optimized on the CND’s sloping terrain. Both are cash crops with high export value, and are 
the target of active expansion through both governmental programs and private enterprise. Intensifying 
environmental stresses from climate c hange particularly due to thermal increases and the arrival of invasive 
pests from lowland regions, present challenges both for current plantings and in planning for expansion to 
new areas; the same concerns apply to other cultivars.  
Cloud base altitude, w hich is highly influential in montane forest ecology and species composition, is likely 
already elevated above recent past conditions due to conversion of forests to agricultural lands, and certain 
to rise further in proportion to the degree of warming ove r coming decades. Ecosystems and species 
assemblages in the lower reaches of protected forests may already be out of balance with this important 
environmental variable, and this imbalance will only increase over time, promoting rapid species turnovers, 
enhancing potential for invasives, and act as a strong driver of upward range extensions. Rising cloud bases 
in concert with warming temperatures also increase drying of vegetation, enhancing wildfire risk during rain -
free periods. Fog interception by vegetat ion also augments montane forest precipitation by an estimated 
10%, so rising cloud bases will act to remove this important hydrological input too. Highland forest loss 
therefore represents a local loss to the ecosystem service of rainwater provision that could be partially 
restored through reforestation.   
Such challenges highlight how essential highland forests are to the climatic resilience of CND communities, 
for the ecosystem services and products they provide for both the region’s vulnerable communiti es and the 
national economy. They also recharge aquifers; regulate water flow; control flooding; retain soil; provide 
wood fuel energy and timber; underpin the country’s tourism, which provides the largest contribution to 
Rwanda’s foreign exchange earnings56; and provide wider benefits of atmospheric pollution control that 
sustain the country’s economy and the wellbeing of its people57.   
Forest conversion to farmland in the CND highlands has until recently served as a release valve for lowland 
population p ressure at the expense of drastically reduced national carbon stocks, diminished resilience to 
climate change, enhanced potential for destructive outcomes, reduced ecosystem service provision and 
disrupted biological connectivity. The resultant loss of eco system services and functioning and intensifying 
environmental stresses borne by climate change now require redirection towards forest restoration and other 
actions to ensure a sustainable future. Safeguarding the Congo -Nile Divide’s remaining highland for ests, 
and setting long -term goals of reforesting functional linkages connecting them, therefore serve Rwanda’s 
national long -term interests on lessening the severity of impacts of climate change and sustaining critical 
ecosystem services both locally and d ownstream, while contributing to global efforts to draw down 
greenhouse gas concentrations.  
B.1 (b). Summary of spatial biodiversity assessment  
The majority of Rwanda’s remaining montane forests are restricted to the national parks, which support a 
variety of threatened and endemic species. A few fragmented forest patches are situated outside of the 
National Park boundaries. Landcover change (espe cially for widespread smallholder agriculture), fuelwood 
 
54  Asefi -Najafabady, S., K. Vandecar, A. Seimon , P. Lawrence and D. Lawrence, 2018: Climate change, population 
and poverty: vulnerability and exposure to heat stress in East Africa. Climatic Change , 148, 561 -573. 
55  World Bank, 2022: Rwanda Country Climate and Development Report. World Bank, Washington  DC. Link 
56  Rwanda Development Board 2017 Annual Report Link 
57  Andrew, G. and Masozera, M., 2010. Payment for ecosystem services and poverty reduction in Rwanda.  Journal 
of sustainable development in Africa , 12(3), pp.122 -139.


---
*Page 460*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
harvesting, and human -induced fires, coupled with climate change impacts, especially landslides, erosion 
and downstream flooding, have compromised the delivery of critical ecosystem services derived from these 
forests. A detailed spatial analysis of biodiversity in the Congo Nile Divide was conducted to delineate priority 
areas for the long -term conservation and restoration of forests, and the sustainable management of 
landscapes, in order to secure t he ecosystem services needed to improve the resilience of vulnerable 
communities to climate change impacts.  
The spatial biodiversity assessment for Rwanda’s Congo -Nile Divide (CND) (see details in Annex 2 and 
Annex 2.2) is based on a rapid systematic conse rvation plan, using MARXAN decision -support software. 
The key analyses involved identifying and mapping the remaining areas of natural forest and other 
ecosystem types, modeling bioclimatic change and identifying climate change refugia, a Condatis landscap e 
connectivity and bottlenecks analyses, and evaluating ecosystem threat and protection levels. The analyses 
thus build in landscape connectivity, climate change refugia, biodiversity values, ecosystem services and 
social costs.  
The final outcome of the MARXAN and Condatis connectivity analyses split the CND domain into four major 
landscape categories with a set of priority implementation areas, each with their own place -bound project 
interventions. Interventions range from the restoration of natural forest, establishment and improvement of 
protective forest on steep slopes and along riparian areas; and to implement biodiversity -friendly 
agroforestry to reduce landslides, erosion and downstream flooding. Over and above these place -bound 
interventions a re a variety of other mechanisms for promoting the sustainability of rural livelihoods and 
protecting montane forest in Rwanda’s CND landscape.   
The Systematic Conservation Plan analyses covered a range of biodiversity features, including:  
● Terrestrial ecosystems, including their IUCN Red List threat status and protection level. The analysis 
focussed on identifying priority remaining intact areas, based on the development of a map of 
ecological condition.  
● Protected Areas, Protected Forests an d Protected Wetlands. All the identified ecosystems to be 
gazetted for protection are included.  
● Climate change refugia based on projected changes in bioclimatic envelopes under a range of 
climate change scenarios.  
● Identification of key landscape linkage ar eas and bottlenecks.  
● Hydrological process areas – Rivers and Streams, including buffers.  
● Hydrological process areas – Wetlands and Lakes, including buffers.  
● Hydrological process areas – Areas with high rainfall.  
● Landscape process areas - Steep slopes (over  55%) which are most important for minimizing erosion 
and landslide risk.  
Individual species were not separately considered in the assessment as all key species are tightly linked  
to their underlying intact habitat (in particular intact forest patches as w ell as wetlands and riparian areas); 
and available distribution data for species was much broader than the ecosystem data. In selecting priority 
conservation areas, the SCP methodology always attempts to be spatially efficient by meeting conservation 
targe ts in as small an area as possible, while avoiding conflict with other land users, at the lowest possible 
cost for other sectors. The following was taken into account in the prioritization:  
● Urban and dwellings, tea, roads, plantations, cultivated pasture, coffee, bamboo and agriculture.  
● Areas of greatest population density.  
● Areas with highly impacted land cover classes.


---
*Page 461*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Results of the MARXAN spatial analysis:  
The MARXAN landscape prioritization ( Figure 13 ), which builds in landscape connectivity, climate change 
refugia, biodiversity values, ecosystem services, and social costs (in terms of avoiding, where possible, 
areas with highest population density, agriculture etc), splits the landscape into four key planning categories 
(Figure 14 ): 
● Core Protected Area (PA) Nodes:  National Parks comprise the “Core PA Nodes” that need to be 
secured and well managed, which include Volcanoes, Gishwati -Mukura and Nyungwe National 
Parks. Priority activities include strength ening PA management and sustainability, rehabilitation and 
restoration of natural forests, other conservation -oriented land use activities that reduce stress on 
PAs and natural forests (e.g. improved wood stove efficiency to reduce pressure on natural fore sts) 
and supporting sustainable biodiversity compatible activities (e.g. improved beekeeping). These 
nodes also include buffer areas around the National Parks.  
● Stepping Stones:  These are priority nodes outside of the current National Parks that are critica l for 
maintaining landscape connectivity, consisting of small, isolated patches of forest, at Dutake and 
Karehe -Gatuntu Protected Forests and the extensive Gishwati Pastures. These areas would be a 
sensible focus for some (patches of) forest restoration an d protection, beekeeping and energy 
efficient stoves. The Gishwati Pastures are a focus for agroforestry on pastoral land to increase the 
coverage of native trees to secure reasonable landscape connectivity for forest species.  
● Landscape linkages:  These are  key landscape linkages and knickpoints in the farming landscape 
that require afforestation on steep slopes and riparian areas to link the CND at a landscape scale. 
Compatible land use activities include agroforestry, increasing the use of native species, reforesting 
steep slopes, beekeeping and energy efficient stoves. Note that the analysis is based on some 
level of improved connectivity via patches of protective forest and riparian strips, as well as 
overall improved species composition and tree coverage  (within mixed agroforestry 
systems). It does not imply a continuous natural forest corridor; as this potential no longer 
exists, and its creation would not be possible in this highly used landscape without 
unacceptable impacts on livelihoods.  
● Broader Far ming Mosaic:  These are broader areas of moderate priority where conservation 
interventions can support broader sustainable landscapes and ecosystem service delivery but are 
likely to be beyond the scope of most project interventions except for those linked  to land use 
planning.


---
*Page 462*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 13. The MARXAN irreplaceability map for the Congo Nile Divide showing the landscape prioritization, ranging from high 
priority in red to low priority in green.  
To aid prioritization and description of the landscape categories above, the four categories were further split 
into specific planning areas, referred to as “Landscape Implementation Sectors”, as shown Figure 14  and 
in Table 2  with a description of each pl anning category and associated ideas, required outcomes, core 
benefits and associated benefits in Table 3.


---
*Page 463*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
Table 2.  Summary table of landscape categories and associated implementation sectors for the CND.  
Landscape Category  Landscape Implementation Sector  Area (ha)  
Core PA Nodes  Volcanoes NP and “Buffer”58 
Nyungwe NP and Buffer  
Mukura NP and Buffer59 
Gishwati NP and Buffer59 19 487,0  
116 794,9  
4 713,5  
4 013,7  
Stepping Stones  Gishwati Pastures Stepping Stone  
Karehe -Gatuntu Stepping Stone  
Dutake  Stepping Stone  15 547,4  
401,1  
903,0  
Landscape Linkages  Nyungwe NP to Mukura NP Linkage  
Gishwati NP to Volcanoes NP Linkage  
Mukura N to Gishwati NP Linkage  23 375,4  
5 014,8  
7 823,7  
Broader Farming Mosaic  Nyungwe to Mukura Broader Farming Mosaic  
Volcanoes Broader Farming Mosaic  
Mukura Broader Farming Mosaic  
Gishwati Broader Farming Mosaic  
Nyungwe Broader Farming Mosaic  21 164,4  
11 694,4  
4 814,0  
28 433,2  
11 437,0  
Priority Areas for Implementation Activities:  
Specific priority areas for a range of interventions were spatially identified, including:  
● Natural forest rehabilitation and restoration with the National Parks (and their buffers) and in the 
Stepping Stones.  
● Protective forests for steep slopes and riparian areas, particularly in the L andscape Linkages.  
● Agroforestry interventions in key highland Landscape Linkages.  
● Specific agroforestry priorities on pastoral land (silvo -pastoral practices).  
● Indigenous shade trees for tea and coffee plantations.  
● Beekeeping in National Park buffers and S tepping Stone buffers.        
 
 
58Note that buffers refer to both the specific legally designated buffers around Nyungwe and Gishwati -Makura NPs, as well 
as broader buffer areas adjacent to all these NPs, as well as Volcanoes NP.  
59In order to allow for specific landscape description, we s eparately refer to Gishwati NP and Makura NP where necessary, 
even though these areas are managed as Gishwati -Makura NP.


---
*Page 464*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Figure 14. The four major landscape categories (Core PA Nodes, Stepping Stones, Landscape Linkages and the Broader Farming 
Mosaic) were split into specific areas to aid prioritization and description.


---
*Page 465*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Table 3.  A description of the four key landscape planning categories and associated ideas, required outcomes, core benefits and 
associated benefits.  
Landscape 
Component  Core PA Nodes  
The National Parks  Stepping Stones  
Priority nodes 
outside of current 
Pas Landscape 
linkages  
Key landscape 
linkages and 
knickpoints in the 
farming landscape  Broader Farming 
Mosaic   
The broader 
landscape mosaic  Institutional 
issues 
Description  The current core 
national parks and 
protected forests.  Critical pieces of 
biodiversity 
outside of the PAs 
required for 
landscape 
connectivity, 
maintenance of 
biodiversity and 
delivery of 
ecosystem 
services.  The parts of 
landscape within 
identified key 
corridors, where 
functional 
connectivity and 
ability to deliver 
ecosystem serv ices 
needs to be urgently 
maintained or 
improved.  Remaining farmland 
areas of the CND.   The non -geographic 
specific elements of 
the CND system  
Key ideas  Protect and 
manage for climate 
resilience.  Restore and 
protect to ensure 
landscape 
connectivity and 
ecosystem 
service delivery.  Functional linked 
farming landscapes 
delivering ecosystem 
services.  Diverse climate 
change resilient 
farmland delivering 
ecosystem 
services.  Strong, well -
capacitated and 
equitable 
environmental 
governance and 
land use planning.  
Required 
Outcome  PAs effectively 
protect and 
manage natural 
forests improving 
resilience to climate 
change impacts 
and risks.  
Natural forests 
protected, 
connected, more 
resilient to climate 
change impacts 
and risks.  Critical landscape 
nodes / stepping - 
stones are 
secured and 
where necessary 
restored to a 
natural state.  Priority portions of 
the farming 
landscape are 
specifically managed 
to improve overall 
connectivity and 
ecosystem service 
delivery.  Sustainably 
managed farmland 
landscape is  more 
biodiverse, supports 
delivery of 
ecosystem services 
and is resilient to 
climate risk.  Government and 
civil society are well 
capacitated to 
ensure robust 
landscape planning 
that supports 
climate resilience.  
Core benefit  Maintain globally 
significant, 
species -rich natural 
forests.  
Core areas secure 
best possible 
source and/or 
refuge areas for 
species under 
climate change.  Biodiversity value 
of critical 
landscape nodes 
is maintained.  
Landscape 
connectivity 
supported 
through retention 
of key stepping - 
stones for species 
movement across 
the landscape.  Improved 
connectivity of the 
landscape ensures 
long term climate 
resilience.  
Value of core PAs 
and priority nodes is 
retained (i.e. the 
inevitable 
degradation of sites 
due to isolation is 
avoided) .  Generally improved 
farmland 
management 
ensures rural 
sustainability and 
supports 
livelihoods.  Integrated land use 
plans, with 
community 
participation and 
spatial planning 
tools/ monitoring  
Associated 
benefits   Improved delivery 
of ecosystem 
services (especially 
water) and support 
of rural economies 
and livelihoods.  Improved delivery 
of ecosystem 
services 
(especially water) 
and support of 
rural economies 
and livelihoods.  Improved delivery of 
ecosystem services 
(especially water) 
and support of  rural 
economies and 
livelihoods.  Improved delivery of 
ecosystem services 
(especially water) 
and support of rural 
economies and 
livelihoods.  Cross sectoral 
planning and 
management.  
This study was a rapid assessment to support project proposal development and does not replace a full 
conservation planning process. There are significant additional steps which are required to develop a 
product that is useful for land use planning during project implementation. These changes include a robust 
stakeholder engagement process, at a national, district and local scale; incorporation of issues relating to


---
*Page 466*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
land use rights, both of landowners and farm tenants; incorporation of issues relating to so cial safeguards, 
especially for marginalized groups; inclusion of issues related to planning processes and strategies, at a 
national and local scale; finer scale planning (ideally at a 1:50 000 scale); and improved biodiversity data, 
including revised data  on forest degradation, validation of the ecological condition map, and specific species 
data where possible.      
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  
The theory of change for this Project is founded on several key principles. Central to all, the CND represents 
a complex landscape – a geospatial mosaic of forest and farming patches, each dependent on the other. 
These coupled, biological and socio -economi c systems are under great strain due to intense land pressure, 
which has resulted in a negative cycle of natural resource degradation that undermines the well -being of 
both natural and socio -economic systems. The advent of climate change is a forceful driv er that intensifies 
this cycle of degradation, with the resultant loss of key ecosystem services that importantly link forests and 
people. This cycle must be disrupted in order to chart a path toward climate resilience for natural and human 
systems. Ecolog ical connectivity must be established within this mosaic of land uses to promote landscape 
heterogeneity to help build resilience to climate change of forest ecosystems and people who depend on 
them. The approach to be taken by this Project is therefore based on principles of ecosystem -based 
adaptation: that healthy and resilient ecosystems form an essential foundation for adaptation to climate 
challenges60. Climate -aware management of both natural and human -dominated ecosystems – interacting 
and integrat ed at a landscape level – can break the cycle of degradation and instead lead to a positive 
sequence of mutually reinforcing, climate -smart, sustainable, and resilient benefits..  
In sum, the goal statement of the Project is:  
IF Rwanda’s CND landscape of native forests and neighboring farmlands is effectively managed for climate 
resilience  
THEN  the CND will comprise an interconnected  and interdependent set of globally significant, species -rich 
natural forests  in a matrix of sust ainable farmlands , acting as buffers against damage from extreme weather 
events : assuring  landscape integrity, stability and adaptability,  providing  vital ecosystem services and 
improving livelihoods for vulnerable people and the nation at large and contributing importantly to the 
conservation of biodiversity, the national economy, and mitigation of GHGs  
BECAUSE  building the capacity and management of integrated, climate -resilient forest and farming systems 
will ensure natural forest perpetuity and b reak and reverse the climate change -induced intensifying cycles 
of drought, flooding, and landslides that lead to degradation of livelihoods and resultant increased pressure 
on forest resources.  
The status and future of the CND’s forests and people are tig htly intertwined: both heavily dependent on the 
natural resources and processes that provide a foundation for their ability to thrive. They represent ecological 
and socio -economic systems that are importantly coupled in a complex landscape, linked in parti cular by the 
ecosystem services that flow throughout these systems (hydrological and microclimate regulation, soil 
conservation, and nature -based tourism). At present these services, and the consequent relationships 
between forests and people – especially those who are most vulnerable in Rwandan society – are deeply 
 
60  Scarano, F.R. et al, 2017 . Ecosystem -based adaptation to climate change: concept, sustainability and a role for 
conservation science,  Perspectives in Ecology & Conservation 15(2), 65 -73.


---
*Page 467*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
strained61. Forests have been reduced in extent, fragmented, and degraded by fire62, overuse of resources63, 
and introduction of exotic species64. The sharply sloped rural lands of the CND have been farmed more and 
more extensively and intensively on steeper and steeper slopes65,66 and throughout riverine bottomlands, 
further reducing tree cover outside forest blocks: thereby further compromising the ability of the land to retain 
soils67, avoid f looding68, provide consistent and healthy water44, ameliorate microclimate49, store carbon69, 
and remain productive. The coupling of these stressed systems has led to a negative feedback cycle of 
insecurity and constrained the well -being of farmers. Having little access to alternative sources of livelihoods 
or capital to enable change70, smallholder farmers have consequently increased pressures on natural forests 
for land, fuel, and other forest resources46. Such pressures in turn cause furth er forest loss and degradation 
and decline in biodiversity – reducing their ability to provide essential ecosystem services to people living in 
the landscape and across the nation, including tourism revenues and employment that are of national import. 
Thus , these systems are caught in a negative cycle that has proven difficult to break, despite significant 
sector -specific efforts. One such pressure – demand for fuelwood – is quite substantial given that a recent 
Government of Rwanda (GoR) census found that 77% of Rwandan households use wood as their primary 
fuel for cooking71. 
With the advent of climate change, these already strained systems are showing clear signs of breakdown. 
Increased variability in the timing and intensity of rains along with rising tem peratures are causing increased 
landslides72 and soil erosion50, increased desiccation and drought50, and unpredictable timing for agricultural 
plantings and harvest73. This is reducing farm productivity and security, driving even greater pressures on 
the remaining forested estate, thereby compromising further the essential ecosystem services that are 
necessary to such well -being. At a larger scale, climate -induced forest degradation and decline of 
biodiversity in the CND compromise national -level benefits of water provision and quality1, nature -based 
tourism74, the supply of hydroelectricity,7,75 and carbon storage10 [see diagram A below].  
 
61  Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows and potential 
supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.  
62  Masoz era, A.B., Mulindahabi, F., 2007. Post-Fire Regeneration in Nyungwe National Park , Rwanda. Wildlife 
Conservation Society.  
63  Republic of Rwanda, 2011. Green Growth and Climate Resilience: National Strategy for Climate Change and Low 
Carbon Development . 
64  USAID, 2019. Rwanda Tropical Forests and Biodiversity Analysis . 
65  Camberlin, P., 2018. Climate of Eastern Africa . In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science.  
66  Seimon, A., 2022. An Overview of Climate Change and its Impacts along the Congo -Nile Divide in Rwanda . 
67  World Bank, 2019. Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic . 
68  Karamage, F., et al., 2017. Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water  2017,  9(2), 14.  
69   Mugabowindekwe, M., Brandt, M.,  Chave, J. et al. Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang. 13, 91 –97 (2023).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
70  Clay N., King B., 2019. Smallholders' uneven capacities to adapt to climate change amid Africa's 'green 
revolution': Case study of Rwanda's crop intensification program . World Dev.  
71   Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.  
72  Uwihirwe, J., et al., 2020 . Landslide precipitation thresholds in Rwanda . Lan dslides.  
73  World Bank; CIAT. 2015. Climate -Smart Agriculture in Rwanda . CSA Country Profiles for Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America and the Caribbean Series. Washington D.C.: The World  Bank Group.  
74  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2015 . Rwan da State of Environment and Outlook Report.  
75  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2009 . Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report , 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.


---
*Page 468*
---

A 
 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 (b) PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
 
 
This context calls for new mechanisms of land -use planning and management that are based on 
consideration of the C ND as a landscape, consisting of an inter -dependent mosaic of forests and farms, the 
management of each determining the health of the whole. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination 
across geographic and sectoral boundaries, while mainstreaming cli mate risks into management planning 
will be key – and the foundation for a paradigm shift. Use of this framework to design and apply practical, 
precedent -setting Project actions in -forest and on -farm is expected to shift mindsets and management 
systems. Th is, in combination with establishing durable sources of financing, is thereby intended to shift the 
natural and human ecosystems themselves toward sustainable climate resilience. [see diagram B above, 
and the ToC (Theory of Change) diagram below.


---
*Page 469*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 
Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 15. Theory of change


---
*Page 470*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 29 
 
  
Outcome 1. Landscape planning, policies and management are effective and coordinated across 
sectors and scales to address climate risks and adaptation benefits.  Major barriers currently stand in 
the way of moving in this direction, as outlined in the ToC diagram. Awareness, understanding, attention, 
and action regarding climate risks to natural resources are currently insufficient . Planning and 
adaptation to climate impacts are constrained by a lack of information, site -focused modeling, spatial 
analysis, and real -time monitoring. Where some capacity exists, it operates within sector initiatives rather 
than across them . It also proceeds largely within governmental programs, with mechanisms for inclusive 
land-use planning inadequate , not fully engaging rural peoples – particularly women and youth. Because 
of these barriers, coordination of landscape planning and management is weak across governmental and 
non-governmental sectors (agriculture, forestry, national parks, economic development), scales (local, 
district, natio nal), and actors (women, youth, smallholder farmers, commercial businesses, as well as 
governmental agencies). Activities outlined in Component 1 , aimed at integrated landscape land -use 
planning and the capacity for effective management, are intended to he lp ensure ecosystem services persist, 
and thereby align the ties between forests and people as they are faced with climate challenges. Activities 
under this component will provide the government and public with up -to-date information on climate 
adaptation (1.1.1), build agency capacities for incorporation into land -use planning – particularly spatial 
analysis and forest monitoring (1.2.2, 1.2.3), establish mechanisms for integrated landscape planning – 
including public participation and operations of an int er-agency task force (1.1.2, 1.2.1), and facilitate the 
creation of a climate -smart, integrated CND land -use plan (1.1.2).  
Outcome 2. Natural forests are protected, connected, more resilient to climate impacts and risks.  
Particular to the CND, another key barrier is that natural forests are as yet undervalued and under -
resourced  despite the fact that they play vital roles in stabilizing natural and human CND ecosystems76,77. 
The national parks of the CND (Volcanoes, Nyungwe, and Gishwati -Mukura) are globally significant 
regarding their outstanding species richness, levels of endemism, and presence of endangered and rare 
species78. Although these are well -recognized for their  tourism potential, and strong governmental policy and 
practice exists to protect them, barriers to their full valuation remains: their ecosystem services are yet to 
be fully recognized  or financially supported, and their support is vulnerable to global to urism trends  
(with COVID -reduced tourism as a current example). As climate change considerations enter into landscape 
management, the values of these natural forests for fog interception, precipitation infiltration, soil retention, 
drought mitigation, and hydrological balance are only now becoming more prominent. In order to provide 
such services into the future, Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura NPs are in need of restoration and 
connection79,80. Yet the understanding and capacity for recovering their richness and function is nascent at 
best, particularly in light of climate change. Activities outlined in Component 2  are therefore designed with 
forest sustainability at the core. To build climate considerations into forest planning and management, the 
Project will facilitate revision of park management plans (2.1.1) that enhance dimensions of fire prevention 
and management (2.1.3), and will support in -park forest restoration (2.2.2). Establishment of restored forest 
at park boundaries (2.2.2), riparian linkages outside the parks (2.2.2), and forested “stepping stones” that 
 
76  Gatwaza O.C., Wang X., 2021 Mapping of biodiversity hubs and key ecosystem  services as a tool for shaping 
optimal areas for conservation.  PLOS ONE 16(8): e0253151  
77  Andrew, G., Masozera, M., 2010. Payment for Ecosystem Services and Poverty Reduction in Rwanda . Journal of 
Sustainable Development in Africa (V12, No.3).  
78  This a rea is also significant for global biodiversity – with the Albertine Rift being one of the most biodiverse regions 
within Africa, including conservative estimates of at least 980 endemic species, 15 Critically Endangered species, 34 
Endangered species, and  99 Vulnerable species. Source: Plumptre, A.J., et al. 2016. Conservation Action Plan for the 
Albertine Rift . Wildlife Conservation Society.  
79  Nyandwi, E., Mukashema, A., 2011. Excessive Deforestation of Gishwati  Mountainous Forest & Biodiversity 
Changes . Participatory Geographic Information Systems (P -GIS) for natural resource management and food security in 
Africa.  
80  Ordway, E., 2015. Political shifts and changing forests: Effects of armed conflict on forest co nservation in Rwanda . 
Global Ecology and Conservation.


---
*Page 471*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 allow for forest species to move between parks (2.2.1, 2.2.3) is intended to enhance biodiversity and forest 
functions across th e CND landscape.  Fundamental to forest sustainability as well is sustainable long -term 
financing, which will be addressed by providing technical support from the Project to RBD and REMA to 
assess various financial instruments (conservation and/or water fu nds, bonds, revenue streams) to be 
employed for revenue generation post -GCF (2.1.2).  
Outcome 3. Vulnerable rural livelihoods are more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable 
and nature -positive.  The sustainability and climate resilience of th e agricultural matrix of this landscape is 
challenged by additional, multiple barriers. Rural agricultural practices and livelihoods are constrained by 
the very small size of landholdings (avg. 0.3 ha81), creating intense pressure to utilize all arable lan d for food 
and near -term income -generating products56, thus creating reluctance to incorporate trees or other soil 
conservation measures on the land82. The resultant lack of fuelwood in turn continues to drive 
deforestation of natural forests12, and occupi es important time for women and youth  who could 
instead be engaged in productive and empowering roles. Overall, local communities and extension 
services83 have limited skills, information and knowledge to design and implement farming methods  
that would enh ance their capacity to mitigate the impacts from climate -induced soil erosion, flooding and 
droughts. Farmers also lack access to financial know -how56 and capital, proven alternative livelihoods, 
and markets  that could incentivize and enable change12. They  are therefore caught in a cycle of immediate 
need that – without alternatives – forecloses options that could recover and sustain benefits from improved 
ecosystem services, other forest functions, and new livelihoods. Component 3  aims to redress these 
conditions via activities that will demonstrate, incentivize, facilitate, and support actions that maintain and 
recover ecosystem services, benefit from forest functions and provide alternative on - and off -farm based 
incomes that reduce pressure on forests. T o these ends, the Project will support reafforestation on steep 
slopes (>55%), on both public and smallholder private lands (Activity 3.1.1). It will develop farm -based 
agroforestry for climate -resilient species that produce fuelwood and/or market products , while conserving 
and enriching soils (3.1.2, 3.2.1). The Project will complement land -based production with a scaling -up of 
alternative value -chain products for smallholders that are nature -positive, including but not limited to tourism -
based income, bee keeping, and improved cooking stoves (3.2.2, 3.2.4). Central to these activities will be 
facilitation of access to market chains (3.2.3) and financial mechanisms for establishing and maintaining 
businesses (3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3). Given that these activities  are designed at the core to be profitable and 
promote financial sustainability, it is intended that they be replicable, and sustained once GCF funding 
expires.  
Assumptions . Success in achieving Project outcomes will depend on important assumptions being m et, 
among them that governmental and non -governmental actors will be willing to work in collaboration across 
sectoral and geographic boundaries; rural adoption of alternative farming and off -farm revenue generation 
can be scaled up to drive a landscape -level transition to sustainability; financing and revenue -generating 
mechanisms will be established that assure continuance of initiated actions; and governmental commitment 
to natural forest restoration and ecosystem -based adaptation continues in national st rategies and in meeting 
global commitments.  
The pathways summarized in this ToC are expected to contribute to the overall goal and outcomes of the 
Project : natural forests  and vulnerable communities  will be more resilient and sustainable despite climate 
impacts, with effective, coordinated management across the CND landscape. In doing so, important co -
benefits will accrue. Intentional, inclusive engagement in management coordination will empower women 
and youth  in environmental thinking and decision making.  Forest conservation and restoration, along with 
agroforestry, will contribute to greater carbon sequestration and storage, while fire management and 
greater cooking efficiency will reduce GHG emissions . The globally unique, endemic biodiversity of 
 
81  USAID, 2017. LandLinks Country Profile: Rwanda. https://www.land -links.org/country -profile/rwanda/   
82  Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority, 2017. Forest Investment Program for Rwanda . 
83  Foster & Graham, 2014. Connectivity and the Tea Sector in Rwanda: Value Chains and Networks of Connectivity -
Based Enterprises in Rwanda.


---
*Page 472*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 31 
 
 Rwanda’ s forests, from great apes to rare orchids, will recover on the basis of healthy, more connected and 
resilient forest habitat.   
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2  
Low- 
emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliance
s MRA 4  
Forestry 
and land 
use ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communitie
s ARA 2  
Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructur
e and built 
environmen
t ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1. 
Landscape 
planning, policies & 
management 
effective & 
coordinated across 
sectors and scales 
to address climate 
risks & adaptation 
benefits  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 2. Natural 
forests protected, 
connected, more 
resilient to climate 
impacts & risks  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 3. 
Vulnerable rural 
livelihoods more 
climate -resilient, 
diverse, 
economically 
sustainable & 
nature -positive  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
Co-benefits 
number  Co-benefits  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1 : 
Globally unique, 
endemic 
biodiversity 
maintained  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2 : 
Women and 
Youth 
empowered  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
       
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Rwanda’s CND region is a complex, naturally integrated landscape. Its diverse high elevation forests capture 
and store water resources, releasing them in a sustained manner throughout the year to surrounding steep 
hillside and bottomland farms and plantati ons, before feeding into the national network of wetlands, rivers, 
and lakes. The Rwanda portion of the CND runs from the Virunga Mountains and Volcanoes National Park 
(VNP) on the border with Uganda in the north, down through Gishwati Mukura National Park  (GMNP), to the 
south end of Lake Kivu and Nyungwe National Park (NNP) on the southern border with Burundi. These three


---
*Page 473*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 32 
 
 national parks contain the country’s only remaining montane forests. The boundaries of the CND landscape 
are defined as all areas greate r than 1900m in elevation.  
Administratively, the CND overlaps three Provinces (Western, Southern, Northern) and ten Districts 
(Karongi, Musanze, Ngororero, Nyabihu, Nyamagabe, Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru, Rubavu, Rusizi, Rutsiro).  
 
 
Figure 16. Map of CND Landscape


---
*Page 474*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Map of CND Landscape drainage basins  
 
To address the present and intensifying threats from climate change requires that this region also be 
managed as an integrated and ecologically connected system. This need is recognized in several key 
policies and plans enacted in recent years by the Rwandan government. However, implementation and 
integration84 of these have lagged, their decentralized application on the ground is largely unrealized, and 
climate -related technic al capacity remains limited in key institutions at all levels. This Project is designed to 
increase the climate resilience of the CND. Its intended outcomes are:  
● The development and implementation of effective landscape planning, policies, and management, 
coordinated across sectors and scales, to address climate risks and adaptation benefits;  
 
84   Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows and 
potential supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.


---
*Page 475*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 34 
 
 ● Improved protection, restoration, and connection of existing natural forests, with enhanced resilience 
to climate impacts and risks; and  
● The transformation of vulnerab le rural livelihoods to be more climate -resilient, diverse, economically 
sustainable, and nature positive.  
The Project has three main components directly targeting vulnerabilities within climate impact chains. 
Detailed analyses of the underlying rationale are provided in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2). Please see 
section 4.1 of that study, for a list and descr iption of relevant existing and previous projects in the region.    
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning   
There is an urgent need for more effective collaboration among Rwandan government agencies, civil society, 
private sector, and diverse partners to balance difficult -yet-inevitable land use trade -offs that will have 
profound impacts on the climate resilience of both natural systems and people. The GoR recognizes that a 
piecemeal approach to decision mak ing has exacerbated competition over scarce land resources and 
reduced the adaptive capacity of both ecosystems and rural populations85. Rwanda’s Baseline Climate 
Change Vulnerability Index (2015) recommends establishing a multi -ministry technical climate resilience 
coordinating committee, including NGOs86. In 2017 the MoE developed the Strategic Programme for Climate 
Resilience (SPCR), to focus on three cross -cutting priorities to achieve climate change resilience: (a) 
technical capacity building and stren gthening institutional coordination; (b) integrated land use and spatial 
planning; and (c) climate services and disaster risk management87. The SPCR is a key step towards ensuring 
inter-ministerial and multi -sectoral collaboration and integration of climat e resilience considerations into 
development plans and actions. However, there remains a need to comprehensively implement the strategy 
and mainstream climate change adaptation at the sub -national level, engaging a diverse set of actors and 
sectors and emp owering women to provide input into decision making at district and community levels.  
Output 1.1: Landscape -wide land -use plan developed for climate -resilient livelihoods and forest 
ecosystems, integrating district strategies.  
The GoR completed a National Land Use and Development Master Plan (NLUMP 2020) to guide land use 
planning and regulate permitting processes. However, effective and strategic land use has yet to be applied 
at a local and district level, and the conversion of plantation and riparian for ests to agriculture continues and 
development projects are approved without sufficient knowledge of climate change risks or the value of 
existing forests for ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA)88. The Project will add climate -change  resilience and 
adaptation content to central government efforts such as NLUMP and the SPCR process by acquiring, 
synthesizing, and disseminating key information on climate trends, the importance of remaining natural 
forests, and the value of ecosystem services. This information wil l also be shared at district and community 
levels through var ious outreach networks and workshops, with particular attention to reaching disadvantaged 
women, youth and vulnerable groups.  
Building on the information base outlined above, the Project will wor k with the National Land Authority (NLA) 
to establish a working group, with participation from relevant ministries, agencies, and districts, including 
representatives of women, youth, and vulnerable groups interests, to develop a climate -resilient land -use 
 
85  National Land Use Management Plan.  
86  United Nations, 2015. Economic Commission f or Africa; Rwanda Environment Management Authority. Baseline 
climate change vulnerability index for Rwanda. Kigali. Rwanda Environment Management Authority.  
87  Rwanda’s Green Fund (FONERWA), 2017. Strategic Programme for Climate Resilience (SPCR) Rwanda - 
December 2017. Link. 
88  Scarano, F.R. et al, 2017 . Ecosystem -based adaptation to climate change: concept, sustainability and a role for 
conservation science,  Perspectives in Ecology & Conservation 15(2), 65 -73.


---
*Page 476*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 35 
 
 plan for the CND landscape. At the national level each relevant ministry and government agency will select 
and appoint a working group member while at the district level, participants will be selected from the Joint 
Action Development Forum (JADF). JADF i s a multi -stakeholder platform meant to facilitate and promote 
the full participation of citizens in the decentralized and participatory governance and improve service 
provision processes with representatives from the public sector, private sector and civi l society. The following 
stakeholders will form the basis of the collaboration: a) the Ministry of Environment represented by four of 
its agencies: the Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA); the National Land Authority (NLA), 
Rwanda Water Board (R BA) and the Rwanda Forest Authority (RFA); b) the Ministry of Agriculture, including 
the Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB);  c) the National Agriculture Export Board (NAEB) d) Ministry of Local 
Government; e) Rwanda Development Board (RDB); f) Gender Monitori ng Office (GMO); g) Districts 
Decentralized Structures – the District Administrative Units, which supervise several technical and 
administrative activities; h) civil society, international organisations, academia and community based 
organizations. This lis t will be discussed during the inception period and expanded as necessary. From this, 
a spatial framework for district level land use planning will be developed that accounts for current and future 
climate risks, reconciles cross -sectoral land -use conflict s, and guides development decisions. All the 
activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forest Authority in collaboration 
with National Land Authority, and districts.  
Activity 1.1.1.  Synthesize and disseminate informati on on value of natural forests and ecosystem services  
This activity will involve conducting a stakeholder mapping & consultation exercise in order to better 
understand the use of climate adaptation data in existing sectoral planning processes, and identify  cross -
sectoral linkages or conflicts. These results, along with a comprehensive literature review, will inform the 
design of high -level information packages that will synthesize information on climate risks for various sectors 
(e.g. agriculture, forestry)  and highlight the value of forests for increasing resilience of local communities. An 
information dissemination program (e.g., presentations, workshops, and newsletters) will be implemented to 
share this knowledge among key ministries as well as governmen t, non -government and community 
organisations. The Project will use JADF as a platform to disseminate information to key stakeholders. 
Particular attention will be paid to ensure women, vulnerable and youth groups from Ubudehe categories c, 
d and e are rep resented . In addition, the program will use mass media in the form of a radio program and 
complementary community action campaigns to improve community, women, youth, other vulnerable groups 
knowledge on climate information, climate risks and climate adap tation options. This will stimulate discussion 
on issues pertaining to climate risks and other social issues locally and support engagement of each in 
responding effectively to climate adaptation and resilience options.   
Cross -sectoral tradeoffs and climate adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral implications will also be 
highlighted, in order to begin promoting the benefits of integrated land -use planning. To complement the 
high-level information dissemination program, a suite of technical training materials will also be developed 
for delivery to district technical staff. These materials will provide training on climate risks & the need to 
incorporate climate adaptation into land -use planning, with a focus on the technical skills required for climate -
sensitive planning (e.g. sourcing climate data, mapping ecosystem services).  
Sub-activities will include:  
1.1.1.1 Map the sectors involved in land -use planning in the CND and review how forest ecosystem services 
and climate resilience are incorporated in to each sector’s planning process


---
*Page 477*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 36 
 
 1.1.1.2 Conduct comprehensive literature review & stakeholder consultation to collect & synthesize 
information on climate risks for various sectors (e.g. agriculture, forestry), the value of forests for increasing 
resilien ce of local communities, and highlight adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral implications.  
1.1.1.3 Host workshops & presentations with key ministries, government organizations, NGOs and 
community organizations to disseminate high -level knowledge on valu e of forests for increasing resilience 
of local communities.  
1.1.1.4 Develop guidelines for integrating climate risk into land use planning and cross sectoral planning  
1.1.1.5 Develop outreach materials on climate and related risks in the CND and the value  of forest 
ecosystems for increasing resilience  
1.1.1.6 Implement outreach program tailored to different stakeholders (local government, civil society, 
communities, women, youth) to enhance capacities for land -use planning, funding mobilization, and delive ry 
of climate adaptation actions  
1.1.1.7 Conduct climate literacy seminars for local government and civil society organizations, aimed at 
increasing women and youth participation.  
1.1.1.8 Provide financial and logistical support to trained organizations in grassroots mobilization to increase 
women and youth participation in climate adaptation planning.  
1.1.1.9 Introduce social safeguards at a high level at each meeting, including the GRM, FPIC, and Access 
Restrictions Mitigations as safeguar ds to be in place for work with local communities.  
Activity 1.1.2.  Develop climate -resilient landscape land -use plan  
This activity aims to ensure that climate change adaptation requirements are fully integrated into planning 
processes at local, district a nd national scales. This will involve i) participatory scenario analysis to 
understand the problems local communities and district officials face in terms of natural disasters (flooding, 
soil erosion, forest loss/degradation) and climate change, as well as  the future land use plans of the districts, 
including an assessment of the national consequences of these problems in terms of ecosystem service 
delivery and climate change resilience and adaptation capacity; ii) risk assessment to estimate the impacts 
of the planned land use changes, as well as climate change, on flood risk, soil erosion, forest 
loss/degradation and the well -being of local people, especially any disproportionate impacts on women, 
youth and vulnerable groups; iii) climate change adaptation  and mitigation measures development to decide 
possible climate actions for both adaptation and mitigation and prioritize these actions according to their 
feasibility and urgency in consultation with local communities, district leaders, and other stakehold ers; and 
iv) land use plan development based on the recommendations from the previous 3 steps. A comprehensive 
consultation and feedback process will be undertaken to incorporate views of stakeholders at all levels (e.g. 
civil society; men, women, youth, a nd historically marginalized people in local communities; district & national 
government), upon which the plan will be finalized and approved by the Government of Rwanda.  
Sub activities will include:  
1.1.2.1 Engage district officials, Joint Action Develo pment Forums (JADF), and community members in the 
CND (especially women) in reviewing and interpreting the National Land Use and Development 
Management Plan (NLUMP), to ensure the plan accounts for current and future climate and related risks, 
while buildi ng local support for climate sensitive planning


---
*Page 478*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 37 
 
 1.1.2.2 Conduct participatory land -use planning process in communities from village to district level to 
support integrated climate resilient land use planning  
1.1.2.3 Develop Integrated Land -use Plan that su pports Resilient Livelihoods and Ecosystems in the CND, 
ensuring alignment with National Land Use and Development Master Plan and ensuring the CND plan guides 
the district plan  
1.1.2.4 Develop and roll out a series of trainings (virtual sessions and online  modules) on gender sensitivity 
and mainstreaming women and youth into planning  
1.1.2.5 Assess specific climate impacts on historically marginalized and Category c,d,e populations through 
a participatory NR process to ensure the Project components address their needs for adaptation  
Output 1.2 Local and national institutional capacities strengthened to integrate biodiversity and 
climate risks into land use planning and management  
Forest data in Rwanda has historically been generated in an ad -hoc fashion89 through the support of external 
agencies. This precludes comprehensive consideration of forest and biodiversity data in land -use planning 
processes. As Rwanda moves to achieve the goals outlined in the Green Growth and Climate Resilience 
Strategy and the Nat ional Land -Use Development Master Plan, building governmental capacity in generating 
and utilizing spatial data to inform decision making is essential. The activities under this output will involve 
recruiting experts in mapping, remote sensing and ecosyste m service modeling, in order to establish a formal 
spatial planning unit within government. These experts will also lead a formal information dissemination and 
capacity building program, in order to i) promote the importance of considering forest & climate  resilience 
into land -use planning, and ii) deliver detailed training to technical staff on forest mapping, climate and 
ecosystem service modeling. The Project will also increase the understanding of the importance of forest 
landscape restoration in securi ng ecosystem services for local economic development and resilient 
livelihoods. It will ensure that the public, decision -makers and other stakeholders in the CND landscape have 
a high level of awareness of the risks to the economy and livelihoods associate d with deforestation under 
current and possible evolution of these risks with the changing climate, and the benefits of reforestation in 
an integrated landscape approach.  
Women’s land rights need some key consideration for an effective integration of wome n in land use planning 
and management, among which include advocacy for women’s knowledge of their rights, women’s 
confidence in the dispute resolution process and outcomes, men’s respect of women’s rights, and modest 
improvements in physical and social ac cessibility of the local justice system for women are most critical 
avenues for success. These factors will be considered throughout project implementation of the activities 
proposed within this project using a gender -responsive, participatory and fully tr ansparent approach. For 
example, under the project trained institutions will hold meetings to train women, youth and marginalized 
people on forests and mobilize them to participate in planning processes and local institutions will be trained 
to build capac ity of rural people, specifically women and youth, to participate in climate adaptation processes 
Program Staff and government officials will be trained understand gender barriers, understand how to 
mainstream gender equality principles into planning  and  support women, youth and marginalized 
participation in meetings.  
Furthermore, the Project will support dialogue with the private sector and planning processes needed to 
mainstream climate change and biodiversity in the tea sector. Projected climate chang es predict significant 
elevation rises in CND agro ecological zones, including the potential for tea cultivation at much higher 
 
89   Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change  in Western Rwanda during periods of wars and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).


---
*Page 479*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 38 
 
 elevations than at present. This is unlikely to threaten Rwanda’s existing montane forest parks, as foreign 
revenues from touris m in these reserves far surpass those from tea. However, tea remains a significant 
source of foreign revenue and a government target for expansion. Any increased tea production in the CND 
would therefore most likely affect lands outside of parks: smallhold er, cooperative, and district holdings, 
many of which might also be targets for reforestation, agroforestry, and biodiversity stepping stone initiatives 
under this Project. The integrated land use planning included in this Project design, will bring togeth er tea 
industry, agriculture, forestry, biodiversity, and tourism interests to identify and reduce such potential 
conflicts over use of the CND’s limited land resource base. Through this integrated land use planning we 
aim to establish a formal public -private sector forum at the landscape level to help improve communication 
across sectors, appreciation of environmental issues, and increase synergies between interventions to avoid 
conflicting targets and indicators between sectors.  
This output will comprise the following activities and sub activities which will be executed by the Rwanda 
Forestry Agency (RFA) in collaboration with key government agencies, private sector and civil society 
organizations.  
Activity 1.2.1 Create interagency taskforce institutionali zing integrated landscape planning and policy  
Insufficient mechanisms for integrated land use planning constitute one of the key barriers for sustainable 
natural management in Rwanda. Planning processes within government agencies are carried out in silos 
without paying attention to the impacts a certain land use activity or project will have on other sectors of the 
economy. This Project aims to facilitate improved collaboration among government agencies by 
strengthening the government’s existing cross -secto ral planning task force. The existing task force was set 
up to support cross -sectoral implementation of the National Strategy for Economic Transformation, but it 
suffers a number of weaknesses, including: i) a lack of official mandate for the task force to  carry out 
activities; ii) irregular attendance of members; and iii) lack of clear and regular funding to facilitate meetings. 
This activity will review the mandate and structure of the cross -sectoral task force and promote solutions for 
strengthening its operation to RFA (the task force coordinator). It will also facilitate quarterly meetings of the 
task-force, in particular between institutions in charge of agriculture and agroforestry, to encourage synergies 
and avoid overlapping mandates and redundancy in different climate resilience interventions. The involved 
staff at both national and local levels shall be empowered to readily share information and activity plans, and 
will be offered technical support to generate materials that can inform decision -making (e.g. policy briefs, 
map, presentations). The Project will support collaborative integrated landscape planning, which secures 
climate resilience undertaken with appropriate social safeguards.  
Sub activities will include:  
1.2.1.1 Review & strengthen operationalisation of the current cross -sectoral task force  
1.2.1.2 Hold quarterly sectoral planning meetings with both national and district administrations in CND and 
the private sector involved in mining, agriculture, and livestock production in the landscape  
1.2.1.3 Facilitate discussions and provide technical  support (e.g. policy briefs) in decision -making for cross -
sectoral actions around climate adaptation and forest resilience in the CND  
1.2.1.4 Continue to introduce social safeguards at each meeting including the GRM, FPIC, and Access 
Restrictions Mitigati ons as safeguards to be in place for work with local communities. For those at the district 
or community level, provide options for feedback on the process and best ways of communication with local 
partners.


---
*Page 480*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 39 
 
  
 
Activity 1.2.2 Build capacity for spatial plan ning in national agencies re climate change  
Spatial planning is emerging as a valuable tool for the development of evidence -based land use and climate 
resilience strategies90. This subcomponent will develop capacity within the Rwanda’s university network a nd 
the MoE to use remot e sensing, ecosystem service modeling and spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, 
InVEST, RIOS, SWAT and other open access tools such as Open Foris) to inc orporate climate risks and 
climate resilience strategies into development plans and to readily identify and reconcile land use conflicts. 
A prime example of the latter is the potential for climate -driven shifts in optimal elevation zones for coffee 
and tea cultivation conflicting with current subsistence agricul ture in the case of cof fee, and key remaining 
natural forest fragments with regard to any upward migration of tea. These spatial planning tools will be 
procured by the project and will be made available to the spatial planning unit.  
The Project will assist the GoR in developing  a dedicated spatial planning unit (SPU) within an appropriate 
ministry or cross -cutting agency. The appropriate hosting institution will be determined during the project 
implementation in consultation with key government agencies operating under the Minis try of Environment.  
This will include support for training high level Rwandan specialists to provide the technical expertise needed 
to process and integrate spatial planning into decision -making within and across secto rs. A specific 
contribution of this S PU in coordination with appropriate governmental and non -governmental partners is 
the development and operationalization of an innovative, scientifically credible, scalable system for 
monitoring trends in natural forest cover and forest types at multiple s cales. This SPU will also allow Rwanda 
to measure and report on the land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector as part of a national 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory (GHG -I). This system will build on the national FMES that was established with 
the sup port from ENABEL.  
Capacity building is essential for execution of the Project; even more so for the sustainability of Project 
elements in the long run. To improve Rwanda’s collective ability to integrate land use planning in support of 
climate change resi lience and delivery of ecosystem services, these sub -activities are planned:  
1.2.2.1 Recruit spatial planning expert/s to support spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.2 Assess and identify the institutional home and operationalize the spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.3 Conduct a capacity needs assessment and identify the appropriate tools for spatial planning to fit the 
Rwandan context and conduct familiarization  
1.2.2.4 Led by the spatial planning unit, develop capacity within the University of Rwanda and the MoE to 
use remote sensing, ecosystem service modeling and spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, InVEST, RIOS, 
SWAT) to incorporate climate risks into land use planning processes  
1.2.2.5 Deliver training workshops on utilization of earth system models for land use pl anning purposes, 
utilization of remote sensing resources (lightning, satellite radiances) for hazards detection and climate 
monitoring and on regional climate monitoring and applications.  
Activity 1.2.3 Develop an effective forest monitoring system to unde rpin forest management decisions  
 
90  Mathias S., et al, 2019. The Spatial Development Framework to facilitate urban management in countries with 
weak planning systems, Internatio nal Planning Studies, 24:3 -4, 235 -254, DOI: 10.1080/13563475.2019.1658571


---
*Page 481*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 40 
 
 Within Rwanda, forest -related data is limited in scope and generally outdated91. Consequently, the current 
state and trends of Rwanda’s forests are not well understood. Efforts to improve the situation through 
individual st udies have been valuable but have not led to systematic increases in spatial information on 
trends in different forest cover types and resilience at the scales at which land use decisions are being made. 
For example, the FMES software focuses on forestry a nd plantation forests, but does not address natural 
forests. This activity will update and monitor forest cover data in different ecological zones and forest types 
using high resolution satellite imagery, field work, and remote sensing techniques. In addit ion to remote 
sensing techniques,  the Project team, once selected, will meet with government and international partners 
to assess best monitoring tools and platforms, including Open Foris. Close attention will also be given to the 
system used by Mugabowind ekwe et al (2023)92 for the most recent, highly detailed forest inventory from 
2007 imagery. RFA will recruit a Rwandan expert who will work with WCS experts in applying spatial planning 
and forest monitoring tools in support of  government agencies during  the project implementation  to  
strengthen the capacities of RFA, NLA and  GIS Center at the University of Rwanda.  
An adaptive forest, climate change and land use monitoring system will be established to support climate 
resilient forest management decisio ns through the following:  
1.2.3.1 Recruit Forest ecologist or remote sensing expert to support the design and implementation of 
indigenous forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.2 Review existing forest mapping data and monitoring software, and assess utility for generating 
quantitative assessments of indigenous forest cover from local to national scales  
1.2.3.3 In collaboration with REMA, MINAGRI, RAB, RDB, RISA, MoE and affiliated agencies and University 
of Rwanda, design structure and operation of fo rest monitoring system, including required inputs (data, 
computing, personnel), desired outputs, and operational structure (e.g. location, reporting structure, funding)  
1.2.3.4 Purchase and install 2 new weather automatic stations in the CND  
1.2.3.5 Establ ish & operationalize forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.6 Generate updated maps & statistics for indigenous forest cover, forest type etc. using forest 
monitoring system  
1.2.3.7 Develop capacity within hosting institution for continued operation of forest moni toring system  
Component 2: Forest and landscape management and restoration  
The GoR has prioritized forest management and restoration – including natural forests in protected areas – 
as a key component of climate change adaptation strategies for the CND landscape.93 Natural forests within 
the national park system have been generally well protected and managed in recent years, earning high 
marks for biodiversity conservation while also developing a high quality – and quite lucrative – set of 
ecotourism att ractions. Current park management plans, however, include little attention to the potential 
effects of projected climate change. Outside of parks, few areas with natural forest cover remain and forest 
management and restoration approaches are not being imp lemented at the scale required to significantly 
improve forest climate resilience. Where forests are restored, most use exotic species and mono -specific 
 
91  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017. Analysis of forests and climate change in Eastern 
Africa.  Forests and Climate Change Working Paper 16.  
92  Mugabowind ekwe, M., Brandt, M., Chave, J. et al.  Nation -wide mapping of tree -level aboveground carbon stocks 
in Rwanda. Nat. Clim. Chang.  13, 91–97 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558 -022-01544 -w 
93  IUCN, 2014. Forest landscape restoration opportunity assessment for Rwanda . Link.


---
*Page 482*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 41 
 
 plantations that are generally incompatible with mixed agricultural uses; they are also vulnerable to d iseases 
and pests with climate warming.  
In this component, targeted interventions will integrate climate change awareness and adaptation into 
national forest park planning, policies and management, as well as restore degraded areas within those 
parks. Thes e efforts will help sustain the forests’ rich biodiversity, the lucrative tourism revenues that flow 
into local and national economies, and the ecosystem services needed for climate resilience of vulnerable 
communities. This suite of activities will also i dentify priority areas outside of parks – in remnant natural 
stands, around wetlands, and along streams – for protection and restoration as “stepping stones” and  
linkages for long -term climate change connectivity.  
Output 2.1 Protected Area management effec tiveness improved re climate risks and adaptation  
The remnant natural forests of the CND harbor globally significant biodiversity across multiple taxa, from 
primates to birds and orchids. More than 10% of these species are regionally endemic94 – 47 flowering plants 
are endemic to Nyungwe Forest alone95. Though each has suffered from significant past habitat loss, the 
Nyungwe and Volcanoes National Parks have been generally well -managed under the Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB), with assistance f rom NGOs, PPPs, and the private sector. Rwanda’s reputation 
for ecotourism and nature tourism attractions is world class. It has also earned conservation recognition for 
the dramatic recovery of its endangered mountain gorillas, sustained protection of its  remaining biodiversity, 
and creation of a significant revenue -sharing program with parks -adjacent communities. The recent addition 
of Gishwati -Mukura National Park to this mountain forest network underscores the government’s 
commitment to conservation, th ough both forest blocks require significant restoration for the purposes of 
biodiversity conservation, connectivity, and ecosystem services enhancement.  
In contrast to Rwanda’s areas of conservation success, relatively little attention – and less action – has been 
focused on climate change and its potential impacts on habitats and biodiversity, especially in the climate -
adapted mountain forests of the CND. The investment required to build and sustain the institutional and 
human capacity to achieve Rwanda’s recent conservation success now needs to be joined with a parallel 
investment to ensure that PA management plans, policies, and actions address the realities of climate 
change both within and outside of their boundaries.  
Activity 2.1.1 Facilitate revision of PA management plans to address climate risks  
Climate change is increasingly recognized as not only a major future threat to protected areas, but one that 
will also exacerbate existing threats and vulnerabilities96. This is particularly true for the thre e national parks 
of the Congo Nile Divide landscape that are surrounded by a large number of smallholder farmers who are 
dependent on natural resources for their livelihoods. The park planning processes need to be expanded to 
best meet challenges posed by climate change as well as ensure full incorporation of buffer zone and 
landscape linkage requirements, and the ability to engage with the larger CND and district landscape 
management planning processes. The revised management plans will aim to:  
● Develop spe cific goals and objectives for improving climate resilience  
● Identify areas and species of particular importance to climate adaptation, mitigation and resilience  
● Identify and prioritize threats that exacerbate climate impacts  
● Identify and prioritize critical actions for strengthening resilience  
 
94  CBD. 2020. Rwanda 6th National Report to the Convention on Biodiversi ty 
95  Fischer, E. and Killmann, D., 2008. Illustrated field guide to the plants of Nyungwe National Park Rwanda . 
University of Koblenz -Landau.  
96   World Bank, 2019. Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.


---
*Page 483*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 42 
 
 ● Identify areas important for climate change adaptation and mitigation into protected area zones and 
regulations  
● Develop indicators of climate resilience  
To this end, the Project will undertake these sub -activities:  
2.1.1.1 Review and update existing national park management plans to ensure climate and related 
landscape changes, risks, impacts and required management responses are integrated  
2.1.1.2 Provide technical and financial suppo rt to planning, research and monitoring as well as community -
based conservation units within RDB in managing the parks as part of larger CND landscapes  
2.1.1.3 Train PA staff to integrate gender and social inclusion into programming  
2.1.1.4 Train PA staff on integrating needs of women, youth, historically marginalized and Ubudehe 
Categories c,d,e populations into climate adaptation risks and responses  
2.1.1.5 Train PA staff on SEAH, GRM, FPIC, and Access Restriction Mitigation Processes to ensure NP 
climate  change responses are undertaken in a way which supports social inclusion and equity  
Activity 2.1.2 Establish long -term plans for CND financial sustainabilit y post -GCF 
Rwanda has recently developed a Biodiversity Finance Plan97 through support from BIOFIN.  This plan has 
identified a number of financing solutions that will not only contribute towards improved biodiversity 
protection in Rwanda, but also aligns with Rwanda’s sustainable development and green growth objectives. 
These solutions include:  
● Introdu ce a Biodiversity Conservation Fund into Rwanda’s National Fund for the Environment 
(FONERWA) to help streamline and attract domestic and international sources of finance to support 
conservation investments and thereby reduce transaction costs to increase conservation benefits.  
● Improve efficiency and effectiveness of environmental fees and fines to strengthen the effectiveness 
of the regulatory environment that will ultimately improve ecosystem and biodiversity conservation 
goals.  
● Water User Fees for Catchm ent Management to secure the financial resources necessary for 
effective water catchment management.  
● Pilot Business Plans for Selected Wetlands to enable the sustainable development of wetlands for 
ecotourism and biodiversity -friendly enterprises such as handicrafts, fisheries, and sustainable 
agriculture.  
● Promote biodiversity -friendly enterprises in the transition to a green economy and accelerate the 
transition to a green economy by incentivizing and supporting businesses to adopt sus tainable 
practices and attracting investments in new conservation enterprises.  
● Strengthen the tourism revenue sharing scheme to improve biodiversity outcomes and effectively 
address conservation -development objectives  
● Develop a Protected Area Finance Strat egy to support the goal of increasing the financial and 
ecological sustainability of Rwanda’s Protected Area System (PAS)  
There are also new emerging solutions such as the Wildlife Conservation Bond (WCB) which essentially is 
a payment for performance -base d financial instrument that channels investments to achieve conservation 
outcomes – measured in this case by specific conservation targets that could be set (e.g., hectares of native 
forest restored, or an increase in umbrella species populations). In the case of Rwanda, gorillas and 
 
97  BIOFIN Rwanda – Biodiversity Finance Plan, REMA, 2019.


---
*Page 484*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 43 
 
 chimpanzees are considered umbrella species that play a crucial role in shaping entire ecosystems on which 
countless other species depend. For the WCB, a grants -based, outcome payer is needed, which could be 
the GCF. Through th e WCB, and in collaboration with the World Bank (WB), the WB could issue bonds and 
investors could support the financing of activities to protect and grow a critically endangered species with 
clear conservation targets, contributing directly to biodiversit y and bringing jobs to local communities through 
the creation of conservation -related employment in rural areas of the CND. A third -party, independent verifier 
is also needed to evaluate whether conservation targets have been met. A meeting is planned with  the WB 
in the second half of February 2023 in Rwanda to determine the scale and feasibility of the WCB in the CND. 
The South African Rhino Bond has already attracted foreign investment, and it is a good model Rwanda 
could emulate98. The Government of Rwan da, represented by the Rwanda Development Board, is in 
advanced stages of negotiation with the World Bank for establishing a wildlife Bond. There is, therefore, 
clear interest in the bond which suggests that investors still see value in investing in such a n instrument.  
A technical advisor will be recruited by this project to provide technical support to RDB, REMA, MINECOFIN 
and MoE and explore these various solutions to identify financial instruments that could be employed for 
revenue generation post -GCF for sustainable management of the CND landscape. The technical advisor will 
work closely with the NSC to facilitate buy-in from stakeholders such as RDB and MINECOFIN into 
compliance with environmental laws through greater emphasis on the links to climate resilience and N DC 
objectives . 
Activity 2.1.3 New fire management curriculum developed and operationalized Given the expected increase 
in drought, and the natural forest vulnerability already demonstrated in the past, the capacity for effective 
fire prevention and managem ent in core PAs and adjacent landscapes will be increased.  
While current climate projections call for increased rainfall in the CND, they also project higher temperatures 
and a rise in elevation of the natural forests’ cloud cover zone  (Annex 2.1). The com bination of the latter two 
trends raises the potential for increased fire risk. In order to sustainably address the threat of fire to the 
natural forests and regenerated areas in particular, this project will increase the capacity of RDB in the area 
of fire prevention, with emphasis on education and outreach, monitoring of fire danger conditions across the 
parks, response plans, and fire suppression.  A collaborative effort in fire management planning and 
implementation in CND districts will be carried out, facilitated by a fire management expert. Based on training 
needs, the project will also carry out RFA district and sector foresters’ training in Integrated Forest Fire 
Management approaches and activities and firefighting; they will then build the capacity  of community fire 
brigades.  
Sub-activities include:  
2.1.3.1 Develop a curriculum tailored to needs and capacities of different stakeholders  
2.1.3.2 Build the capacity of RDB to manage fire in National Parks  
2.1.3.3 Build the capacity of RFA, local authori ties and communities to collaboratively manage fire in forests 
outside Pas  
2.1.3.4 Implement a “fire wise” outreach and awareness program for communities and local government 
(district, sector, cell), as well as Rwanda Forest Authority, surrounding natural  forests to reduce the incidence 
of human -caused fires.  
 
98  World Bank, 2022. Wildlife Conservation Bond Boosts South Africa’s Efforts to Protect Black Rhinos and Support 
Local Communities.  Press Release NO: 2022/059/AFE.


---
*Page 485*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 44 
 
 Output 2.2: Natural Forest cover restored, biodiversity connections established.  
The natural forests of the CND exist as an archipelago of isolated islands within a surrounding matrix of 
intensive human land use. Although some have raised the possibility of reconnecting these islands, it is 
important to understand that their isolation is not a recent phenomenon (with evidence of the initial isolation 
of the main forest blocks from the pre -colonial era). Furthermore, large -scale proposals for landscape 
linkages have thus far failed to provide alternatives for the tens of thousands of rural smallholders who would 
be displaced by such schemes. However, important actions can be taken to restore  degraded natural forest 
lands and protect or reestablish natural “stepping stones” and ensure a functional level of ecological linkage  
between the existing parks.  
In some areas where natural forests have been cleared, the Project will work to restore fore st cover. This 
will be done primarily around the Gishwati and Mukura reserves, using native species and building on 
nursery and planting techniques already tested in Rwand a. New techniques may need to be developed to 
expand reforestation to degraded lands on steep slopes and along waterways and wetlands. Tree species 
will be carefully selected considering the following attributes: pioneer species which grow in full sun, fast 
growing (height and canopy width), and animal pollinated and dispersed. These “tree  islands” serve several 
purposes. First, by growing quickly and providing canopy cover, they shade out competing vegetation and 
change the soil microclimate (very important for later successional species establishment). Site -generalist 
native species such as Albizia, Dombeya, Macaranga and Polyscias  respond to these characteristics. 
Secondly, they entice a variety of animal species into the expansion area, thereby dispersing seeds. In 
certain areas the Project will favor natural regeneration from seed banks .  
All work outside of protected areas will require careful attention to private land ownership claims and related 
social and gender equity issues. Part of the communities’ responsibilities will be afforestation of the degraded 
forest with indigenous trees  and clearing invasive species from the natural forests and buffer zones. Part of 
the benefits for the communities will be harvesting of non -timber forest products (NTFPs) from the natural 
forests, under sustainable use plans. The project will provide trai ning on improved harvesting techniques, 
processing, packaging and marketing, to those engaged in NTFP value chain (financed under outcome 3).  
Activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from WCS.  
Activity 2.2.1 Secure key remaining natural areas outside PAs  
Outside of current protected areas, the Project will identify remaining natural areas and seek to secure their 
continued protection within district management plans or through other means. These are mostly small 
stands of natural vegetation on rocky outcroppings or strips  of forests along the CND’s myriad of waterways. 
Although these will not permit large mammals (e.g. elephants or mountain gorillas) to migrate betwee n the 
forested parks, these small remaining natural areas provide critical intermediate stepping stones for the 
broader biodiversity elements of the CND forest ecosystems.  For the CND’s rich assemblage of bird species, 
these vegetated patches and gallery g roves could prove to be essential stepping stones for connectivity 
under changing conditions. Small mammals and insects are likely to also directly benefit. And most 
importantly, the movement of birds and small mammals will support the transfer of seeds be tween forest 
patches, greatly improving the ability of forest ecosystems to adapt to changing climates, and continue 
supplying key ecosystem services to the people of the CND.  
Sub-activities include:  
2.2.1.1 Raise awareness on remaining protected natural f orests in CNDL to secure their protection


---
*Page 486*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 45 
 
 2.2.1.2 In collaboration with RFA, REMA, districts identify and implement actions that support conservation 
and management of remnant protected natural forests in CNDL  
Activity 2.2.2 Restore natural forest cover in  and outside Protected Areas including riparian linkages  
While the boundary integrity of the Nyungwe and Volcanoes NPs has been maintained for several decades 
now, internal degradation has occurred. Prior to 2004, approximately 12% of Nyungwe National Park had 
been affected by wildfire, including a catastrophic fire during a period of prolonged drought in 1997.99 The 
natural vegetation was quickly replaced by a carpet of invasive ferns. In recent years, teams of local 
community workers led by W CS have demonstrated that careful removal of the fern cover reveals still viable 
native tree seeds and seedlings that respond to this exposure by rapid growth and the formation of new 
forest stands. The project will expand this labor -intensive process of a ssisted regeneration to the remaining 
4,500 ha of burned lands within  the NNP, restoring forest values and generating significant employment for 
local rural communities.  
For the Gishwati Forest, restoration with native species will take place on adjacent, previously cleared lands. 
This and other restoration efforts should benefit from tree nursery techniques and planting trials already 
initiated by RFA, RDB, and NGO partners around Nyungwe, Volcanoes, and Gishwati itself. The project will 
work with the Nati onal Tree Seed Centre to provide training on tree propagation and supply of quality 
seeds/seedlings/propagation materials, especially of indigenous species and plantation species not being 
sourced locally.  
A special element within the CND landscape is its dense network of waterways. Historically forested riparian 
habitats along these streams and rivers, however, have been largely cleared of their forest cover. Riparian 
reforestation efforts will restore an important erosion control factor as well as recreat e important biodiversity 
connectivity along linear corridors. RWB will co -finance these riparian restoration efforts. With support from 
district and sector leaders as well as community representatives, community members will be hired from 
neighboring villa ges to the project sites. The project will make efforts to recruit the most vulnerable 
community members in category c,d and e, women, young landless, and others to carry out these activities.  
Key sub -activities include:  
2.2.2.1 Review mapping of degraded natural forest areas in core NPs, stepping stones, and unprotected 
riparian lands using updated imagery and ground truthing  
2.2.2.2 Identify parcels for restoration in core PAs, stepping stones, and riparian lands using desktop and 
field-based assessment  
2.2.2.3 Establish indigenous tree seed nurseries in the CND to serve core PAs, stepping stones, riparian 
land restoration and promotion of indigenous trees on farms and in protective forests  
2.2.2.4 Recruit, train (in forest restoration methods), and equip community workers to be involved in core 
PAs restoration and riparian linkages  
2.2.2.5 Assisted rehabilitation of 4,500 ha of indigenous forest in NNP  
2.2.2.6 Active restoration of natural forest on 500 ha Gishwati Mukura National Park  
2.2.2.7 Restore 1,500 ha of riparian lands  
 
99  Masozera, A.B., Mulindahabi, F ., 2007. Post-Fire Regeneration in Nyungwe National Park, Rwanda.  Wildlife 
Conservation Society.


---
*Page 487*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 46 
 
 2.2.2.8 Using permanent plots sampling, collect field monitoring data on tree species recruitment and growth 
for estimation of biomass, species richness, etc. in restored parcels in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura 
National Pa rks as well as on riparian lands to assess success of initiatives, then replicate or adapt as needed  
2.2.2.9 Perform Environmental and Social Screening on all positions being created by the project  
2.2.2.10 Establish a grievance process for laborers  
2.2.2. 11 Update emergency and preparedness plan including risk mitigation guidance to local conditions at 
restoration sites  
2.2.2.12 Train all workers on their rights and how to access the GRM  
2.2.2.13 Provide code of conduct and emergency preparedness and safet y training for all laborers  
2.2.2.14 Hire and train labor and safety leads at each site to provide guidance to staff, be available for 
grievance issues, and monitor health and safety conditions for workers  
2.2.2.15 Develop and implement strategy (including  social marketing) to ensure that women and youth 
participate and benefit from forest restoration projects  
 
Activity 2.2.3 Promote silvopastoralism with indigenous trees around Gishwati  
Roughly 80% of Rwandans own livestock of some sort. While it is govern ment policy to expand this 
percentage, conflicts over competing land uses are inevitable, especially for the country’s most vulnerable 
rural populations. In the area around the protected forest of Gishwati, the presence of many slopes greater 
than 55% open s the possibility for reforestation of larger blocks with tree species compatible with an 
undergrowth of grass or other forage. In addition, some existing pasturelands could be enriched with tree 
species. These areas could then provide critical off -farm fo dder for goats, sheep, and perhaps even cows, 
while also serving vital ecosystem services.  
Plans for tree planting/restoration on pasture lands will be elaborated in collaboration with the local 
communities and technical (extension and local government) s ervices. Areas meant to produce fodder and 
for water retention will be demarcated during community consultations for action plans. Already, important 
forage grasses, such as Brachiaria  grass known to increase milk production while reducing methane 
emission  from cattle, have been identified while tree fodder such as Calliandra, Leucaena, Acacia, Gliricidia  
are well accepted but not widely adopted due to local capacity barriers. Improving adoption of better 
management practices will require technical assistan ce considering needs of cattle owners, local milk 
cooperatives, and traders.  
Beneficiaries of these activities will be pasture land owners and cattle keepers in the Gishwati area. They 
will be identified in collaboration with district and sector leaders, RFA, EE and representatives of pasture 
lands and cattle owners. Special attention will be paid to specific groups such as women -headed households, 
youth, and historically marginalized groups if they own grazing land in the Gishwati area and for paid work. 
Awareness and consultations with these pastoral communities will be conducted during project inception to 
ensure farmers' involvement in identifying and selecting key areas for restoration, suitable species to grow 
in their pastoral areas, capacity barrier s, and associated technical assistance to be provided to adopt better 
management practices.  
Key sub -activities include:


---
*Page 488*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 47 
 
 2.2.3.1 Assess the status of pasture lands in the Gishwati area and identify key areas for restoration and the 
potential to introduce in digenous species  
2.2.3.2 In collaboration with landowners, identify suitable indigenous species for fodder trees, shrubs, 
grasses, and herbaceous legumes that have potential to improve rangelands and increase their climate 
adaptive capacity  
2.2.3.3 Produce  and disseminate fodder trees, shrubs, grasses, and herbaceous legumes to project 
beneficiaries  
2.2.3.4 Train beneficiaries on improved livestock and pasture management  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient  livelihoods  
Increasing the extent of protective forests, enhancing and restoring forest plantations, and increasing 
agroforestry tree cover are key steps to restoring ecosystem function and services identified in the National 
Forest Policy Report (NFPR 2017), especial ly i) reducing the risk of flooding, landslides and soil erosion 
from extreme climate events and ii) increasing long -term supply of wood fuel resources (the primary energy 
source for 77% of Rwandans100). Together with fuel efficient cookstoves, these trees will provide a 
sustainable source of fuelwood and reduce the amount of time women spend collecting fuelwood, enabling 
them to participate in other economic activities and programmatic opportunities. These outputs (cookstoves, 
plantation restoration, and ag roforestry) will deliver carbon sequestration benefits totaling 522,606 tCO 2eq 
over 20 years.  
In working to develop a comprehensive land use plan that incorporates climate adaptation, and while 
ensuring Rwanda’s forest ecosystems are strengthened through f orest management and restoration, 
attention must be paid to people who live next to the forests and those who are the most prone to causing 
degradation of these forest systems. In particular, this includes people who either do not have access to 
land or wh ose land holdings are insufficient to meet their daily needs. These people are most likely to enter 
into and unsustainably use protected and protective forests to help meet their daily needs. Thus, this Project 
component targets these vulnerable households  – youth, people from historically marginalized groups, and 
farmers with insufficient holdings – to build their capacity in financial literacy and enterprise, in order to 
strengthen their resilience to economic and climate shocks.      
Also, to maximize the  opportunities from improved silvicultural practices, it is necessary to improve business 
practices and market linkages for farming communities. More specifically, organizing and linking farmers to 
local and national wholesale traders will enable them to s ell their produce more efficiently, maximizing profit 
and reducing wastage. To facilitate these linkages, this component will also build the business capacity and 
market linkages necessary to support the transition of farmers and their communities away fro m 
unsustainable practices that magnify their vulnerability to climate change and towards more secure 
livelihoods and expanded income opportunities. This includes strengthening capacities, developing inclusive 
business models, and developing market value ch ains for livelihoods that do not depend on traditional 
smallholder farming.  
The project will develop alternative sources of income to improve living conditions for people in the CND 
who depend for a large part of their income on exploitation of the forest and natural vegetation. This 
approach, focusing on vulnerable groups, aims at real economic empowerment of the concerned families 
through the realization of their own business plans. Several promising activities related to the use of the 
forests aside  from wood -gathering (such as beekeeping, extraction of essential oils, herbs, and other forest 
 
100  Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020 . National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.


---
*Page 489*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 48 
 
 products) will be analyzed. These business plans, tailored to individual circumstances, will be realized with 
support and tools provided by the project.  
From the sec ond year onwards, these vulnerable groups will become members of existing cooperative 
organizations that will be supported by the project, particularly in value chains important for forest 
conservation, such as production and export of honey and the extrac tion of essential oils. These 
cooperatives provide various services (e.g., information on markets / export, input supply, aggregation of 
commodities, etc.) and they also play a role in the protection of the interests of their members.  
The project will deve lop the private sector strategy (which will include engagement of impact investors 
interested in conservation -friendly commodities) for livelihoods implementation in the target areas through 
the identification of new livelihood opportunities for the CND. W e will establish relationships with several 
buyers fitting our selection criteria, and engage partners such as Blue Ventures to expand market 
opportunities for products that meet international or local market opportunities. On the producer side, we will 
build strong relationships with other projects and programmes that support private sector engagement with 
community organizations, and producer associations to pursue promising market opportunities (local and 
international, as appropriate).  
For component 3 and the project overall, the eligibility criteria for selecting beneficiaries will be:  
● Households with limited access to financial resources for implementing climate adaptation measures 
as determined by Local Authorities  
● Women -headed households.  
● Households in the CND living in key areas such as those surrounding PAs, identified stepping -stones, 
landscape linkages, and broader farming mosaic with exposure to erosion.  
● Most vulnerable households including people with disabilities  
● Land owners where the project intervention will have to intervene  
These criteria will be further refined by the p roject EE in consultation with key stakeholders (MoE, Districts 
and community representatives) once the project is approved.  
Output 3.1 Farming methods enhance productivity, reduce erosion and flooding risks, contribute to 
ecosystem services, and support c onnectivity  
Soil degradation and loss, largely from the cultivation of steep slopes in the western highlands of the CND, 
has caused declines in agricultural productivity and serious downstream problems of siltation and flooding. 
While the former means that smallholder  farmers in the hills increasingly struggle to feed their families, the 
latter poses a threat to the long term v iability of water provision services in municipal areas and hydro -power 
generation101, which is a key pillar for Rwanda’s low carbon growth strategy.   
This Project will support smallholder farmers in high erosion risk areas to implement Sustainable Land 
Management (SLM) practices techniques and the active restoration  of degraded forest lands. By targeting 
high risk areas the Project can have a significant impact to reduce soil erosion, improving the resilience of 
agricultural livelihoods in the highlands, wh ile having a positive impact on water flow and water quality in the 
lowlands.    
 
101  Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) , 2009. Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report, 
Chapter 8: Energy Resources.


---
*Page 490*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 49 
 
 In each selected priority site, the Project will support the implementation of the full range soil erosion control 
best practices including agroforestry. While the erosion cont rol practices may vary (e.g. radical vs 
progressive terracing), agroforestry practices will be established across the entire 3,346  ha. RFA will mobilize 
participating landowners on whose lands soil erosion control best practices including agroforestry shal l be 
implemented. Landowners willing to participate will sign a consent form allowing project activities on their 
land and will be grouped in vigilance committees. These vigilance committees will sign MoU with Districts 
and RFA as a commitment to participa te and manage sustainably their land and trees with clear role and 
responsibilities of each (farmers, districts and RFA) specified. The consent forms will be granted to RFA and 
Districts where landowners are located. The vigilance committee will be respons ible for ensuring the 
sustainability of project interventions implemented on community land. The MoUs signed by Districts, RFA 
and the vigilance committee will not be legally binding but rather to establish certain understanding in the 
implementation of th e project.  
Interventions will be made in collaboration with district officials, according to agreed priorities and objectives, 
and involving local farmers and contracto rs. Table 29 in the feasibility study (FS) provides a preliminary list 
of the fuelwood, fodder, timber and fruit tree species that have been identified as suitable for agroforestry 
systems in the CND, based on their resilience capacity against climate -driven temperature and precipitation 
changes, as well as community preferences - particularl y the needs of women farmers, historically 
marginalized households, and youth. They also concur well with recommended species for the North and 
Western Province as described in the Agroforestry Technical Guide102.  
Activity 3.1.1 Restore high slope areas (> 55%) as protective forests  
In Western Province, a major part of the CND landscape, 80% of the increase in tree -planting in recent years 
has come from private landowners seeking to earn revenue or increase their access to wood -based fuel103. 
Beyond this utilitarian interest, however, the NFPR 2017 calls for increasing the extent of protective forests 
and enhancing and restoring forest plantations as key steps to restoring ecosystem function and services, 
especially i) reducing the risk of fl ooding, landslides and soil erosion from extreme climate events and ii) 
increasing long -term supply of woodfuel resources (the energy source for 77% of Rwandans104), providing 
biodiversity habitat, and sequestering 193,472 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
The curren t land use master plan discourages cultivation on slopes greater than 55% and encourages 
protection of existing vegetation and afforestation with indigenous species. This Project will promote 
indigenous species in rehabilitating existing forests and establ ishing new ones on bare lands . This activity 
will result in highly productive, climate -resilient woodlots and forestland with fully restored ecosystem 
services and significantly increased long -term carbon sequestration. It will afforest/restore 2,500  ha of  
degraded private smallholder land and district/state land by restoring existing degraded tree stock, 
afforesting bare areas, promoting good silvicultural practices, and facilitating the adoption of Simplified 
Forest Management Plans (SFMPs), as recommende d by 2013 forest law. In the priority regions selected 
for afforestation/restoration, awareness and capacity building activities will be undertaken to build support 
and understanding of the PFMU approach.  The objective of PFMUs is to combine economic profi tability, 
preservation of environment, and improvement of living conditions of the local population, as well as to apply 
a gender -responsive approach to wood resource management.  For privately owned land, only small -scale 
individual private landowners will  be included, and this activity will not involve restoration of private 
institutional plantations.  RFA will mobilize participating private landowners on whose lands afforestation 
 
102  Ministry of Environment. 2018. National Agroforestry Strategy.  
103  Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change in Western Rwanda during periods of war s and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).  
104  Government of Rwanda, 2021. Rwanda Household Survey 2019/2020. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.


---
*Page 491*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 50 
 
 trees shall be planted. Landowners willing to participate will sign a consent  form allowing project activities 
on their land. Following this, private woodlot owners will then be organized into local groups (around 40 -50 
ha of woodlot per group), PFMUs (Private Forest Management Units) and assisted to form and register as 
cooperativ es and elect among themselves two cooperative committees: Administrative committee made of 
5 persons (President, Vice president, Secretary and two Advisors); supervisory committee made of 3 
persons (President, vice president and secretary). Note that gende r consideration is mandatory (at least 
30% women).  
When the cooperative committees are elected, they are mandated to represent forest landowners at different 
events and fulfill their interests, especially in seeking the best market for their forest product s and seeking 
for other income generating opportunities. RFA will sign MOUs with different cooperatives specifying each 
party’s respective role and responsibility.  
Experiences from pilot PFMUs established under the FMBE project in the districts of Gicumbi , Gakenke and 
Rulindo Districts of the Northern Province and Rwamagana District of the Eastern province have 
demonstrated that this approach is helping to achieve economic profitability, preservation of environment 
and improvement of living conditions of t he PFMU members. Forests are sustainably managed, and all 
PFMU members respect the management plan and planned harvesting period. All silvicultural practices are 
properly followed because cooperatives supervise all activities with technical guidance from t he district 
technicians. The forests within a PFMU are economically attractive to potential buyers due to good stock at 
harvesting time. PFMU members have access to small loans while waiting for the forest to mature. This 
shows that PFMUs established in th ese areas are also serving as demonstrations to other forest owners 
supported by other projects in the country. Green AMAYAGA and Green Gicumbi, and TREPA Projects are 
scaling up this approach in other parts of the country.  
On public land, forests will be  organized into state/district FMUs to be managed by professional private 
companies through long -term concession agreements in line with the government strategy. While a 
concession agreement will be signed between the private forest companies and the MoE, the Project will 
only support the design of the forest management plans and development of contracting documents. 
Registration of restored forest parcels will be guided by well -trained district forest officers and forestry sector 
extensionists, assisted by  the new FMES software and related GPS/tablets, which will provide automatic 
statistics, maps and register owners. For each FMU, a SFMP , reviewed or developed through a participatory 
process , will outlin e the basic information of the site (e.g. owner, spec ies etc.), as well as a harvesting plan 
and schedule for silvicultural operations (thinning, pruning etc.). However, some areas of the state 
plantations that are vulnerable and exposed to high risk of degradation (high slopes) will require setting up 
speci al protective measures. Restoration on identified vulnerable areas will be done by establishing 
appropriate tree plantations that will offer a better protection and conservation of biodiversity while providing 
other ecosystem services incl uding tree specie s that improve forage for bees . The choice of tree speci es 
planted will take into consideration women’s participation, use and priorities. The project will further strive 
and advocate for gender equity for selection of plots which will be done in consultat ion with communities.   
Sub-activities include:  
3.1.1.1 Introduce and raise awareness of indigenous species to target stakeholders in CND  
3.1.1.2 In consultation with RFA, National Land Authority, districts and communities, determine fragile areas 
(steep s lopes > 55%) to be allocated for protective forests and their ownership  
3.1.1.3 Assess the current status of the indigenous tree species in selected areas for protective forests and 
select indigenous tree species appropriate to CNDL


---
*Page 492*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 51 
 
 3.1.1.4 Develop restora tion plan for protective forests  
3.1.1.5 Build capacity of local stakeholders (men and women) on PFMU approach and methods  
3.1.1.6 Design and approve SFMPs of private FMUs  
3.1.1.7 Ensure consent of smallholders prior to planting trees  
3.1.1.8 In collaboration with smallholders reforest/restore 2,500 ha of public or private land with slopes >55% 
and ensure sustainable management under private FMUs according to approved SFMPs  
3.1.1.9 Support monitoring and evaluation of restored private FMUs  
3.1.1.1 0 Assess impacts of exotics on neighboring lands and mitigate their negative impacts  
3.1.1.11 Develop and implement strategy (including social marketing) to ensure that women and youth 
participate and benefit from forest restoration projects  
3.1.1.12 Asse ss the benefits and costs of each proposed tree and plant species and how those benefits 
affect different population segments  
Activity 3.1.2 Develop on -farm agroforestry for high -caloric and indigenous tree species  
The extreme land scarcity of the CND precludes smallholder farmers – many of them among the most 
vulnerable and land -poor of the region – from dedicating any significant proportion of their holdings to tree 
production. However, the use of certain agrofores try species that both enrich the soil and control erosion 
when interplanted with ground crops can greatly reduce this conflict.  
Under this activity, the Project will facilitate the production of on -farm afforestation plans with action plans 
for implementa tion. Formulation of the forest landscape restoration plans will follow the methodology 
introduced by the World Resources Institute (WRI) and IUCN and already tested in the country by the former 
Ministry of Natural Resources, as recently modified and appli ed for the Gatsibo Forest Landscape 
Restoration baseline conditions assessment. The methodology will involve three simple steps: a) Geospatial 
analysis to map degraded land that presents an opportunity for forest and landscape restoration (FLR), which 
will highlight areas with best potential for restoration; b) economic analysis to model the costs and benefits 
of degraded and restored land); and c) designing a restoration/afforestation action plan, based on an in -
depth assessment of the conditions required to implement the FLR in the selected sectors.  
For selected areas where Project activities may lead to reduced access to resources, the Project will 
undertake an in -depth Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) in the first year of 
implementation and design an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to guide 
implementation. This ESMP will include an access restriction mitigation plan, if deemed necessary. The 
matter of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) will be explored during the ESIA  and the approach applied 
if deemed appropriate. These documents will be based on materials contained in Annex 6.  
Drawing on experience with high -elevation species identified both in Rwanda and across East Africa, the 
Project will support the following su b-activities:  
3.1.2.1 Identify sub -areas of intervention for agroforestry dissemination in the CND  
3.1.2.2 Introduce and raise awareness of agroforestry in target communities  
3.1.2.3 Develop the capacity of extension agents at district/sector level and NGO s to support adoption of 
agroforestry technologies


---
*Page 493*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 52 
 
 3.1.2.4 Establish agroforestry/fruit tree nurseries to facilitate access to quality planting material  
3.1.2.5 Promote sustainable land management practices by stabilizing existing terraces, and plant high 
calorific agroforestry species to provide a sustainable source of fuelwood for energy -efficient cookstoves to 
protect sloping land against severe soil erosion.  
 3.1.2.6 Train RFA, extension agents, Project participants and community members on specific tec hniques 
for identification of and management of invasive pests and pathogens  
Participants in sub -activities 3.1.2.3 and 3.1.2.6 will be selected by districts, JADF, RFA and farmers 
representatives. Special attention will be given to youth, women and other  vulnerable groups. RFA and RWB 
will co -finance bub -activities 3.1.2.4 and 3.1.2.5.  
Output 3.2 Rural livelihoods generate alternative incomes & reduce pressure on forests  
To respond to the growing pressure on natural resources and increase the local commun ity's resilience to 
climate change in the CND landscape, the Project will address key drivers of deforestation by creating 
alternative livelihood pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and income -generating, climate -
resilient crops, as well as str engthening supportive financial services.  
The setup of interventions in this output will focus on enhancing on -farm production capacities in market -
facing promising value chains in agroforestry (especially avocado, macadamia and short -duration crops) for 
immediate income and beekeeping taking advantage of the agroforestry and the crops; the combination of 
these will promote ecotourism as supplementary income (avocado, macadamia, forestry, agroforestry, short -
term crops, and honey). This output will als o provide solutions to the growing households' energy poverty 
which has exerted pressure on natural resources and eventually exacerbated the local community's 
exposure to the stress of climate change in the CND landscape.  
This project will employ a ma rket systems development approach that encompasses business coaching, 
value chain development, and access to finance. This entails multi -stakeholder collaboration with business 
service providers, financial institutions, community -based enterprises, value c hain actors, and farmer 
cooperatives.  Ultimately, this project will develop and or promote a financial model that enhances the private 
sector ecosystem collaboration and partnership to stimulate finance in forestry and agroforestry sectors and 
support mark et-oriented access to energy -efficient cook -stoves to reduce pressure on forests.  
The value chain development for potential revenue generating streams such as honey, ecotourism, and 
efficient cookstoves requires grant support of GCF grant to finance the activities that are important for the 
most vulnerable, as well the drivers for the M SD to take root; these include the development of the identified 
revenue generating streams, strengthening access to market information, and improving quality of the 
products and produce aggregation.  
To target the poorest and most vulnerable, and empo wer women and youth towards meeting inclusive 
development goals, critical support at the nascent stages is essential. The GCF grant will facilitate the 
integration of the poorest and most vulnerable women and youth in the CND and position for private secto r 
investments that will build a firm back base for sustainable community development. The GCF grant will not 
only provide financing support but will be critical in creating enabling opportunities for market development 
beyond the project to catalyze privat e investments.  
While promoting the above -mentioned households cooking solutions and income streams, the selection of 
the beneficiaries will follow the government' procedures, and in the case of CND will focus on the vulnerable 
groups of youth, women, and historically marginalized people and will be selected based on an assessment


---
*Page 494*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 53 
 
 of poverty levels (also known as Wealth Categories) conducted by the government to ensure the most 
vulnerable are selected. Selection criteria will further take into account s ocial and cultural factors such as 
gender and age which intersect to predispose some groups more to vulnerability than others.  
                                             .     .                                                                                           .                                                                                                                     
Activities and sub activities under this output will be executed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from CORDAID.  
Activity 3.2.1 Develop agroforestry related value chain for m arkets access.  
Most traditional tree farming in Rwanda is linked to fuel production in terms of firewood, charcoal, and timber 
for construction. However, to further strengthen community resilience to climate change, there is a need to 
introduce fruit and n ut trees that have high economic value in the agroforestry system to generate more 
income for smallholder farmers but also increase its adoption, especially women -headed households. 
Though women -headed households face the same issues and challenges as male -headed households, they 
are less likely to be included in income -generating activities and are disproportionately impacted by climate 
change because of prevalent gender inequality issues. In the Feasibility Study, avocado and macadamia 
have been identifie d as high economic value crops with high market potential, and the economic benefits of 
identified fruit trees is paramount to increase farmer adoption and buy -In. Since fruits and nuts take time to 
mature, short -term crops like chili and French beans will  be promoted to support smallholder farmers with 
limited land resources (less than 0.4 ha) to create additional, more quickly generated income and incentivize 
adopting agroforestry practices. Regular income will help vulnerable communities to cope with cli mate 
variabilities and shocks.  
The identified agroforestry value chains have market potential and potential for intercropping with short -term 
horticultural vegetables and fruits while providing further impacts on carbon sequestration, nutrition value, 
and market access in the CND. Selected fruit trees are expected to meet the dual purpose of soil protection 
and climate impact while generating long -term economic benefits to the most vulnerable community 
members of the CND region.   
For each crop value chain i dentified, specific bottlenecks will be addressed while focusing on specific 
product -place combinations within the CND. Especially, attention will be on enhancing the quality and 
quantity of production in sync with particular demands from market niches, de velopment of various models 
to improve access to finance together with financial institutions, and exploration of market opportunities that 
can generate off -farm jobs to absorb a good number of landless and other vulnerable groups of youth and 
women.   
Thes e priority crops are:  
● Macadamia: a low -volume, high -value export crop; in -country processing creates jobs for women and 
youth. Two hundred and four trees cover one hectare, and one mature tree produces up to 60 kg of 
macadamia nuts per year with an income of 25,000 FRW per kilogram. Furthermore, every tree must 
be separated from the next by 7 meters; thus, many other commercial and consumable crops may 
be planted and harvested while waiting for macadamia's fruiting maturity.105 The global demand for 
macadami a outweighs the available supply, which presents a huge business opportunity for 
macadamia farmers in Rwanda. For example, the current macadamia supply meets only 48% of 
global demand and the global market for macadamia is expected to further expand from $ 1.17 billion 
to $2.36 billion  by 2027. The project will build on the government export initiatives to promote 
 
105  DAPP Malawi, Odetta Chimwaza – Macadamia Nuts project . Link.


---
*Page 495*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 54 
 
 macadamia farming in CND areas through National Export Board (NAEB) and Rwanda Environment 
Management Authority (REMA) to include macadamia in its tree planting drive in the CND.  
● Avocado: The extensive penetration of avocado cultivation amongst smallholder farmers (SHFs) and 
the favorable growi ng conditions lead to avocado yields (21MT/ha) that are nearly double those of 
Kenya. The increasing demand for export, and cash yield/ha are higher than maize or Irish potato. 
Through linkage to local avocado private value chain actors, packaged avocados will be exported to 
the European Union, where the channel price for avocados is  $1.75 per kilogram, providing an 
estimated 32% margin.106 Avocado production presents numerous opportunities to smallholder 
farmers in CND: for example, earnings from avocado ex ports have been increasing from $1.6 million 
in 2020/21 to  $4.5 million  in 2021/22 and product ion increased from 1,000 tonnes to 2, 500 tonnes 
in 2021/22. According to the NAEB, the production is set to double this year and generate $8 million 
from exports. To further strengthen its avocado exports the government has launched sea freight, 
which wil l not only increase export volumes but also make them competitive in terms of pricing.   
● Avocado is projected to be the second most traded tropical fruit, after bananas, by 2030.The United 
States and the European Union, where consumer interest in avocados is fuelled by the fruit’s health 
benefits, are expected to remain the main importers, wit h 40% and 31% of global imports in 2030, 
respectively107. The project teams in CND will work closely with private sector partners and 
communities to develop value chain analysis, business development strategies, and business 
planning. The team, led by our L ivelihood Specialists, will work with these private sector partners to 
prepare action plans detailing technical services we will provide to train producers to supply 
commodities to markets.  
● Vegetable crops such as French beans and chili: It has been demons trated that these crops can 
double the income per hectare of maize and potatoes and employ a good percentage of the 16% 
reported unemployed women and youth108. Commercial farm wage reported labor in postharvest 
production handling at 72% women, 20% youth (s ee Annex 2.3). French beans can potentially deliver 
a gross margin of 22,040Rwf per acre and a return on labour of 2,755Rwf per day, while chili can 
offer a gross margin of 46,384Rwf per acre and a return on labour of 7,731Rwf per day.109 
The Project will a lso enhance ecotourism and honey value chains. Particularly in areas close to national 
parks, the potential business development of ecotourism can go hand in hand with honey and wax product 
development. Our analysis shows that the honey value chain already  has a sizable production history in 
Rwanda. Various initiatives exist that have encouraged farmers to invest in modern hives. However, the 
current sector is constrained by a perception of limited profitability due to low prices, gender patriarchy due 
to male dominance, and limited market access. The honey (and various by -product) value chain shows a 
wide range of different consumer target groups, whereas honey is too often marketed as a generic product. 
This is a crucial bottleneck: while the value chain a ctors engage in the business, there needs to be more 
incentives to invest financial resources to improve production or quality, such as through modern beehive 
technology. It will be essential to link ecotourism destinations and agro -tourism to enhance the potential for 
an improved business case and help beekeeping cooperatives enhance their processing, quality 
management, and marketing processes with large scale buyers and exporters such as Api Business 
Development Company (ABDC) and create a sustainable an d expanded source of income especially for 
 
106  Karuiru, M., 2018. Value chain management and the performance of avocado fruit small scale farmers in Kanda ra 
sub county, murang'a County, Kenya.  International Journal of Physical and Social Sciences , 8(10), pp.24 -40. 
107 OECD - FAO Agricultural Outlook. https://www.fao.org/3/cb5332en/cb5332en.pdf  
108  Rwanda Development Board, 2020. Labour Market Trends Analysis Brief 2016 -2020. https://rdb.rw/wp -
content/uploads/2022/07/Labour -Market -Brief-2020.pdf  
109  Van Keulen, Rik, Rumenera, P., Banjara, G., Colantuoni, M. and Muthamia -Mwenda, J. 2022. Horticulture value  
chain analysis – Opportunities for youth employment in Rwanda. Rome, FAO. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb8266en


---
*Page 496*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 55 
 
 women.  Api Business Development Company has applied for EU certification in order to export honey to 
international markets. Nevertheless, the company –which has a capacity of handling 120 MT of honey per 
year–still faces the challenge of low production, inadequate even in meeting local demand.  
Rwanda has a well -established record of generating off -farm benefits from its protected area ecotourism 
programs. The Project will build on this by supporting sustainable to urism activities around and between the 
Gishwati and Mukura Forests, as outlined in the GMNP Tourism Master Plan.110 New trails and base camps 
outside of the parks will generate employment and income opportunities for rural women and youth, as well 
as attra ct tourism revenue to help support forest protection and management. In addition, this Project will 
initiate and train Community Freelance guides to mutually benefit the parks and local communities 
neighboring Mukura -Gishwati NPs. A freelance system suits the seasonality of tourism, and the demand and 
sourcing of guides from the local communities stimulates economic empowerment among the young and 
unemployed living in rural areas around protected areas. This initiative will enable community members to 
provi de a service and generate income, and benefit from the growing tourism industry in Rwanda, which in 
turn supports conservation over the long term.  
In collaboration with district authorities in the CND, who will provide a list of existing cooperatives, the  project 
will select cooperatives based on value chains, number of women and youth, number of members with 
vulnerabilities and membership size. Furthermore, we will assess selected cooperatives using the 
Cooperative Assessment Matrix tool (CAM) to identify  capacity gaps. Selected cooperatives, participating 
financial institutions (PFIs), and value chain actors/small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) (including 
seedling producers, aggregators, traders, etc.) will receive capacity -building to improve their busi ness skills 
and access to finance, and to strengthen value chains.  
Women play a crucial role in balancing household demands with market production. This is why it is so 
important to give women access to financial and value chains related services. The proj ect aims to reach at 
least 50% of the women beneficiaries in the project area.  In areas where women are under -represented in 
value chains, the project will identify and address gender -specific challenges and barriers related to the 
different value chains and promote increased female representation and active participation in Producer 
organizations by creating gender committees that will recruit more women, and support women to be part of 
the leadership committees.  
Key sub activities are:  
3.2.1.1 Identify and map of vulnerable groups of youth and women within the community  
3.2.1.2 Develop and implement strategies to ensure that women, youth, and other marginalized groups 
benefit from rural livelihoods and financial services.  
3.2.1.3 identify farmers and coo peratives involved in selected value chains in consultation with district/local 
authorities in CND.  
3.2.1.4 Assess capacity gaps of identified farmer organizations to strengthen their capacities  
3.2.1.5 Identify and develop Nature -based tourism value chain as a means to generate viable economic 
alternatives for local people living near areas of high biodiversity in the CND.  
RDB will co -finance sub -activity 3.2.1.5.  
 
110  Rwanda Development Board (RDB), Rwanda  Environmental Management Authority (REMA), 2018. Tourism 
Development Master Plan for Gishwati - Mukura National Park. Link.


---
*Page 497*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 56 
 
 Activity 3.2.2 Facilitate and s cale up climate -resilient value chain products  
The project will conduct deep analysis for identified value chains, namely macadamia, avocado, chili, and 
French beans. Such analysis will provide evidence of the opportunities and constraints in the selected value 
chains and will involve mapping out chain operators and service providers at each segment of the value 
chain to identify existing capacity gaps and orient overall value chain interventions in the project. 
Furthermore, value chain analysis wi ll enable the project to clearly understand the characteristics of the 
selected value chain with attention to smallholder farmers, women, youth and vulnerable groups.  
To build strong and sustainable value chains, the project will improve information flows within the chain, by 
strengthening coordination among value chain actors and supporters. This will involve creating value chain 
platforms in the CND region to increase transparency and fair business relations. The project will focus on 
activities that stre ngthen and scale up value chains: for example, by organizing business -to-business (B2B) 
events, establishing district value chain interprofessional/platforms, and promoting business development 
services such as swift, cost -effective, and accessible product  certification for agribusiness. The project will 
play an active role by introducing key supporting functions such as financing, value chain information, 
certification services, etc., and advocate for fair business relations to ensure farmers are active pl ayers in 
value chains and not passive beneficiaries. The project will help strengthen the capacity of producer 
organizations in selected value chains. Often farmers fail to participate and benefit in value chain activities 
due to weak and poor organization , resulting from poor managerial skills and weak internal financial 
management. The project will use different capacity assessment tools like CAM and Scope insight to identify 
capacity gaps and develop capacity -building plans to ensure that producer organi zations are strong and 
professional and capable of serving their members and building sustainable value chains.  The capacity -
building trajectory will also focus on encouraging participation by women, youth, and vulnerable groups and 
increase their access to services. Activities to strengthen farmers and producer organizations will be based 
on farming as a business (FAAB) concept to orient farmers toward business -oriented agriculture. Synergy 
will be built with projects such as KIIWP2  (Kayonza irrigation and integrated watershed management), a 
project funded by IFAD where this module is being applied.  
In the selected valu e chain quality standards are an integral element of the core interventions, due to export 
market requirements. The project will strengthen the capacity of farmers to increase production in terms of 
volume and quality but also adhere to market standards (f or example, global GAP, maximum residual limits 
(MRLs), etc.) Another challenge affecting the selected value chains in the CND region is access to inputs, 
especially seeds, and pesticides. This is exacerbated by the international market which requires cert ain seed 
varieties and types of pesticides. The project will strengthen the input supply system in collaboration by 
National Agricultural export board (NAEB) and selected off takers by establishing and supporting agro -
dealers and nursery production through  technical support and access to finance, to further access to input 
the project will also focus on building business models that help farmers access inputs via credit guarantee 
schemes. The project will create strong linkage and business relations between  input suppliers, 
farmers/producer organizations, and markets/buyers to enhance flow of information among value chain 
actors. Based on experience, the project will ensure that processors/buyers have a say or influence on type, 
variety, and quality of input s used by producers to ensure produce marketability. Furthermore, the project 
will collaborate with other projects like PSAC  (promoting smallholder agro -export competitiveness project) 
and NAEB (National agriculture export board) to further build a sustainable input supply system. Most value 
chains are not well developed or are still nascent in the CND region, based on our  experience with 
agroforestry value chains with the TREPA project for instance. In such situations, off -takers, processors, and 
traders are few and poorly organized, with minimal outreach to farmers. They normally experience 
challenges in understanding and  meeting market standards (i.e., sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) 
standards, Global GAP, hazard critical control point certification (HCCP), etc.) which limit their


---
*Page 498*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 57 
 
 competitiveness and market scope. The project will improve their capacity to meet these sta ndards, provide 
other support to access and integrate cold chains, especially for avocado and French beans, and build out 
grower schemes in which off takers/exporters play a vital role. For MSMEs and start -ups, the project will 
strengthen their managerial capability for running successful, efficient businesses. Through organizing value 
chain linkage events (B2B, market linkage sessions, etc.) the project will enhance buyers to reach more 
farmers and producer organizations.  
Addressing rural poverty and food insecurity using agriculture requires investments in off -farm agricultural 
activities to complement primary production.111 Synergies will be created to reinforce direct linkages of small 
producers to other value chain actors with inputs (seeds and seedlings , fertilizers) and outputs (processors, 
wholesalers, and retailers).  
The project will use the Market Systems Development (MSD) model to enhance value chain development. 
This will entail multi -stakeholder collaboration with business service providers, fina ncial institutions, 
community -based enterprises, value chain actors, and farmer cooperatives. In -depth target area 
assessments will be conducted to tailor business cases for the selected value chains, particularly focusing 
on identification and engagement of existing farmer organizations and cooperatives, youth and women -
owned businesses, and local small and medium enterprises (SMEs, value chain actors) with the capacity for 
production aggregation, value addition, and market potential to absorb production f rom smallholder farmers' 
cooperatives. This localized stakeholder and value chain exploration will serve as a basis for the organization 
of market linkages to help value chain actors better understand the market, challenges, and opportunities.  
Regarding ho ney value chains, the project will estimate the number of beekeeping cooperatives operating 
in the targeted region or its surroundings. Members of these cooperatives will be trained in improved honey 
production techniques and adding value through wax -based  products. This will involve establishing honey 
and wax storage stations and associated processing facilities. Cooperatives will also be an important vehicle 
for fostering tree growing for improved bee forage. The project will foster interactions between t he 
cooperatives and private companies through business roundtables, trade fairs, and similar events focused 
on honey and beeswax products and this activity will be co -financed by RDB.  
This activity includes in -depth target area assessments to tailor busine ss cases for the selected value chains, 
particularly focusing on identification and engagement of existing farmer organizations and cooperatives, 
youth and women -owned businesses and local small and medium enterprises (SMEs, value chain actors) 
with capaci ty for production aggregation, value addition, and market potential to absorb production from 
smallholder farmers' cooperatives. This localized stakeholder and value chain exploration will serve as a 
basis for organization of market linkages to help value chain actors better understand the market, challenges 
and opportunities.  Key sub -activities are:  
3.2.2.1 Analyze identified value chains and promote them among the CND stakeholder networks  
3.2.2.2 Strengthen the capacity of producer organizations to impro ve managerial capacities, farming 
practices, and gender inclusion in their organizations  
3.2.2.3: Establish and strengthen relevant value chain platforms in the CND area and promote business 
development services to enhance value chain coordination.  
 
111  Selasi, J., 2012. Making Small Scale Farming Work in Sub -Saharan Africa . In Global Forum on Food Security and 
Nutrition "FSN Forum", FAO.


---
*Page 499*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 58 
 
 3.2.2.4 : Build and strengthen the capacity of off -takers (MSMEs, SMEs, and off -takers aggregators) to 
increase their competitiveness and comply with various standards  
3.2.2.5: Facilitate and strengthen access to quality inputs for farmers and producer organizatio ns in the CND 
regions  
3.2.2.6: Establish “CND brand” for honey and wax products  
Activity 3.2.3 Facilitate access to output markets for vulnerable farmers  
Lack of access to the market is a challenge to smallholders: only  4.2% of agricultural households have  
access to contract farming ( Agric HH Survey, 2017 ). Limited access to markets for smallholder farmers is 
mainly attributed to lack of access to market information, failure to meet market requirements, or 
undeveloped value chains. Some of the challenges also stem from po or quality and poor produce 
aggregation. The project will strengthen the capacity of farmers and producer organizations to improve 
quality and aggregation capacity, and in creating market linkages with off -takers or buyers through market 
information. The p roject will promote contract farming and out -grower schemes, where farmers are required 
to practice market -oriented farming, with the main objective of establishing long -term business relationships 
with markets/buyers. A focus on financial literacy and com munity initiatives will also mobilize domestic 
investment and expertise, facilitate access to financing, incentivize the private sector to create innovative 
financial products, and support improved data collection and measurement of outcomes.  
Furthermore, through producer organizations, the project will develop an inclusive business model to 
improve produce aggregation and supply coordination and to increase farmers’ bargaining power and 
influence in formal value chains, particularly for remote/hard -to-reach women, youth, and vulnerable groups. 
To further strengthen market access, the project will develop innovative market access approaches such as 
“it takes two to trade”, which focuses on understanding the challenges and weaknesses that limit demand 
(trader s) and supply (farmers). The project will create interventions to eliminate challenges and improve 
weaknesses to build sustainable market access. The project will also build on the national digital agriculture 
strategy (NDAS) to introduce digital market ac cess, where farmers access market information through their 
mobile phones through USSD or IVR interactive voice response.  A similar intervention is currently being 
implemented in the Kayonza district through an IFAD -funded project: Strengthening Agricultu re Resilience 
through Learning and Innovation  (STARLIT ). This approach is particularly customized to poor, rural, and 
hard-to-reach farmers who  do not own smartphones.  
To implement this, the project will identify and select two buyers/off -takers for each selected value chain 
based on market needs and link them to farmers and farmer organizations. The eligibility criteria for 
buyers/off -takers wil l be developed by RFA in collaboration with CORDAID during the implementation. The 
project will organize periodic market linkage events and business -to-business (B2B) workshops through 
established value chain platforms. Additionally, the project will creat e a clear link between market access 
and other value chain supporting functions, such as value chain finance, to ensure that farmers have access 
to working capital for aggregation and marketing. Various models will be developed including tripartite 
agreeme nts (buyers, producer organizations, and financial institutions) to increase confidence among 
partners and financial flow.  
The activity will work to scale up the market system developed using the Output 3.2 inception report on 
beneficiary persona and stakeholder engagements to facilitate market system growth within the selected 
value chains, including bee products, and other w omen and youth -focused sectors. The activity will work to 
scale up the market system developed using the Output 3.2 inception report on beneficiary and stakeholder


---
*Page 500*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 59 
 
 engagements to facilitate market system growth within the selected value chains, including b ee products, 
and other women and youth -focused sectors such as adoption and sales of fuel -efficient cookstoves.  
The project will also build strong business relationships and linkages between input suppliers, markets, and 
farming cooperatives. This will bui ld common understanding and smoother flow of information to ensure that 
input suppliers and farming cooperatives respond swiftly to what markets need. The activity will train 
vulnerable groups and farming cooperatives on “farming as a business” concepts.  
Finally, trade agreements will be created between cooperatives and relevant national and regional 
companies that buy and sell such products. The Project will support and ensure protection of the interests 
of the cooperatives and their members while negotiat ing and signing relevant agreements for win -win 
situations.  
Key sub -activities:  
3.2.3.1 Develop an inclusive business model to Integrate vulnerable farmers into formal markets   
3.2.3.2 Organize microenterprise training and develop and implement green gran ts programs targeting 
landless youth and poor, as well as women who are unable to access direct benefits from land -based project 
activities.  
3.2.3.3 Facilitate market access for women, youth, and historically marginalized communities through market 
linkage  sessions  
3.2.3.4 Provide technical support on market standards, contract farming, and financial connectivity.  
3.2.3.5 Develop various market access channels including digital market access for rural farmers, especially 
women and marginalized groups  
 
Activ ity 3.2.4 Scale up use and sales of clean fuel -efficient cookstoves  
The project will actively promote the use of energy -efficient cookstoves to benefit the 90% of households in 
the CND that depend primarily on firewood to meet their cooking energy needs an d thus contributing to 
accelerated      forestry resources degradation while       causing profound health hazards to the already 
impoverished community.      .  
This intervention will reduce pressure on forests and farmland by raising household awareness of the 
differences between high and low efficiency stoves and by collaboration with the local TVETs institute to 
manufacture affordable efficient stoves that will  address       the limited availability of high -efficiency stoves in 
rural markets. Promoting the local fabrication will reduce dependency on cookstoves made outside the 
country and therefore make them affordable. Also, promoting locally made cookstov es designed to address 
local needs will lead to full adoption of improved cookstoves and will contribute to sustainable biomass 
resource use and prevent overexploitation of forest resources, thereby ensuring the success of the forest 
landscape restor ation activities described in Outputs 2.1, 2.2, and 3.2 above.  
The project will adopt a market -oriented approach to strengthen the cookstove supply chain in the CND and 
create strong linkages and business relationships with several ecosystem including the TVET center for 
training of youth and women SMEs on cookstove manufacturing  and repairing           , and microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) to ensure sustainable access and finance of cookstoves  business . 
As mentioned above,      to ensure  product quality and affordability to drive       uptake, scalability, and business 
growth and expansion      , the project will partner with integrated polytechnic regional colleges to develop a


---
*Page 501*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 60 
 
 Tier 2 (for emissions) prototype compatible with rur al settings and affordable to rural communities. Youth -
led SMEs will be trained on how to manufacture cookstoves and contracted to produce them  as well as 
operating sales points within the community       
The cookstove pricing and financing modality      will take into account      vulnerable groups, including 
historically marginalized groups mapped and selected in sub -activity 3.2.1.1 (social wealth categories c, d, 
e, and people with disabilities) .       F     or sustainability , the groups will be organized into saving groups and 
ensure they lend among themselves with the purpose of purchasing the cookstove            , the project       
subsidies may target      women -headed households  which has contributed over a percentage       of the total 
cost      . Additionally, the product design       will incorporate reducing health hazards      , such as reducing 
respiratory diseases risks and others linked to climate impact s     , contributing to reduction in morbidity and 
health treatment cost and enabling the vulnerable to have disposable income for investment into productive 
ventures and this will ensure       sustain ability       of impacts beyond the GCF fin ancing. Moreover, the project 
will target women -headed households, recognizing the significant role women and children play in firewood 
collection and cooking. The project will substantiate the time -saving benefits for fuel collection and links to 
women's decision -making and empowerment with clear indicators.  
Considering the lessons learnt from similar projects where hand -outs lead to poor sustainability, this pro ject      
will promote alternative income sources from fast -maturing crops such as chili and French beans which have 
ready market in Rwanda and externally. The members of the            saving groups will be able to use income 
generated from the sale of fast -maturing crops (chili and French beans) coupled with savings accumulated 
from th eir groups and save progressively to purchase the      cookstoves and replacement      . The project's 
technical support to MFIs will build their capacity      to develop       tailored financial products for cookstoves  
with affordable repa yment terms aligned to revenue streams from short -term crops and group savings , 
making it easier for farmers to access loans to buy cookstoves.  
GCF funds with co -financing from RDB will provide support for the development of ICS prototypes, youth -
led SME s engaged in cookstove production, subsidies for cookstoves, creation and support of savings 
groups, and technical support to MFIs to develop tailored financial products to facilitate access to ICS by 
local communities. The project will ensure that the coo kstoves are sustainably sourced and lead to minimal 
indoor air pollution and related respiratory conditions compared with the cooking methods presently in use 
both during production of the cookstoves and during usage by the individual households.  
Key sub -activities are:  
3.2.4.1. Promote local manufacturing through partnership with Integrated Polytechnic Regional Colleges 
(IPRCs) of Karongi and Musanze to help design  prototype Tier 2 ICS to address local constraints      . 
3.2.4.2. Build business and marketing capacity of the cooperatives and youth led SMEs to act as the 
marketing channels of      energy efficient cookstoves to CND community members based on wealth 
categories.  
3.2.4.3 Create a specialized small business development fund, to help local women and youth groups build 
innovative business models for accelerated distribution of ICS.  
3.2.4.4. Promote demand -through raising public awareness on the benefits of ICS by developing and 
disseminating messages on mass media  and in community meetings . 
Output 3.3 Financial services & private sector investment increased  
Financing challenges and needs are particularly high in clean cooking, mainly for two reasons: (1) due to 
lack of income, the upfront purchase of clean cooking equipment presents an affordability challenge to most


---
*Page 502*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 61 
 
 households, which adds to the monthly fuel expendit ures and (2) businesses operating in the sector are 
often unable to attract financ ing      for for investment in the value chain      . Serving low -income households 
also generally yields low returns  due to low customer base . 
With a particular f ocus on marginalized communities, and vulnerable groups of youth and women in the 
CND, the Project will deploy a FSG model to capacitate the communities' productivity and financial resilience. 
The project will address barriers to access to financial serv ices, specifically for women and youth by building 
the financial                      institutions to develop and financial products      that meet the  differentiated needs of 
vulnerable women and men  in the CND . The project Gender Exp ert, Youth Focal Point along with the 
Community Mobilization Specialist and Community Engagement Specialist will provide support to address 
barriers to access, ensure women’s financial skills are developed and there is community and financial 
institution a wareness and support to ensure marginalized groups, including women and youth can access 
financial services including credit  to invest in their businesses including purchase of the cookstoves . Besides 
this, to address the significant challenges facing MF Is and Participating Financial Institutes (PFI) such as 
limited understanding of forestry and agriculture sectors  investment and the corresponding risks            
associated with climate change  effects on credit repayment , this Project will      coach the participating  
financial service providers to enhance their       on assess ing the impact of climate change on their clientele 
and loan portfolio, and ensure equitable access to financial assets by women, youth, and historically 
marginalized communities. Furthermore, the Project will facilitate local and international impact investo rs 
and PFIs to engage in investment and credit provision for farmer cooperatives and SMEs in the selected 
value chains.  
In collaboration with TVET institutes/ICS youth producers and central (RFA, MININFRA) and local authorities 
(Districts), CND biomass and  micro -finance experts will refine and test, for each type of ICS/fuel to be 
promoted, the category/profile of households to be targeted and the related subsidy/microcredit schemes to 
be implemented to facilitate stove adoption with minimum concessionality . These schemes will be designed 
to align with the procedures and rules of identified local partner financial institutions . 
In addition, the financial products will be consistent with climate resilience and capacity -building for 
macadamia, avocado, vegetab les, honey and ecotourism value chain actors under Outputs 3.2.3 and 3.2.4. 
Techniques will be developed to analyze and score forestry and agroforestry value chains that are climate -
resilient.  
Activities and sub activities under this output will be execut ed by the Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA) with 
the technical support from WCS.  
Activity 3.3.1 Facilitate access to finance & private sector investments  
To de -risk the selected forestry and agroforestry -related value chains, the Project will organize sensi tization 
sessions for value chain actors and private financial institutions to build a common understanding with regard 
to the selected value chains. This will also include introduction of monitoring and measurement systems to 
support the risk and climate impact assessment on the value chains to be undertaken by the financial service 
providers.  
Communities involved in chosen forestry and agroforestry value chains in selected intervention sub -areas 
will be selected with a particular focus on landless people , historically marginalized communities, and 
vulnerable groups of youth and women in collaboration with local authorities (districts & sectors) and 
community representatives.   
Furthermore, the interventions will capitalize on the fast outreach of informal  saving groups. Saving groups 
are self -managed and self -capitalized entities that use members’ savings to facilitate lending within the


---
*Page 503*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 62 
 
 group. They set up clear rules and regulations which are known and adhered to by all group members. 
Groups consist of a limited number (10 -25) of people who have freely chosen to work together, and offer 
self-managed savings, insurance, and credit services in remote rural areas. Poorer segments of the 
community often do not have a regular source of income –however, within a savings group, people can save 
to purchase agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizer or equipment. Savings groups may also provide 
mutual assistance for group members, such as medical insurance or loans to members in need.  
Saving groups have transfor med marginalized communities by mobilizing local savings, which provide 
members  with a means to cope with emergencies, manage household cash -flow, build a capital base, and, 
crucially, re -build social networks, solidarity and trust. Savings group participa nts often do not have regular 
sources of income and commonly come from poorer segments of the community. Women are regularly 
involved in savings groups and have high participation rates. Saving group participants often come from the 
same socioeconomic back ground and know each other.   
Activities of saving groups include:  
● SAVING:  The group determines a fixed amount for a given period that each group member will bring 
to the savings account. The allocation and management of these savings can vary according to the 
needs of the members or is used to support group activities.  
● LENDING : The group can grant small internal credits to members. Loans are modest and repayable 
in the short term. Interest rate is fixed by members. At the request of the group, these credits are 
renewable almost automatically if there is no problem and if the am ounts are within a ceiling set by 
the group.   
● SOCIAL : The group not only improves the lives of its members financially but also socially as 
members are given the opportunity to socialize at each meeting and discuss other issues or 
concerns. The group furt her builds a small social fund to help group members in distress. Each 
group agrees on the amount to be saved, usually a smaller amount than the amount for regular 
savings, in every meeting for the social fund. This money is not loaned, but instead used to  pay 
group member expenses for things such as funeral costs or medical treatment and are only used if 
agreed on by all group members.  
In case of external loans from financial service providers, which most members can’t afford, group members 
agree to mutual ly guarantee each other (co -guarantee) when taking a loan. If a member does not pay, the 
group ensures repayment for him/her . The group uses moral pressure to force repayment and therefore 
there is no requirement for physical guarantees with third parties such as financial institutions. The internal 
character assessment for group members is important.  
The project will strengthen the capacity of saving groups and link them to more formalized financial 
institutions. The project will further enhance financial  education and client protection principles.   
This model is more convenient and more accepted by most women who cannot afford collateral loans. As 
such, this approach will attract more women and will facilitate their formal access to financing over time. 
Specific attention will also be paid to women’s participation in other project financial products that will be 
developed, such as asset finance in activity 3.3.2.  
The project will digitize saving groups, to reduce time and cost spent to access their saving s, thereby 
facilitating transactions with formal financial institutions. Solutions such as “push and pull technology” (i.e., 
payments using cell phones, commonly referred to as “mobile money”) have proven to be useful and 
convenient for savings groups to s end and receive money.


---
*Page 504*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 63 
 
 In activity 3.3.1, communities involved in chosen forestry and agroforestry value chains under this project in 
selected intervention sub -areas will be selected with a particular focus on landless people, historically 
marginalized com munities, and vulnerable groups of youth and women in collaboration with local authorities 
(districts & sectors) and community representatives.   
Sub-activities include:  
3.3.1.1 Develop tailored credit assessment tool for selected value chains, while integ rating climate impact 
data 
3.3.1.2 Facilitate access to finance for selected value chains of avocado, macadamia, vegetables and 
ecotourism that are relevant to build climate resilience  
3.3.1.3 Develop tailored financial products to meet the needs of women and youth  
Activity 3.3.2 Set up and support savings & loan groups, enhance asset -building  
To strengthen the capacity of local smallholder farmers in financial literacy and access to finance, farmers’ 
cooperatives will be assisted and supported in setting up saving groups. Savings groups are a proven and 
effective approach to the financial inclusion of the most vulnerable and are increasingly recognized as one 
of the strongest forms of community organization available due to the high levels of socia l capital generated 
from its savings approach. Saving groups create a platform for linkage with financial institutions and other 
business development services. Further, savings groups are recognized for enabling high levels of female 
inclusion. As groups m embers co -guarantee each other for accessing a loan and groups are strong, it forms 
low lending risks for MFIs since members mutually reinforce each other’s repayments.  
Once grouped, small savings group members, especially women, grow from accessing internal group loans 
to accessing formal financial institution loans. As members' bankability and trustworthiness increases, 
members are able to start accessing individual loa ns, gradually building to larger loans and are able to open 
individual savings accounts at financial institutions.  
Members of a saving group will be self -selected and the saving group will be managed by its members. 
Self-selection will be based on the fol lowing:  
● Knowledge of one another and similar economic background   
● Close proximity to where the meetings will be held   
● Reputation for honesty and reliability   
● Ability to attend all meetings on time and follow rules  
● Have a cooperative personality  
● Be able  to buy at least one share each week (or time set by the group)  
● Be able to repay loans on time   
Most saving groups are informal but transparent, democratic, and structured groups that have constitutions 
and clear rules. Members do not enter into contractu al arrangements for their membership. Record -
keeping is based on simple passbooks in which each member’s savings and loans are recorded; all 
transactions are done in front of the members during group meetings.  
Farmer savings groups (FSGs) will be created within cooperatives and farmers will decide which group to 
join. Groups will set up governing rules and conditions (savings amount, meetings, etc.), and criteria for new 
members who want to join. Particular attention will be given to social inclusion (incl uding vulnerable 
communities and landless people).


---
*Page 505*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 64 
 
 Youth and women -owned businesses selected for activity 3.2.2 will be linked to targeted FSG beneficiaries 
for supplying inputs (modern beehives, seedlings, etc.) and energy -efficient cook -stoves. Further more, 
intensive capacity -building and technical support will be delivered to all groups with emphasis on financial 
literacy, entrepreneurship, and gender mainstreaming. The activity will also help link savings groups to PFIs.  
For Activity 3.3.2, in collabo ration with local authorities, the project will target existing or potential youth and 
women -owned businesses that can intervene at any level of selected value chains in activity 3.3.1. The 
project will ensure the integration of vulnerable and landless peo ple. 
Key sub -activity:  
3.3.2.1 Establish/form saving groups for access to finance  
3.3.2.2 Provide organizational, technical, and financial capacity -building to women, youth, and CSOs (such 
as cooperatives or VSLA) with focus on financial literacy and provide long -term coaching to beneficiaries  
3.3.2.3 Support women, youth, and other marginalized groups to strengthen savings and loan groups and 
register for MFI accounts  
 
Activity 3.3.3 Build the capacity of financial institutions to serve targeted value  chains and communities  
Many financial institutions demonstrate little knowledge about the science of agriculture, forestry, climate 
change and associated risks. A study by the International Food Policy and Research Institute (IFPRI)112, 
noted that many agr icultural activities are located in remote, widely dispersed regions and that financial 
institutions find it impossible to provide cost -effective and affordable services in this context. Hence for this 
specific activity, PFIs will be supported to access an d adopt a digitalized forestry and agri -loan assessment 
tool, and to understand climate impacts on their portfolio to actively integrate and promote climate relevant 
financial products in their product offer.  
The Project will work with these institutions b y developing and refining appropriate financial products and 
financing operations that are better understood and user -friendly for smallholder farmers and vulnerable 
groups. The Project will also collaborate with selected PFIs to build their awareness of p rospective farmer 
and low -income group clients and their exposure to climate impacts.  
Key sub -activity:  
3.3.3.1 Capacity -building of PFIs  
Activity 3.3.4 Facilitate learning & knowledge sharing  
To deliver an adaptive program that cooperates with market ac tors on inclusive and sustainable business 
models that have a positive impact on smallholder farmers, while generating and sharing lessons on which 
business models work and which do not, the project will adopt the program -embedded reflection and learning 
(PERL) model for facilitating learning and knowledge sharing to popularize the CND unique approaches to 
restoration and environment management.  
By proving,  we seek to know and show what works and what does not work by demonstrating results at all 
levels, g enerating deeper insights into farmer benefits and the effects on the wider ecosystem, and building 
business model sustainability.  
 
112  Kloeppinger -Todd, R. and Sharma, M. eds., 2010.  Innovations in rural and agriculture finance  (Vol. 18). Intl Food 
Policy Res Inst.


---
*Page 506*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 65 
 
 By improving, we learn by doing to enhance project adaptation and improvement, build a learning culture 
through discussion an d reflection, generate knowledge to support project effectiveness, make comparisons 
over time, and enhance data quality procedures.  
Through sharing,  we disseminate high -level results and learnings to relevant audiences, contribute to 
visibility and commun ication, showcase successful, sustainable and scalable business models, and generate 
best practices.  
Under this activity we will go through the following actions to prove, improve and share:  
Capture  - We will establish a KML framework and support case studies and discussion by project staff; 
improve data collection; collect insights from field visits; write human interest stories; hold quarterly program 
reviews; measure client satisfaction; and colle ct information on business models, market uptake, and 
ecosystem changes.  
Synthesize  - We will organize discussions and quarterly program reviews with program staff and 
stakeholders for assessment, interpretation, reflection, and learning from results. Outp uts will include 
reports, briefs, and articles.  
Disseminate  - We will contribute to and support the project, presenting its achievements in newsletters, 
conferences, webinars, blogs, publications, media events, partner workshops and sector network 
presenta tions.  
Take action  - We will have regular discussions and reviews in which we revisit the work plan and processes 
in light of results and insights (e.g., based on outreach data, field visits, case studies, partner feedback, 
quarterly reports, changes in the ecosystem, etc.) , and adapt operational planning when needed (within and 
outside of the normal project planning and reporting cycle).  
Refine agenda  - We will help to align the project intervention strategy with a shared vision for success.      
      
The table below summ arizes the project activities to be implemented in Congo Nile Divide .


---
*Page 507*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 66 
 
  
Table 4:  Summary of project activities (place based and non -place based) to be implemented across the Congo Nile Divide.  
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
The proposed project will be implemented in five years, from 202 4–2029. The Ministry of Environment (MoE) 
is the Accredited Entity (AE) for the GCF and MoE will enter into a funded activity agreement with the GCF 
once the project is approved by the Board.


---
*Page 508*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 67 
 
  
The governance arrangements for the project at the national level are designed to build upon the  
institutional structure of MOE (the accredited entity) and RFA (the Executing Entity).  
Accredited Entity:   The MoE on behalf of the Government of Rwanda is a Direc t Access Entity of the GCF 
and will assume the oversight role on implementation, management, monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
on the CND Program elaborated in the FAA. The MoE will enter into a subsidiary agreement with the 
Executing Entity (EE) with c lear roles and responsibilities for each party. Under the Ministry of Environment 
there is a Single Project Implementation Unit that has a number of staff charged with resource mobilization 
and providing oversight over different projects implemented throug h the Ministry of Environment. The 
MoE/SPIU has a track record of experience in project oversight, management, monitoring and evaluation of 
projects and programs including the GCF funded FP073 that is currently at the mid -term level of 
implementation with over USD 32.8 million, managed over USD 3.8 million for the GCF funded PPFs, 
overseen the implementation of USD 10 million from Adaptation Fund. The MoE is currently managing the 
World Bank Funded project preparation advance of USD 6 million and has been i mplementing since 2018 a 
program funded by the UNDP focused on Strengthening Capacities of Environment and Natural Resources 
Sector for a Green Economy Transformation of over USD 6 million. Additionally MoE assumes its oversight 
role through chairing of th e Project Steering Committee for different projects implemented under the 
Environment and Natural Resources Sector as a whole namely TREPA, a GCF -funded project, Rwanda 
Urban Development Project Two funded by the World Bank and NDF,   an Early Warning Syste m project


---
*Page 509*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 68 
 
 (funded by LDCF), the Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and Conservation (LAFREC) programme 
(funded by GEF/World Bank), Green Amayaga Project (funded by the GEF) and the “Building resilience of 
communities living in degraded forests, savan nahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem 
management approach” programme (funded by LDCF). A coordination platform between approved GCF 
projects will be established to identify, maximize linkages and ensure complementarity through learning and 
shari ng best practices and failures arising from the implementation of existing GCF projects. Quarterly 
meetings will be organized under the supervision of the MoE between project directors and staff responsible 
for monitoring and evaluation to share lessons le arned.  
Project Financial Flow and AE Roles  
Funds from GCF will be provided to the MoE GCF account (as the AE), under the terms of the FAA. MoE 
will be responsible for financial management and accountable for the use of GCF resources. Financial 
transactions  will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally certified auditors. In addition, as 
the AE, MoE will: i) ensure that the project is executed in accordance with GCF standards; ii) supervise, 
oversee and manage the implementation of project i nterventions; iii) report on Project progress; and iv) 
ensure that Project activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries' national priorities. MoE will 
provide oversight to the project consisting of a) entering into subsidiary agreement with t he EE; b) managing 
and disbursing GCF funds to EE on the approved work plans and budgets; c) reviewing financial 
expenditures and progress reports; d) overseeing Project implementation in accordance with the Project 
document and Annual Work Plans and Budge ts, agreements with co -financiers and  executing entity rules 
and procedures; e) providing technical guidance to ensure that the appropriate technical quality is applied 
to all Project activities; f) providing financial reports to the GCF for Project funds  received; g) ensuring that 
the project complies with the terms agreed in the Project’s respective FAA as well as the AMA signed 
between MoE and the GCF; and h) undertaking regular annual supervision missions according to the MoE’s 
guidelines and convene   Project   Steering Committee (PSC) meeting twice a year   aimed to review progress 
and approve   work plans.   The PMU hosted under the Single Project Implementation Unit of the Ministry of 
Environment will manage, monitor and report on day -to-day implementati on of the Project activities by the 
EE. The EE will   execute the tasks within the overall project management structure: a) implementing day -to-
day activities as per the project work plan and budget, including the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan; b ) undertaking procurement activities as per the agreement signed by GCF and AE as well as the sub -
agreement signed by the AE and EE; c) managing contracts of suppliers and services providers; d) hiring 
and managing project staff relevant to the EE -managed project areas; e) implementing activities as per the 
project work plan; and f) carrying out financial and technical monitoring of activities, including the 
achievement of outputs and outcomes the EE is  in charge of. EE will enter into Memorandum of 
Unders tanding with different implementing partner agencies that will provide technical know -how to the 
implementation of the project activities. The implementing partners including but not limited to RWB, WCS, 
NLA, RDB, CORDAID and Districts will provide technic al and operation services articulated and agreed in 
respective MoUs. For the Implementing partners RFA will be paying service compensations and at District 
Level community approach will be used. Procured service providers will be contracted in accordance w ith 
MoE rules and regulations of procuring goods and services.   
Project Steering Committee (PSC):  An inter -ministerial Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary will be established by MOE to serve as the project’s coordination and  decision -making 
body. The PSC will ensure the project delivers its outputs and achieves its outcomes. The Committee will 
meet on a semi -annual basis to review project progress and evaluations, facilitate implementation (ensuring 
the necessary resources an d support are provided in a timely manner) and provide guidance to the PMU 
and EE/PIU. The Steering Committee will also facilitate effective coordination between the key stakeholders 
at the national and district levels and ensure the project aligns with Go vernment strategies and programs.


---
*Page 510*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 69 
 
 The PSC will reflect the multi -sectoral nature of the project and will include senior -level representatives from 
GoR and other relevant Stakeholders. The PSC will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, MOE or any 
Senior Ma nager from MoE delegated by the Permanent Secretary with representatives from: MINAGRI, 
MINECOFIN, MININFRA - MINALOC, RDB, REG, REMA, RWB, RFA, RAB, NAEB, WCS, RCA, NLA, UR, 
Provinces ESs, Districts’ Vice Mayors of Economic Affairs and representatives of C ivil Society Organizations.  
Project Management Unit:  It is under the MoE/SPIU that a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) of 
the CND program to supplement the existing MoE/SPIU structure for this complex program will be 
established for day -to-day manage ment of the program interventions. The Project Management Unit (PMU) 
will be headed by the Project Coordinator who will serve as the secretary and the rapporteur of the PSC. 
The Project Coordinator and other PMU staff will be recruited  as per the MoE/GoR r ecruitment practices. 
The Project Coordinator is responsible for the day -to-day operations of the PMU within approved project 
funded activity agreement and any other guidance provided by the AE and PSC including the tasks of 
managing and monitoring project  risks initially identified and submitting new risks to the AE and PSC for 
consideration and decision -making on follow -up actions and updating the status of risks in the project risk 
log. The PMU Project Coordinator will report to the overall MoE/SPIU - Coordinator as the immediate 
supervisor and to the Permanent Secretary as the secondary supervisor.  
The PMU will provide to the MoE/SPIU coordination and to the Chair of PSC with quarterly progress reports 
and close its operations when the final project evalu ation report and other documentation required by the 
GCF have been completed and submitted to MoE. The PMU will be staffed with required professional and 
technically qualified personnel selected and recruited following the MoE/GoR procedures. In all, the P MU 
will strive to maintain a lean management structure. It will comprise a Project Coordinator, Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, E&S Specialist, Procurement Specialist, Gender Specialist, Financial 
Management Specialist, Communication and Outreach  Specialist, Office Manager, and Driver as a 
dedicated team to manage the EE for the whole program.   
Executing Entity:  RFA will serve as the EE for the Project through a subsidiary agreement (SA)  signed with 
MoE. The SA will establish clear roles and respo nsibilities for both parties for the delivery of the project 
activities, the schedule and conditions for installments, the determination of the prevailing fiduciary standards 
and the terms and conditions for arbitrations and termination of contract. The SA  will include specific 
obligations for the EE on project execution, financial management, personnel administration and reporting, 
as well as on arbitration and liability terms.   
Rwanda Forest Authority:  RFA was established by the Government of Rwanda by the law No 72/2019 of 
29/01/2020 with the mission of ensuring the growth of forest resources, their management and protection 
for sustainable development purposes. RFA is an affiliated agency under the Mo E with a separate legal 
personality and a budget entity of the Government of Rwanda.   RFA is currently implementing   TREPA;   a 
GCF funded project as one of the executing entities, COMBIO Project funded by the Swedish government, 
executed Forest Management and Biomass Energy project (FMBE) implemented in the Northern province; 
Sustainable forestry, agroforestry and biomass energy management for climate resilience in Gatsibo and 
Gicumbi districts; and Improving the Efficiency and Sustainability of Charcoal an d Wood Fuel Value Chains 
in the North -western part of Rwanda supported by the Nordic Development Fund. RFA has three main 
divisions namely Forest Research Division, Forest Management, Administration and Finance and an 
established Single Project Implementat ion Unit (SPIU), composed of staff with the required financial 
management skills where the CND Staff will be hosted. The Director General of RFA as the Chief Budget 
Manager, the  RFA SPIU Coordinator together with Program Manager and a Financial Management 
Specialist will be responsible for the day -to-day financial management of the Project.   RFA SPIU will open a 
separate account at the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR), from which payments of the Project activities will


---
*Page 511*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 70 
 
 be made from. RFA follows the same financ ial and procurement policy as the one of the Ministry of 
Environment.   
WCS Technical Assistance (TA) Services:  As one of the project implementation partners,  WCS will 
provide technical assistan ce to the EE (RFA) through a n MOU  signed with RFA. The MOU  will detail all the 
activities that WCS will be directly supporting during the implementation of this project. The TA services will 
include advising RFA/SPIU, procuring and supervising international experts and consultants, and procuring 
materials to support t he execution activities. Relevant technical expert s from WCS will be embedded within 
RFA to advise SPIU on day -to-day project management to support the implementation of activities under 
outputs 1.2, 2.1, and 2.2. These experts will support RFA’s technical  teams and strengthen their capacities 
in different aspects of the project implementation. Furthermore, WCS technical assistance services will 
include supporting the development of ToRs and reviewing works of international consultants to ensure high 
qualit y deliverables.  
CORDAID Technical Assistance Services : CORDAID will provide technical assistance to RFA mainly on 
output 3.2 and 3.3 through  an MOU signed with RFA.  
Other Government of Rwanda implementing partners will provide implementation support and RFA will enter 
into specific M OUs with these partners  based on the type of support t hey will provide.   
Table 5:  Summary of project outputs. The EE will be responsible for all activities and sub -activities of the 
project, rec eiving support from technical implementation partners .  
Outputs  Executing 
Entity per 
output  Technical 
Implementation 
Partners  
Output 1.1. Landscape -wide land -use plan 
developed for climate -resilient livelihoods & 
forest ecosystems, integrating district 
development strategies (DDS)  RFA 
  WCS and NLA  
Output 1.2. Local & national institutional 
capacities strengthened to integrate biodiversity 
& climate risks into land use planning & 
management  RFA WCS and NLA  
Output 2.1. Protected areas management 
effectiveness improved to address climate risks 
and adaptation  RFA WCS and RDB  
Output 2.2. Natural forest cover restored; 
biodiversity  connections established  RFA WCS  
Output 3.1. Farming methods enhance 
productivity, reduce erosion & flooding risks, 
contribute to ecosystem services, and support 
connectivity  RFA RWB


---
*Page 512*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 71 
 
 Output 3.2. Rural livelihoods generate 
alternative incomes and reduce pressure on 
forests  RFA CORDAID  
Output 3.3. Financial services & private sector 
investment engagement  RFA CORDAID  
Monitoring and Evaluation  PMU   
 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)  will be responsible for ensuring technical guidance to both the 
project execution team and the PSC. The TAC will have technical representatives from all project 
stakeholders including MINAGRI, MINECOFIN, MININFRA, MINALOC, RDB, REG, REMA, RWB, RFA, 
RAB, N AEB, WCS, RCA, NLA, UR, Districts representatives and representatives of Civil Society 
Organizations. The TAC will be engaged in providing technical support and quality assurance of the project 
implemented activities as well as facilitating effective imple mentation and mainstreaming of project 
interventions beyond the life of the project. The institutional stakeholders will nominate relevant technical 
experts to the TAC, thus bringing expertise from their respective institutions to make technical contributi ons 
to the project implementation based on the integrated nature of the project.  
The project will use the GoR fund management modalities based on an annual work plan developed by the 
PMU together with EE and subsequently approved by the PSC. The Annual Work Plan (AWP) indicates 
which activities should be covered at PMU and EE levels as per the allocated respective budgets. The EE, 
together with support from implementing partners, will establish Local Project Implementation Committees 
(LPICs)specif ic to the zones of intervention in the Western and Southern Provinces of Rwanda. Two LPICs 
will be established; one for the Southern province and another one for the Western province for the 
coordination of activities in Western (GMNP) and southern (NNP) R wanda to ensure synergies and 
complementarity between partners. These teams will work closely with the Joint Action Development Forums 
(DJAF) based in each district located in these respective zones. LPIC will be composed of representatives 
of districts in  charge of natural resources management, RDB, CSOs, and conservation organizations, 
women and youth councils and JADF.   This arrangement will ensure that a) project delivery can proceed 
securely and efficiently despite the complex governance framework; and  c) government partners play a 
leading role in project delivery and capacity development. PSC will provide policy direction and guidance to 
improve the coherence and efficiency of this innovative approach to be developed as an up -scalable model. 
At the loc al level, the EE and its service providers will coordinate closely with districts to ensure smooth local 
level coordination in project implementation, provide ownership and ensure sustainability. The District 
Executive Directors (DEDs) are expected to play  an active role in project implementation, facilitation and 
monitoring and play a key role in the grievance redress mechanisms, as described in the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan of the project.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request  
Rwanda has achieved remarkable social, political, and economic progress over the past two decades. The 
Rwandan economy has grown well above average compared to its peers and the rest of the world, achieving 
growth rates of more than 8% regularly, with a 9. 4% growth rate in 2019113. However, the economy which is 
 
113  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2020.


---
*Page 513*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 72 
 
 dependent on nature -based tourism and agriculture is extremely vulnerable to external shocks, including 
climate change.  
Climate change is likely to increase variability in crop yields and agricultura l production, cause severe flood 
damage to physical infrastructure, reduce labor productivity, and impact demand for tourism114. The recent 
Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) estimates that if these risks materialize, Rwanda’s GDP 
levels can drop  by 5–7% below baseline in multiple years by 2050115, with negative impacts on private 
consumption, exports, and government revenues. By strengthening resilience to climate change, Rwanda 
can better prepare to manage the adverse impacts of climate change. I mplementing the commitments 
articulated in the NDC is estimated to require new investments of US$11 billion, of which close to US$7 
billion is conditional on new financing.  
Rwanda is classified by the U.N. as a Least Developed Country (LDC)116 and lacks su fficient public financial 
resources to implement its climate change and resilient green development objectives. The implications of 
climate impact for Rwanda demands concerted action and support both locally and internationally to enable 
the mainstreaming of climate resilience into public, private and community sectors at the pace and scale 
required. This Project will allow Rwanda to implement its NDC commitments and pursue its aspirations under 
its National Forest Policy and Climate Resilient Green Economy  plans for reversing trends of high 
deforestation, allowing for demonstration of sustainable reforestation models and reductions in demand for 
wood fuel. Rwanda has made an impressive commitment to using forests and forest protection as part of its 
strateg y to mitigate the impacts from climate change, and to provide benefits of biodiversity conservation 
and livelihood improvements.   
Yet, vulnerable citizens' needs, coupled with fragile landscape and forest restoration, will not be met solely 
with national resources in the rapid timeframe needed to arrest loss of economic assets for households and 
prevent further degradation of landscapes. Specific investments in awareness and forest governance, 
training at scale required to increase the resilience of CND co mmunities to the impacts of climate change, 
and alignment and coordination of support on undertaking climate resilient restoration activities are not 
currently being developed by the GoR. The GoR does not have the financial means to implement all project 
activities identified to improve climate resilience and requires technical assistance and support. While project 
partners are contributing co -finance for this project implementation, this represents only a fraction of the 
resources required for implementati on. The GCF grant investment can help initiate, expedite, and catalyze 
these critical interventions and assist with alignment of future climate resilience efforts. MoE is requesting 
grant funding for this Project due to Rwanda’s status as an LDC, insuffici ent alternative finance options, and 
because the proposed activities will provide a public good on which the livelihoods of many of Rwanda’s 
rural poor depend. The high levels of poverty among project beneficiaries in the CND as identified in the 
Feasibili ty Report necessitate the use of grant funds rather than a reimbursable financial option. While the 
GoR will contribute resources for the implementation and sustaining climate resilience efforts beyond the 5 -
year Project, this represents only a partial sha re of implementation resources. The GCF funding will crowd 
in additional private sector capital, such as efficient cookstoves and forest plantations, and will allow the 
government to cost -efficiently implement the adaptation capacity -building training and practices to ensure 
that CND landscape is restored, and climate resilient landscapes maintained.  
 
114  “World Bank Group. 2019.  Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.  World Bank, Washington, DC. World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32113   License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”  
115  World Bank Group. 2022. Rwanda Country Climate and Development Report . CCDR Series;. World Bank, 
Washin gton, DC. World Bank Group . https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/38067   License: CC BY -NC-ND 
3.0 IGO.   
116   United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2021. Least Developed Country Category: Rwanda 
Profile.


---
*Page 514*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 73 
 
 The lack of private capital structure, prevalence of subsistence farming, and inadequate market for 
agriculture and forested products, is the primary cause of the request for grants, not loans as little surplus 
products are produced and traded, and thus wi ll be inadequate to secure or service any loans.The prevailing 
market conditions necessitate GCF grant finance, rather than loans, to raise the capacity and bridge the 
financial and technical gaps until the restoration and value chain models are brought to  financially viability 
that can be sustained by private sector. Furthermore, our Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) shows 
that the direct returns on investment in landscape restoration activities are too low to make them financially 
attractive or feasib le for farmers, even if they had access to credit. Without GCF support, lack of private 
financing, large payback period, uncertainty and transaction cost of getting the loan, and upfront cost and 
benefits realized over a longer period of time reduces the f inancial attractiveness of climate resilience 
investments. It is unlikely that there will be a financial return on investment within the Project time frame to 
repay loans. The issue of societal benefit investment is accentuated by the fact that there canno t be direct 
uptake of benefits to communities from restoration within National Parks.  
Serving low -income households yields low returns and the community lacks financial education and capacity 
to link them to formal private institutions. Most formal financ ial institutions view these as high risk and high 
cost, as the transactions are often small and the clients usually have neither physical collateral nor the 
education needed to organize their finances. Without the value chain development for potential reve nue 
generating streams such as honey, tea plantation tourism, and efficient cookstoves, the private sector 
investments are not occurring. Henceforth, these potential revenue generating streams proposed in the 
project are not sustainable on their own and th e GCF grant will not only provide financing support but will be 
critical in creating enabling opportunities for market development beyond the project to catalyze private 
investments. The full concessionality funded by GCF grants is requested so that an ena bling environment 
can be created, and the project can overcome affordability challenges through developing a system of 
community co -guarantee. This will also go beyond the neoclassical economics model and focus on shifts in 
social dynamics that move the co mmunity as a whole to escape the poverty trap and increase financial 
resilience. The full concessionality for potential revenue generating streams will be passed on to end 
beneficiaries in the CND and the project will strengthen the capacity of community o rganizations on quality 
improvement and aggregation capacity, create market linkage with off -takers or buyers, and attract finance 
for development, marketing, and distribution.  
Planting indigenous species, well -suited to the climatic conditions of the CND,  is likely to increase the health 
and resilience of forest plantations and thus the erosion control benefits that these forests provide. However, 
when establishing protective forests, most existing projects in the CND use exotic species because they are 
fast growing, widely available, and low cost117. GCF grant resources are required to support restoration to 
help build natural capital (restored forest) which can be used sustainably and provide larger ecosystem 
benefits in the future.  
The financial Net Present Value (NPV) of $34.48 million for agroforestry, $2.98 million for protective forests, 
and $0.31 million for silvopasture intervention and economic NPV of $ 58.93       million for agroforestry, 
$30.22 million for protective for ests, $ 0.97       million for silvopasture, and $ 10.59       million for energy 
efficient cookstoves interventions for 20 -year analysis period when GCF support for the Project is 
considered118. These results are indicative of the investment in time and resources required to increase 
climate resilience, associated benefits, and restoration of landscape and forest productivity. Furthermore, 
 
117  Mukuralinda, A., et al, 2016. Taking to Scale Tree -Based Systems in  Rwanda to Enhance Food Security, Restore 
Degraded Land, Improve Resilience to Climate Change and Sequester Carbon.  PROFOR, Washington D.C.  
118 The provision of energy efficient cookstoves is a non -income generating intervention and is expected to have no 
financial cash inflows and no income generating opportunities, then no financial analyses is needed. The cookstoves 
analyses was pursued only at the economic analysis level.


---
*Page 515*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 74 
 
 agroforestry, restoration, and forest management require up -front investments that take 10 -30 years to 
mature ful ly. However, these future benefits are depressed by the use of a high discount rate that downplays 
the importance of long -term investments. The discount rate considered in our economic analysis is 13%, 
which is Rwanda Central Bank’s yield for a 20 -year tre asury bond, as issued in August 2021. This is the rate 
at which the government can borrow to fund equivalent investments in the absence of grant financing. For 
financial analysis, we used the discount rate of 15.44%, which is Rwanda Central Bank’s lending rate for 
July 2021. Consequently, the GoR seeks maximum concessionality from the GCF for the urgent adaptation 
actions proposed under this Project. Without GCF funding, under a business as usual (BAU) scenario, 
inadequate technical and financial capacity a t the national and local level will continue to hinder the efforts 
of rural communities in the CND to adapt their livelihoods. Consequently, the vicious negative cycle of 
unsustainable forest use and ecosystem degradation will persist, reducing the supply of goods and services 
which buffer impacts of climate change on rural communities, compounding their vulnerability. GCF funding 
is therefore vital to initiate progress towards a complete paradigm shift in GoR’s approach to adapting the 
livelihoods of rural  Rwandans to climate change.  
The Project cost per direct beneficiary of $31 ($39.86 with co -funding) and 20 -year economic rate of return 
of project interventions for agroforestry (       49%), protective forests (72%), and silvopasture (       51%) 
highlights its viability. The Economic rate of return for energy efficient cookstoves could not be estimated as 
there is no change in the sign in the net cash or resource flows from positive to negative over the analytical 
period; and the economic NPV of $ 10,585.675       for this intervention highlights its feasibility.  The cost of 
restoring natural forest for providing both adaptation and mitigation benefits is significantly greater than the 
cost of simply planting trees for mitigation. Restoration o f natural forest in Rwanda is essential for sustaining 
the critical ecosystem services on which vulnerable rural communities and the national economy depend . 
The capital market in the country is weak and provides limited opportunities. It has low levels of  direct 
investment which further limits the opportunity for financing. The country's capital markets currently are not 
able to serve the needs of rural and resource limited beneficiaries. The project addresses market failures 
and minimizes the risk of disr upting or unduly distorting markets or crowding out private finance, including 
new entrants, as well as other public investments. Taking the above -mentioned points into account the 
concessionality that the GCF provides is justified.  
B.6. Exit strategy  
The Project will establish a new inter -agency and local -to-national -scale spatial planning framework and 
capacity for an integrated approach to multi -sector analysis and planning. This will enable the analysis of 
land-use trade -offs that explicitly conside r the value of ecosystem services, climate risks and risks of 
ecosystem degradation. This represents a radical shift away from business -as-usual and will have long -term, 
far-reaching implications for policy and financial planning in Rwanda. It will provide  a spatially explicit 
framework for mainstreaming climate risk considerations across all sectors while also providing a 
mechanism for quantifying harmful financial flows to biodiversity from multiple sectors.  
In addition, the multi -scale spatial planning system will be able to strengthen a nd link directly to the system 
under development by Rwanda’s Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) for policy 
coordination to integrate climate risks into fiscal planning, with support from the IM F Resilience and 
Sustainability Trust. Further, it will support the ability of both national and local governments to plan and 
implement the new disaster risk reduction strategy in a spatially explicit way, which previously has not been 
possible.  
Mainstrea ming climate change adaptation metrics . The Project will integrate climate resilience metrics into 
land use planning, district development strategies and annual performance contracts and harmonize cross -


---
*Page 516*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 75 
 
 sectoral monitoring and reporting mechanisms. This wi ll lead to a systematic consideration of climate change 
risks and adaptation in policy planning that will be sustained beyond the Project. An MoU between key 
government agencies will operationalize the cross -sectoral planning task force, which will be supp orted by 
a ministerial order, giving it the mandate and financial support to operate beyond the life of the Project.  
Rwanda has adopted a private -public partnership (PPP) business model to make its national parks 
operations financially viable. However, in Rwanda, as in the rest of the world, national parks and the 
biodiversity they are intended to protect are threatened by climate change and by the interaction of climate 
change with other direct anthropogenic threats. By “climate proofing” its national park s–i.e., by establishing 
a technical unit within RDB, by explicitly incorporating climate change considerations into the management 
plans of national parks, including climate -wise functional linkages, such as the one this project will create in 
the CND, and  by training rangers and other park personnel to proactively manage climate -change -related 
threats –Rwanda will ensure that the ecosystem service benefits of the country’s biodiversity, including its 
national parks, will be sustained beyond the life of the Project. Specific finance instruments –such as payment 
for ecosystem services (PES) and structured impact conservat ion bonds to ensure ongoing revenues and 
benefit -sharing with surrounding communities –will be identified and implemented before the end of the  
project, in a manner consistent with the Biodiversity Finance Plan that the GoR has recently developed with 
support from BIOFIN. The Project through RFA will hire a Technical Advisor  , to work with RDB, MoE, 
REMA, FONERWA and MINECOFIN to ensure that a p ortfolio of sustainable finance mechanisms is 
designed and implemented before the end of the project period to ensure the long -term sustainability of the 
Project outputs.   
Strategies for Long -term Financial Sustainability.  Two specific examples of the Gove rnment of Rwanda’s 
commitment and approaches to financial sustainability that will be key parts of the Exit Strategy are the 
Tourism Revenue Sharing Program (TRSP) of RDB and the Community Adaptation Fund of FONERWA, the 
Rwanda Green Fund.  
Tourism Revenue Sharing Program.  The long -term success of the three protected areas in the CND 
depends, to a substantial extent, on the support of communities living around protected areas.  In recognition 
of this, in 2005 Rwanda established a Tourism Revenue Sharing Prog ram, allocating 5% of gross tourism 
revenue to local communities.  Currently Rwanda and Uganda are the only two African countries with formal 
tourism benefit sharing programs. RDB recently completed a 15 -year review of its Tourism Revenue Sharing 
Program ( Snyman et al. 2023) and it has increased the revenue sharing allocation from 5% to 10%.  
The primary challenges identified in the 15 -year review are increasing the effectiveness of community 
engagement, reaching the most vulnerable community members, and en suring that the TRSP meets 
community needs.  The GoR is interested in adapting the TRS Policy to more effectively engage the 
communities living around the PAs in the TRSP and to allocate more funding to directly enhance the lives of 
Rwandan citizens living  around PAs. In this regard the Project will work with RDB and district governments, 
to increase transparency in the Program, ensure that the most vulnerable community members benefit from 
the TRSP and to link the cooperatives and youth -led SMEs to the Pro gram. This will include working with 
RDB to use the insights from this project to revise the TRSP revenue allocation model and eligibility to create 
greater resilience among communities.  The 15 -year review recommended that the following percentages 
be use d for the revenue allocation going forward: 70% for livelihood projects; 25% for infrastructure support; 
and 5% in an emergency fund. However, there is a need for input from this Project to ensure that the specific 
types of projects to be supported most ef fectively increase community resilience.  This will ensure long -term 
benefits to communities.  
The Community Adaptation Facility (CAF) within FONERWA  was developed as part of Rwanda’s NDC Deep 
Dive:  Advancing Financial Innovation to Scale Up Climate Action .  The aim of the CAF is to provide grant


---
*Page 517*
---

B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0  | PAGE 76 
 
 funding for community projects that scale up climate resilience. In this regard, the Project will support the 
cooperatives and youth -led SMEs engaged in Component 3 to prepare business plans and link them to 
innova tive financing for community projects with the CAF. In line with the CAF priorities, the business plans 
will focus on the investment priorities of the Rwanda Green Fund (FONERWA) targeting conservation and 
sustainable management of natural resources especi ally ecosystem rehabilitation, sustainable land 
management, sustainable forest management and promotion and protection of biodiversity.  The Project 
Technical Assistance will work with FONERWA to design specific long -term funding opportunities for 
communit ies in the CND to the CAF.  
Additionally, t he Project will enhance the environmental, social and economic resilience of communities in 
the CND by enhancing financial and accounting literacy, marketing and entrepreneurship, and vocational 
skills of community  members (e.g., in native tree propagation, forest restoration, and fuel -efficient stove 
production). This will mean the Project will invest in businesses that restore or indirectly halt the degradation 
and loss of native forests by reducing or eliminating  local stressors. These businesses and projects are 
expected to live beyond the lifetime of the project. The value chains, once organized profitably, can continue 
to grow without further support, while the financial service providers will continue to servi ce savings groups 
and farmers and SMEs in the value chain with sustainable financial services also after the project ends. By 
raising the productivity from selected crops, diversifying agriculture towards high -value agriproducts, and 
strengthening their va lue chains through trainings in marketing, processing and business, the project will 
attract investments from the private sector in sustainable agriculture and agroforestry. All economic and 
environmental benefits from the project will be rigorously monito red, captured, compiled and disseminated 
as knowledge products, packaged for various stakeholders including investors and MFI, with which the 
project will engage to secure microcredits to beneficiary farmers.


---
*Page 518*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
(c) FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  Total amount  Currency  
39,056,421  USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
Grants  39,056,421  - - - 
(b) Co-financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
10,943,579  USD ($)  
Name of 
institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
Rwanda 
Development 
Board  Grant  5,000,000  USD ($)  - - - 
Rwanda Forestry 
Authority  Grant  831,307  USD ($)  - - - 
Rwanda Water 
Resources Board  Grant  5,000,000  USD ($)  - - - 
Ministry of 
Environment  In-kind 112,272  USD ($)  - - - 
(c) Total 
financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
50,000,000  USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions   
The Government of Rwanda is providing grant financing via the Rwanda Forest Authority 
(RFA), Rwanda Water Board (RWB), and Rwanda Development Board (RDB) to support 
activities in component 3. In addition  to their contributions, AE will cover office costs in 
the form of an in -kind contribution equivalent to $112,271 for the Project Management 
Unit which will be hosted within AE premises . The co -financiers have been identified 
based on their existing mandat es and activities they implement in the CND region hence 
this was the only assessment done and they have been able to commit their involvement 
in the project implementation. The provided co -financing commitments will serve as a 
basis of MoE engagement duri ng the project implementation. During implementation of 
the project, annual work plans will be adjusted together with the executing entity and all 
the co -financiers to align with everyone’s activities.  MoE/AE under its oversight role will 
ensure that all these stakeholders commit during planning on their co -financing and 
report on it during Annual Performance Reports submitted to GCF.


---
*Page 519*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 1:  
Mainstreaming 
Climate 
adaptation into 
integrated land 
use planning  
 1.1 Landscape -
wide land -use plan 
developed for 
climate -resilient 
livelihoods & forest 
ecosystems, 
integrating district 
strategies  1,729,172  1,729,172  
 Grant     
 1.2 Local & national 
institutional 
capacities 
strengthened to 
integrate 
biodiversity & 
climate risks into 
land use planning & 
management  1,195,652  1,195,652  Grant     
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
USD ($)  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Component 2:  
Forest and 
landscape 
management and 
restoration  2.1 PA 
management 
effectiveness 
improved re climate 
risks & adaptation  2,051,778  2,051,778  Grant     
2.2 Natural forest 
cover restored, 
biodiversity 
connections 
established  16,917,145  14,271,796  Grant  2,645,349   Rwanda 
Water Board  
Component 3: 
Enhancing 
climate 
adaptation 
through 
promotion of 
resilient 
livelihoods and 
climate -smart 
farming methods  3.1 Farming 
methods enhance 
productivity, reduce 
erosion & flooding 
risks, contribute to 
ecosystem 
services, and 
support connectivity  13,451,014  10,856,387  Grant  478,071  
 
 
 
2,116,556  Grant  
 
 
 
Grant  Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
 
Rwanda 
Water Board  
3.2 Rural 
livelihoods 
generate alternative 
incomes & reduce 
pressure on forests  8,612,188  3,850,283  Grant  4,761,905  Grant  Rwanda 
Development 
Board  
3.3 Financial 
services & private 
sector investment 
engage  559,890  559,890  Grant


---
*Page 520*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 79 
  
 Monitoring & 
Evaluation  
 4.1 - Performance 
monitoring plan 
developed  555,475  555,475  Grant     
4.2 - Project 
monitored and 
evaluated; lessons 
learnt integrated 
into adaptive 
management 
processes  645,390  645,390  Grant     
Project 
Management 
Costs  5.1 Project 
managed efficiently 
to achieve its goal 
to build resilience to 
climate change in 
CND  1,901,344  1,480,769  Grant  106,925  
 
 
 
313,650  
 
 In-Kind 
 
 
 
Grant  Ministry of 
Environment 
(AE) 
 
Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
5% Contingency   2,380,952  1,859,830  Grant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 39,586  
 
 
 
 
238,095  
 
 
 
 
238,095  
 
 
 
5,346  
 Grant  
 
 
 
 
Grant  
 
 
 
 
Grant  
 
 
 
In-Kind 
 Rwanda 
Forestry 
Authority  
 
 
Rwanda 
Water Board  
 
 
 
Rwanda 
development 
Board  
 
 
Accredited 
Entity  
 
Indicative total 
cost  (USD)  50,000,000              
39,056,421                        
10,943,579      
    
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
This project will build knowledge among land -use planning actors on the value of forests for climate 
resilience, and institutionalizing cross -sectoral meetings to encourage synergies and avoid overlapping


---
*Page 521*
---

C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 80 
  
 mandates and redundancy in different climate resili ence interventions  to ensure climate adaptation and 
climate resilience are explicitly incorporated into land -use planning processes in the CND, such that trade -
offs between different sectors can be resolved while balancing the climate resilience of nature  and people. 
Local land -use planning experts and community members will be trained and engaged to review and interpret 
the National Land Use and Development Master Plan, to ensure the plan accounts for current and future 
climate risks, and that these risks  are also considered in district level planning schemes. The knowledge and 
insights gained from these activities will be synthesized and used to inform the design of an Integrated Land -
use Plan for Resilient Livelihoods and Ecosystems, which will reconcile  the cross -sectoral (e.g., tourism, 
environment, forestry, food production, cash crops for export) trade -offs necessary to sustain forest 
ecosystem functions, deliver critical ecosystem services and improve community livelihoods. An innovative 
scientifical ly credible system for monitoring trends in natural forest cover and forest types will also be 
established, and a comprehensive capacity building programme will improve use of remote sensing, 
ecosystem service modelling and spatial planning tools to inform  decision making. Budget: $2,000,754  
To enhance forest resilience across the CND, through a combination of increased forest cover, improved 
forest condition, and improved management to reduce degradation and pressure on forests, the project will 
increase the extent and condition of natural fo rest within the CND’s national parks, by facilitating regeneration 
of large areas previously degraded by fires, securing key remaining natural areas outside PAs and 
developing a financial sustainability plan for the CND. The project will invest in the capa city of government 
agencies, districts, and communities to manage forest fires. Community members will be trained in and 
provided technical assistance and equipment for restoration techniques, establishment, and management of 
indigenous tree nurseries.  Management plans for the CND’s national parks will also be updated and park 
staff trained to explicitly consider climate adaptation and gender issues and manage  the parks as part of the 
larger  CND landscape.  The project will also develop the capacity of key G overnment ministries and agencies 
on sustainable conservation finance. Budget: 5,420,837  
Additionally, this project will strengthen the livelihoods of landless and or the most vulnerable households, 
who are often most at risk of unsustainable use of their farmlands, protected areas and resources within 
protective forests. Erosion control measu res and on -farm tree cover will be increased across the CND, 
helping reduce the risk of crop failure from extreme events like landslides, reduce land and water degradation 
caused by soil erosion, and increase provision of valuable products like wood fuel. To decrease pressure on 
forests for resource extraction, existing successful programs distributing improved cookstoves will be 
dramatically scaled up. Community members will be trained in and provided technical assistance for SLM 
practices, establishment, and management protective forests. Both cooperatives, individuals, participating 
financial institutions (PFIs), and value chain actors/small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) will benefit from 
capacity -building to improve their business skills and access to finance, and to strengthen value chains 
(including beekeeping, ecotourism, agri value chains, and cookstoves), including the construction of 
processing facilities and marketing materials. Vocational training schools and local youth cooperatives will 
be sup ported to produce, test, and distribute Tier 2 cookstoves.  Budget: 13,893,987


---
*Page 522*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
(d) EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential  
Adaptation Impact – This Project is designed to restore, sustain and expand critical forest ecosystem 
functions in the CND. More specifically, the project will protect, restore and expand natural forest in and 
around the core national parks; consolidate and expand some smalle r but critical "stepping stones" of 
remaining natural habitat between these national parks (mainly small forest patches and wetlands/ riparian 
areas); improve the landscape linkage function of key high altitude between the protected areas, while at 
the sam e time securing ecosystem services through afforestation and improved native species mix for 
plantation forests on steep slopes; silvopastoral interventions on cultivated pasture; and agroforestry 
interventions in regenerative agricultural areas. These int erventions will reduce erosion, decrease loss of 
soil organic matter, and thus increase the water infiltration rate, which increases water recharge which will 
enhance the resilience of forest ecosystems and smallholder farmers to climate change. The establ ishment 
of ecological connectivity between fragmented forests will promote landscape heterogeneity and support 
species migration to more favorable conditions within this human modified landscape and as a result help 
build the resilience of biodiversity to climate impacts. Increasing the capacity for species movement across 
these islands of forest habitat, will improve the adaptive capacity of multiple species that serve as important 
seed dispersers and insure the long -term viability of forests.  
Project interventions will include 10,000 ha of land (including both forest and silvopastoral sites) under 
improved, climate -resilient management; and improve agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of on -farm 
plantations, directly benefiting 1,254,242 people ( 654,404 women) with more climate resilient livelihoods 
from reduced exposure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and more knowledge on climate risks, value of 
forests and forests ecosystems, climate adaptation options, access to indigenous and agrofores try quality 
materials and improved ecosystem services.  
The Project will provide direct benefits to increase the climate resilience of more than 1.5 million of the most 
vulnerable residents of the CND, including increased adaptive capacity through redu ced exposure to flash 
floods, landslides, and soil erosion which will also increase their crop productivity and livelihoods (direct 
beneficiaries 52.2% female). Indirectly, 2,464,097 beneficiaries in the CND will receive co -benefits from 
improved and more sustained ecosystem services, including decreased sedimentation leading to improved 
water quality downstream and increased hydropower generation. This helps Rwanda produce cleaner 
hydropower energy at a lower cost, making it preferable to other more detrim ental energy sources. The 
project will also indirectly benefit 9,260,745 people and create approximately 24,212 job opportunities in 
forest -dependent communities.  
The Project will contribute altogether to the restoration of 5,000 ha of intact forest, 2 ,500 ha of protective 
forests and 3,346 ha of smallholder farmland, 1000 ha of pastures and 1,500 ha of riparian linkages. Overall, 
275,617 ha of the landscape could potentially be positively impacted by the project as land use planning, 
improved natural f orest management, improved buffer management and a stronger agroforestry sector 
would all contribute to improved outcomes beyond the specific areas directly targeted for restoration or 
improved management by the project. In particular, stronger capacity fo r land use planning across the CND 
and hence improved protection of key areas (e.g. steep slopes, riparian areas and protected area buffers) 
has strong potential to deliver significant mitigation benefits at a landscape rather than a site level. Although 
the project is focused on the priority landscapes covering 275,617 ha, it is likely that benefits due to increased 
adaptive capacity (achieved through improved land use planning and management of key features through


---
*Page 523*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 82 
  
 reduced exposure to flash floods, landsl ides, and soil erosion) could feasibly extend across the full 700,000 
ha CND.  
Additional adaptation benefits will include the training of 52,589 community members in forest management 
and restoration for climate resilience, which will be linked with on going restoration employment opportunities 
through other GoR and private sector projects; the strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems to 
promote climate resilience; and targeted capacity building for certain government institutions and minist ries 
in forest monitoring, remote sensing, spatial planning, and analysis. These beneficiaries will include MoE, 
REMA, RDB, MINAGRI, and the University of Rwanda.  
Complementary activities will address key drivers of deforestation while creating alterna tive livelihood 
pathways for youth and women through ecotourism and income -generating, climate -resilient crops, as well 
as strengthening supportive financial services.  
     Mitigation Impact – The Project will generate mitigation benefits by delivering sequestration of 
approximately       224,871  t CO 2-eq during the 5 -year Project period, which is about       0.8% of the 28.2M t 
CO 2 reduction targeted by Rwanda’s vision 2050.  
● 5,000 ha of critical intact natural forests will be under impr oved management for climate resilience, 
accounting for an estimated total of      596,116 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 1,000 ha of pasture  lands with increased coverage of native trees to secure reasonable landscape 
connectivity for forest species, accounti ng for an estimated total of      4,543 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 1,500 ha of riparian lands will be afforested which will contribute significantly to overall landscape 
connectivity, sequestering 110,138  t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● 2,500 ha of protective fore sts and plantations will be established on slopes >55%, focusing on areas 
not currently planted in crops, accounting for an estimated total of 193,472  t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● Erosion control and agroforestry practices will be implemented over 3,346  ha of smallholder 
farmland, sequestering      129,006 t CO 2-eq over 20 years.  
● Improved energy efficient stoves will be adopted by 8,500 households, securing       51,017 t CO 2-eq 
of avoided emissions over 20 years.  
Overall, there is potential for a significant contribution to GCF1 Core Indicator 4, hectares of natural resource 
areas brought under low emission or climate resilient practices. Conservatively, an area of 275,617 ha of 
the landscape could potentially be positively impacted by the project as land use planning, improved natural 
forest management, improved buffer management and a stronger agroforestry sector would all contribute 
to improved outcomes beyond the specific areas directly targeted for restoration or improved management 
by the proj ect. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
As described in Section B1, the Project provides a profound opportunity to implement new mechanisms of 
land-use planning and management that are based on consideration of the CND as a landscape, consisting 
of an inter-dependent mosaic of forests and farms, the management of each determining the health of the 
whole. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination across both geographic and sectoral boundaries, 
while mainstreaming climate risks into management plan ning represents a fundamental paradigm shift for 
land-use planning and management in Rwan da. This approach to land -use planning and management is 
entirely new for Rwanda and is intended to maintain and recover the ecosystem services that are essential 
to the resilience of smallholder farming communities within the region and to the globally significant and


---
*Page 524*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 83 
  
 unique biodiversity in this part of Rwanda. This represents a reversal of the previous negative feedback loop 
of ecosystem degradation to a more positive , climate -resilient system.  
Potential for scaling -up spatial planning and replication. Spatial planning is recognized by the IPCC, 
the EU and others as playing a key role in climate change adaptation and climate resilient development, but 
to date development planning in Rwanda has largely been based on tabular data, rather than on spatial 
planning. Adoption of spatial planning across ministries and on national regional and local levels, represents 
a significant paradigm shift for Rwanda. Piecemeal decisions and an ad hoc assemblage of isolated sector -
by-sector projects will be replaced with a holistic, climate -smart, evidence -based approach to planning and 
development – enabling systematic, ecosystem -based, multi -sector analysis of land use tradeoff s. The 
Project will therefore establish a new inter -agency and local -national model and capacities for holistic 
planning and implementation – one that can be scaled up for use elsewhere in Rwanda and beyond. This 
will enable better -informed planning decisi ons, the identification and valuation of nature -based solutions to 
climate adaptation and mitigation, and overall will foster climate resilient development pathways in the CND 
and nationwide. Communication and collaboration with complementary GCF and other  projects in Rwanda 
will accelerate this process.  
Potential for knowledge and learning. Component 1 will invest in new technologies and climate -smart 
knowledge to improve national and district planning, scenario analysis and monitoring capacities. In doing 
so, new mechanisms of coordination and collaboration will be established, and shared ac ross agencies. 
Component 2 will invest in best practices in forest management and restoration – some of which will require 
learning beyond the existing science of indigenous tree propagation and restoration (particularly in re -
establishing rain forest habi tat, establishing protective forests on slopes of >55%, and enriching farms with 
indigenous tree species). Component 3 will focus on processes to identify and pilot value -chain products 
(on-farm and off -farm) not yet in practice. All approaches will includ e the participation of local farmers, 
women, and youth to contribute to collective learning processes involving national and local government 
and vulnerable communities. Knowledge generated – and the processes by which it is generated – will be 
shared acro ss the region. The project is based on collective learning, knowledge generation and 
dissemination at community, landscape and national levels. A focus on knowledge management through 
demonstrations, monitoring, and evaluation across the project activities  will inform the implementation of 
current and future adaptation efforts.   
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment. Strengthening the Task Force in Component 
1 will ensure a single, first point of contact for all sectors’ planning developm ent and investments in the CND 
and will ensure that planning for climate resilience is addressed. By establishing a mechanism for 
coordination and harmonization, it will radically improve current conditions for public and private 
interventions and will est ablish partnerships and collaborations that live beyond this Project. Also 
importantly, promotion of sustainable financing for each component will help to assure that initiatives will 
either be self -sustaining or have solid plans for continued financial su pport.  
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies. The Project will finance the development of the 
Integrated Land -use Plan  which will be adopted by all ten CND districts as a framework for seeking 
synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity protections, reconciling land use conflicts 
that arise, and guiding development decisions and climate change adaptation. It will update the National 
Land Use Master Plan, ensuring it incorporates climate resiliency, and is accurate and rel evant to local 
contexts. As development of an Integrated Land -use Planning approach helps better reconcile cross -
sectoral tradeoffs and improve climate adaptation planning in the CND, this approach will prove a successful 
model for application to other reg ions of Rwanda and to other forest/farming landscapes beyond. In addition,


---
*Page 525*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 84 
  
 revising 2 NP management plans to include climate concerns will serve as a model for the remaining parks 
of Rwanda, as well as for the East African region.  
D.3. Sustainable develop ment (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed Project is aligned with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
including SDGs 5, 13 and 15 and will contribute to the achievement of the SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10. The 
Project will promote an ecosystem -based approach to forest protection, restoration, and rehabilitation that 
includes:  
● Reduction of erosion, sedimentation, and landslide risk as a result of restoration of degraded lands;  
● Increased number of native trees on farms with improved agroforestry systems, improving biological 
connectivity;  
● Increased carbon sequestration potential of plants and soils. While the primary objective of the 
Project is adaptation, the Project will also produce mitigation benefits of      204,079 t CO 2-eq during 
the 5 -year implementation period, and      1,033,275 t CO 2-eq over the 20 -year Project lifetime.  
● Reduced GHG emissions through more fuel efficient cookstove technologies, yielding cumulative 
savings of approximately      51,017 t CO 2-eq during the 20 -year Project lifetime.  
The Project will enable the transition to more climate resilient and product ive livelihood models and empower 
the rural poor, significantly reducing impacts from extreme weather events and increasing their potential for 
improved wellbeing. Social benefits will include:  
● Raised awareness about climate change effects and adaptation i n 1,253,252  people living in the 
CND (at least 52.2% representing women).  
● Capacity building of ~52,589 people (at least 50% women), in a wide range of topics aimed at 
increasing ecosystem and social resilience.  
● Create significant social capital through co -designing and co -managing a range of adaptation 
strategies, indirectly promoting social cohesiveness among CND villages through joint saving and 
lending systems.  
● Reduced inequality and poverty through increased financial inclusion and improved e conomic 
opportunities — especially for women, youth and historically marginalized groups.  
● Forest and landscape restoration in the CND will have several economic co -benefits for vulnerable 
communities, including:  
● Soil erosion control measures, protective f orests on public lands and agroforestry on private lands, 
will increase agricultural productivity and associated income.  
● The Project will create direct and indirect employment opportunities, benefiting approximately 24,212 
households and stimulate the loca l economy.  
● Leveraging private capital to invest in the value chains including cookstoves in the CND. The project 
will create important social and environmental benefits. However, the project will also have removed 
a number of risks (notably carbon risk) th at worry more traditional (social -impact or sustainability) 
investors. As a result, the venture becomes an attractive investment for private capital interested in 
a “triple bottom line”, allowing the business to develop sustainably and scale to more CND ar eas. 
During project implementation we will therefore produce a bankable business plan that details the 
activities and resources required for expanding further.


---
*Page 526*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 85 
  
 The Project will result in positive outcomes around access to resources, improved livelihoods, a nd income 
generation opportunity and capacity for women. With support from a dedicated Gender Specialist, the Project 
will engage women in project planning, investment and decision making. With opportunities to generate 
additional income, women, who tradit ionally are already further vested in investing in their families, will be 
more able to respond to incentives that address their families’ basic needs, such as better health and 
nutrition, linking to agriculture and food security improvements. The project will also get support from NGOs 
that engage men in programming and discussions to increase their participation in household and parental 
responsibilities and gain greater awareness of the importance of women’s fair access and control of 
resources, includin g income. Women will benefit from training and educational activities, leadership, 
entrepreneurship and decision making. Annex 8, which will be further elaborated on at project onset, 
provides more information on gender -sensitive impacts.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  
Despite Rwanda’s solid economic progress since 2000, poverty remains widespread and pervasive. Overall, 
38.2% of the population lives in poverty and 16% in extreme poverty119. Women are more affected by poverty 
than men, with 47% of female -headed households living in poverty compared with 44.9% of all households. 
Rural households are more than twice as likely to be in poverty/extreme poverty than urban households. 
Districts of  the Western and Southern Provinces in the CND region have the highest rates of poverty and 
extreme poverty in the country.  
Most rural households are smallholder subsistence farmers and, because of high population density, high 
relief terrain and dependen ce on rain fed agriculture, the residents of the CND are highly vulnerable to 
climate change. These risks include exposure to flash floods120, landslides121 and soil erosion122. During 
stakeholder consultations, communities indicated several socio -economic ch anges stemming from changing 
climate conditions. Notably, the longer dry season and unpredictable rains123 have reduced agricultural yield 
significantly, leading to more widespread malnutrition and extreme poverty, and farmers can barely meet 
their own fami lies’ needs124. In particular, women, youth, and historically marginalized people are feeling the 
impacts. As arable land is increasingly constrained, youth and historically marginalized people have few 
opportunities and are more focused on survival and sho rt-term gains at the expense of education and 
sustainable livelihood development (see Annexes 6 and 8 for more detail).  
As a result, the GoR has invested significantly in developing an enabling policy and institutional framework 
for a more climate -resilien t development pathway. Yet, while adaptation is a top priority, Rwanda is classified 
by the U.N. as a LDC and lacks sufficient public financial resources to implement its climate change and 
resilient green development objectives.  Currently there are no alt ernative funding options of the scale needed 
to secure Rwanda’s priority forests to reduce vulnerability of rural communities to climate risks. The GoR 
also recognises that a piecemeal approach to decision making has exacerbated competition over scarce 
land resources and reduced the adaptive capacity of both ecosystems and rural populations. However, many 
 
119  World Bank, 2020. Poverty and Equity Brief: Rwanda.  
120  Karamage, F., et al., 2017 . Modeling Rainfall -Runoff Response to Land Use and Land Cover Change in Rwanda 
(1990 –2016) . Water 2017, 9(2), 14.  
121  Uwihirwe, J., et al., 2020 . Landslide precipitation thresholds in Rwanda . Landslides.  
122  World Bank, 2019.  Rwanda Systematic Country Diagnostic.  
123  World Bank; CIAT. 2015. Climate -Smart Agriculture in Rwanda.  CSA Country Profiles for Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America and the Caribbean Series. Washington D.C.: The World Bank Group.  
124  Clay N., King B., 2019. Smal lholders' uneven capacities to adapt to climate change amid Africa's 'green 
revolution': Case study of Rwanda's crop intensification program . World Dev.


---
*Page 527*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 86 
  
 agencies operate within siloed environments, focusing on limited scopes framed by individual performance 
plans, and close coordination is often cited as a  key recommendation toward strengthening climate change 
adaptation measures125.  
Additionally, district government staff and community members have limited technical understanding or 
awareness of the complex interactions between forest structure and functions, climate change, and the 
provision of ecosystem services. Accurate measurement of forest cover and forest type is notoriously difficult 
in high relief terrain, such as in the CND126. Lack of access to and capacity to apply new methods for 
classify ing and monitoring forest change has limited forest monitoring in Rwanda127. Consequently, 
government forest data has historically been limited in scope and infrequently updated, and regional/global 
maps are too inaccurate to be of use. Capacity building ar ound the technologies and processes to make 
landscape -scale planning decisions is crucial to the success of Rwanda’s climate -resilient development 
pathway.  
D.5. Country ownership  
The proposed Project is closely aligned with the NAP’s adaptation priorities: 1) promotion of non -agricultural 
income generating activities, 2) introduction of species resistant to environmental conditions, and 3) 
development of firewood alternative source s of energy. It is also aligned with several priorities identified in 
the 2020 NDC: promotion of afforestation/reforestation, improvement of forest management, integrated 
approach to planning and monitoring for sustainable land management, development of a  harmonized and 
integrated spatial data management system for sustainable land use management. The Project will support 
implementation of the Green Growth and Climate Resilient Strategy and the Rwanda National Strategy for 
Transformation –NST1 (2017 -2022) a nd is aligned with the goals of the Rwanda National Forestry Policy 
2018, the Forest Sector Strategic Plan 2017 -2022, the Strategic Plan for the Environment and Natural 
Resources Sector (2018 -2024), and National Forest Management Plan 2017 -2026, reflecting  the 
government’s intentions to address climate change impacts and mitigation targets by improving forest 
management. It is also aligned with the national Biomass Energy Strategy (BEST) 2020 which aims to 
ensure a more sustainable biomass supply and combus tion technologies for homes and small enterprises. 
This Project aligns with the forthcoming GCF country program which prioritizes forest management through 
restoration and protection of natural forests, afforestation and agroforestry, as well as distributi on of high -
quality forestation inputs and capacity development.  
While this Project proposal to GCF focuses on a different geographic area - with specific adaptation needs 
through land restoration, development of markets and finance mechanism, as well as s upport to 
mainstreaming climate change into land use planning - the early and ongoing lessons from the experiences 
from existing GCF -funded projects, “Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern 
Rwanda''128 and “Transforming Eastern Pr ovince through adaptation” (TREPA)129 will be applied during the 
 
125   Bagstad, K.J., 2019 . Towards ecosystem accounts for Rwanda: Tracking 25 years of change in flows a nd 
potential supply of ecosystem services.  British Ecological Society.  
126  Arakwiye, B., et al, 2021. Thirty years of forest -cover change in Western Rwanda during periods of wars and 
environmental policy shifts.  Regional Environmental Change 21(2).  
127  Hero ld, M., Schiller, F., 2009. An assessment of national forest monitoring capabilities in tropical non -Annex I 
countries: Recommendations for capacity building. Global Observation of Forest and Land Cover Dynamics Land Cover 
Project Office.  
128  Rwanda Ministr y of Environment, 2018. FP073: Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in 
Northern Rwanda . Green Climate Fund.  
129  International Union for Conservation of Nature, 2021. FP167: Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation.  
Green Climate Fu nd.


---
*Page 528*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 87 
  
 implementation of this Project in the Congo Nile Divide Landscape.  
MoE is responsible for ensuring sustainable management of natural resources and for the development of 
policies, strategies,  regulations, and mobilizing resources for the development of the sector. The MoE 
managed USD 10 million from the Adaptation Fund to implement the Reducing Vulnerability to Climate 
Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based Adaptation Programme130 and has overseen a 
number of other climate projects including: an early warning system project (funded by LDCF), the 
Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and Conservation (LAFREC), and the “Building resilience of 
communities living in degraded forests,  savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem 
management approach” programme (funded by LDCF)131. The OECD rated Rwanda as one of the countries 
that uses aid most effectively132, and Rwanda is on course to achieve the SDGs. The GoR has demonstrated 
comprehensive country ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project. The national designated 
authority (NDA) is the core interface between a country and the GCF and is mandated to align GCF -
supported activities with strategic national objective s and priorities. The NDA coordinates with AEs on 
proposal development and completes a no -objection letter after it is determined that the proposal is aligned 
with the national priorities. This Project was initiated by the MoE and supported by the NDA, Rwa nda 
Environment Management Authority, due to the high climate sensitivity of the CND.  
Government agencies such as Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA), Rwanda Development Board (RDB), 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) and National Land Use Authorit y (NLA) will maintain 
strong ownership and support activities under component 1 and 2 as aligned with their mandates and the 
aforementioned plans and strategies.   
To better understand the interests of stakeholders and potential impacts of the Project, and  as preparation 
to design future engagement strategies, a comprehensive, gender -responsive, culturally sensitive, non -
discriminatory, and inclusive stakeholder analysis was undertaken and is incorporated into the Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (Annex 7).  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
Financing and concessional: The financial instrument chosen for this Project is grant financing of USD 
39.06 million which constitutes roughly 78% of the total Project’s estimated cost. The relatively high level of 
conce ssionality reflects the public good character of the investm ents to be made by the Project, Rwanda’s 
status as an LDC133 and its high vulnerability to climate change134. Furthermore, it must be highlighted that 
most project expenditures relate to creating pu blic goods through forest and landscape restoration or 
capacity -building of public institutions. These interventions are primarily non -income -generating; hence very 
hard to attract private sector investment. Attracting the private sector for public goods i nvestments remains 
challenging in the context of many countries worldwide, including Rwanda.  
Addressing low private sector investment in the forestry sector . One of the major reasons for lack of 
private -sector investment in Rwanda’s Forestry Sector is tha t most stands are too small to sustain an 
 
130  Adaptation Fund, 2014. Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community 
Based Adaptation. Link. 
131  UNEP, 2016. Building resilience of communities living in degraded forests, savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda 
through an ecosystem management approach . 
132 Newfarmer , R., et al., 2013. Managing Aid for Trade and Development Results: Rwanda Case Study . OECD.  
133  United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2021. Least Developed Country Category: Rwanda 
Profile.  
134  World Bank, 2021. Rwanda . Climate Change Kn owledge Portal.


---
*Page 529*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 88 
  
 economically viable operation (see the Forest Sector Strategic Plan). By restoring smallholder protective 
forest plantations and organizing them into Private Forest Management Units (PFMUs), this Project will 
assis t with creation of units that are economically attractive to private investors, helping to facilitate future 
private investment if landowners desire it. However, no private investors will be subsidized by the Project, 
and ownership of PFMUs will remain wit h the state/district governments and smallholders’ cooperatives who 
own forest plantations. RFA in collaboration with RCA and the district government directly implement 
organization of the cooperatives and conflicts in the cooperatives are managed in accor dance with internal 
rules and regulation governing each cooperative overseen by the Rwanda Cooperative Agency in case of 
escalated conflicts but specifically in the cooperatives that will be benefiting under this project, RFA and 
District government will a lso intervene in conflict settlement.  
No excess subsidy will be provided to the private sector, and no private sector investors will be crowded out 
by these investments. Wherever these are required for institutional and capacity support for market 
development and crowding in for private invest ments these are undertaken with concessionality to 
community in mind. For example, the subsidy/microcredit schemes to facilitate the adoption of efficient 
cookstoves are undertaken with minimum concessionality. The value chain development for other poten tial 
revenue generating streams such as honey undertaken under output 3.2 requires institutional and capacity 
support funded by GCF grant. In the case of ecotourism for tea plantations, no project concessionally  is 
planned and complete crowding in from the  private sector is envisaged. The value chain development of 
beekeeping is 100% funded by GCF grants so that an enabling environment can be created, and the project 
can overcome affordability challenges through developing a system such as community co -guarantee, 
overcome lack of private capital structure and insufficient markets.  Because of above mentioned reasons 
no private sector investors are expected to be crowded out by project investments.  
GCF grant as a suitable financing instrument. The GCF grant c an help create the enabling environment 
for the future engagement of the private sector in similar projects. The showcasing of potential revenue -
generating ways, thanks to the concessional GCF financing, may help invigorate the potential for future 
investm ents in this sector, which in turn might result in a multiplier effect leading to a higher degree of 
development impact.  
Results of the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA). Following the GCF guidelines for developing the 
Annex 3 package, the EFA was prep ared to assess the economic rationale for the proposed interventions. 
Consequently, four representative interventions were appraised in the EFA: (i). agroforestry, (ii). protective 
forests (iii). fuel -efficient cookstoves, (iv). silvo -pastoralism. Best pra ctices in appraisal for public sector 
projects have been followed. T he financial analysis for each intervention was calculated from the private 
perspective using a discount rate of 15.44% which was the lending rate of Rwanda Central Bank. For the 
three mod eled interventions (see table below) the financial NPV is positive and financial IRR is higher than 
discount rate signifying that project activities are profitable. The GCF support will result in a positive financial 
return for farmers or farmers and priva te actors over a 20 -year period and will help overcome high up -front 
investment costs during the project duration.  
Financial analysis (US$)  Agroforestry  Protective Forest  Silvopasture  
FNPV  $34,483,676  $2,980,381  $310,901  
FIRR  42% 25% 35% 
Aggregate financial analysis of with project (WP) interventions


---
*Page 530*
---

D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 89 
  
  
 
The obtained ex -ante aggregate economic net present values (ENPVs) for these interventions over the 20 
years’ timeframe and at a 13% economic discount rate range between USD      0.97million and USD      78.93 
million, with economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) between      49% and 72% (see table below).  
Economic 
analysis (US$)  Agroforestry  Protective Forest  Energy efficient 
cookstoves  Silvopasture  
ENPV  $58,934,340  
      $30,218,468  $10,585,674.50  
      $966,331  
      
EIRR  49     % 72% N/A 51     % 
Aggregate financial analysis of with project (WP) interventions135 
The sensitivity analysis that was carried out suggests that obtained results are relatively insensitive to 
increases in costs or decreases in benefits offering the robustness of obtained results. Therefore, the 
economic sustainability of the Project is likely, and the Project shows the economic rationale for 
implem entation as benefits are likely to outweigh the costs.   
Best Practices Forest Restoration/Tree Planting : The Project will use Rwanda’s best practice guidelines for 
tree nursery establishment, tree planting and tree management136. For assisted natural regeneration, 
methods developed and proven through multi -year research in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura National 
Parks will be used137. Forest Monitoring: The Project will utilize multiple contemporary methods for monitoring 
the success  of project interventions and forest health. Forest plantations will be mapped and monitored using 
the Rwandan government's newly developed Forest Monitoring and Evaluation Software (FMES)138, 
specifically developed for this purpose. The Project will develo p a modern indigenous forest monitoring 
system, utilize the most high -resolution datasets currently available (<3m) and take advantage of modern 
remote -sensing advances including cloud computing and machine learning. Cost effective replication for 
forest r estoration and climate resilience throughout Africa and beyond can be anticipated.  
 
 
135 No financial analyses for cookstoves intervention was warranted as energy efficient cookstoves are non -
income generating intervention with expectation of no financial cash inflows. Only economic analyses was 
conducted for cookstoves.  
136  Unique Ltd. & RNRA. 2015. Tree plantation establishment and management manual for Rwanda. Kigali, Rwanda 
137  Masozera, A.B., 2004. Regeneration of Burned Forested Areas With Periodic Removal of Pteridium aquilinum. 
Wildlife Conservation Society Rwanda.  
138  Rwanda Forest Authority, Enabel, 2021. Technical guidelines on the use of the Forest Monitoring & Evaluation 
System - FMES. Kigali.


---
*Page 531*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
  
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Scale  Rwanda's natural forests are 
extremely depleted and degraded. 
While overall forest cover has 
increased since the 1980s, this is 
primarily made up of exotic 
monocultures, which have very low 
potential to provide ecosystem 
services and adaptation benefits. 
There are small -scale efforts to 
establish/restore native forests and 
increase overall forest resilience, 
but scaling these efforts is 
hampered by a limited supply of 
indigenous seedlings.  Low Paradigm shift would involve a move away from widespread 
planting of exotic species for fuelwood, as well as improved 
erosion control measures on farmland and use of improved 
cookstoves, both of which will reduce pressure on Rwanda’s 
forests. As the be nefits of planting indigenous trees become 
more widely known, behavior changes in non -targeted 
communities are likely to be catalyzed.  The project is expected to bring 144,058 ha 
of land under climate -resilient 
management. This would represent a 
substantial step towards paradigm shift on 
increased resilience of forests and 
vulnerable communities, even before any 
replication effects, which  will likely be 
catalyzed by project activities focusing on 
training, capacity building, and peer - to-
peer knowledge exchange. The project will 
also deliver direct carbon reductions of  
1,204,448 t CO 2-eq over 20 years, and 
potentially more through increas ed 
institutional capacity to mainstream climate 
adaptation and improve land -use planning.  
Replicability  There are a small number of 
interventions occurring across 
Rwanda focused on improving 
resilience of vulnerable 
communities through forest 
restoration, agroforestry, livelihood 
diversification and clean cooking 
technologies. However, many 
interventions foc us on exotic 
species which have very low 
potential to provide ecosystem 
services and adaptation benefits.  Medium  If increasing the extent and integrity of natural forests and 
improving capacity for climate -responsive land management can 
increase climate r esilience of vulnerable communities in the 
CND, then the solution could be replicated throughout Rwanda 
and across East Africa. Further, if incorporating indigenous 
species into forest restoration and agroforestry can provide a 
similar/greater range of ada ptation benefits compared to exotic 
species, and also avoid the drawbacks of exotic monocultures, 
then the solution could be expanded nationally. If development of 
an Integrated land use planning approach helps better reconcile 
cross -sectoral tradeoffs and  improve climate adaptation planning The project will invest in strengthening 
institutional capacity to promote climate 
resilience, directly increase the resilience of 
ecosystems and co mmunity livelihoods, 
and identify options for use of indigenous 
species in forest restoration and 
agroforestry, in order to better contribute to 
climate -resilient livelihoods. These topics 
have received little attention to date in 
Rwanda, and lessons learn ed will inform 
efforts to improve climate resilience across 
Rwanda and East Africa.


---
*Page 532*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 in the CND, this approach could be applied to other regions of 
Rwanda.  
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description)  How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description)  Description  Rating  
Sustainability  The GoR has invested in 
developing policies and institutional 
frameworks for a more climate -
resilient development pathway. 
However, domestic funding to 
implement these policies remains 
lacking, and as yet they have not 
translated to wide -scale 
improvements to climate resilience. 
Changes in behavioral norms have 
been limited, and overall uptake of 
climate adaptation solutions is poor.  Low Paradigm shift would see Rwanda demonstrate that pursuing 
development goals need not come at the cost of extensive 
environmental degradation. Climate -responsive Forest and 
landscape management will be standard, and government 
programmes will focus on incre asing the resilience of forest 
ecosystems and enhancing their ecosystem services. Behavior 
change across the CND would support this, as communities 
recognise, value, and protect the benefits provided by forests.  The project will work closely with 
governme nt and communities to build 
capacity to mainstream climate adaptation 
into forest and land -use planning and 
management. The project will facilitate and 
demonstrate the benefits of climate -resilient 
agricultural practices, forest management, 
and alternative  livelihoods, raising 
awareness within and outside target 
communities.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Mitigation Results 
Area 4: Forests and 
land use  
 Core Indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or removed/ 
sequestered  Greenhouse gas emission 
assessment  0 tonnes of CO 2      107,686 
tCO 2-eq       
224,871 tCO 2-eq 
(5-year 
implementation 
period)  
 
      
1,084,291 tCO 2-
eq 
(20-year lifespan 
period)  Government priorities 
remain supportive of long -
term forest restoration and 
afforestation plans.  
Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires and landslides in target  
areas  
The economic, social and 
political context in the 
country and project areas 
remain stable.


---
*Page 533*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Adaptation Results 
Area 1: Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Core Indicator 2: Direct 
and indirect beneficiaries 
reached  Annual Agricultural 
Survey139 
National census  
Project Baseline and 
Completion Reports, 
including documentation of 
workers contracted for 
reforestation/afforestation 
work, farmers adopting 
agroforestry activities, good 
silvo-pastoral practices, 
restoration of riparian 
linkages, signed MoUs for 
Private Forest Management 
Units, and households 
receiving improved 
cookstoves  Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0 Direct 
beneficiaries: 
95,873 (50,046) 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  Direct 
beneficiaries:  
108,277 (56,5 21 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  
2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  Government priorities 
remain focused on long term 
forest restoration and 
afforestation plans  
Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires and landslides in target 
areas  
Rural l andowners agree to 
adoption of agroforestry and 
reforestation activities  
Adaptation Results 
Area 1: Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Supplementary Indicator 
2.1: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate -resilient livelihood 
options  Project Baseline and 
Completion Reports, 
including documentation of 
beekeepers  using modern 
hives, farmers at different 
levels of value chains, 
people employed in 
ecotourism, have access to Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0 Direct 
beneficiaries:  
26,160 (13,656 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:  Direct 
beneficiaries:  
52,319 (27,311 
females)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries:   
 
 
 
139  The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda conducts the Agricultural Survey yearly. Available at:  
https://www.stati stics.gov.rw/statistical -publications/subject/agriculture -and-environment


---
*Page 534*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 finance for other climate -
resilient livelihood options  2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  2,809,381 
(1,466,497 
females)  
 
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target   
 
Assumptions / Note  Mid-term  Final  
Adaptation Results 
Area 4: Ecosystems 
and ecosystem services  Core Indicator 4:  Hectares 
of natural resource areas 
brought under improved 
low emission and/or 
climate -resilient 
management practices  Updated National Park 
Management Plans 
complete (ha per park)  
Forest cover statistics from 
Forest Monitoring and 
Evaluation System (FMES)  
GIS Data/Remote Sensing  
Ranger Based Monitoring 
data from PAs  
Vigilance Committees 
monitoring data  No increase in 
climate -resilient 
management 
practices (o)   42,558 ha of 
land brought 
under climate -
resilient 
management  130,104 140      
ha of land 
brought under 
climate -resilient 
management  Absence of major natural 
disasters including forest 
fires in target areas  
 
 
Adaptation Results 
Area 2:  Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary Indicator 
2.2: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security   Annual Agricultural Survey  
Gender responsive 
Comprehensive Food 
Security and Vulnerability 
and Nutrition Analysis 
Survey (CFSVA)141 TBD Direct 
beneficiaries :0 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 0  Direct 
beneficiaries : 
1,598,536 
(52.2% female)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
2,464,097 
(52.2% female)  Absence of extreme natural 
disasters and economic 
shocks affecting yields and 
household economy; 
migration patterns do not 
significantly affect the 
number and status of 
households.  
 
 
140 130,104 ha refer to 121,758 ha of all core PAs and 8,346 ha restored areas outside PAs  
141 The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda conducts the CFSVA every 3 years.


---
*Page 535*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 The level of beneficiary of this project are individual households, - who can be in a cooperative or a business community group - who will 
participate directly in the project, and thus benefit from its implementation. Beneficiaries include all people who own the l and where activities will 
take place and/or those who will be employed by the project (except EE staff, consultants and implementat ion and contractual organizations). 
Dependents of household that directly benefit from the project are also considered as direct beneficiaries and were calculate d based on 4.2 
average household size142 and 0.37143 average land size in the CNDL.  
Adaptation R esults Area 1, Core Indicator 2 direct beneficiaries are beneficiaries of activities 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 3.1.1, 1.1.2.  
Adaptation Results Area 1, Supplementary Indicator 2.1 direct beneficiaries of activity 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.4 (excluding 8, 500  beneficiaries of  
cookstoves) and 3.3.2  
Adaptation Results Area 2 Supplementary Indicator 2.2 direct beneficiaries are the total population in landscape implementati on sectors of this 
project.  
Indirect beneficiaries broadly refer to all other human populations living with in the CNDL districts. More details on calculations are provided in 
annex 23.  
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Core 
Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 
5: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory 
frameworks for 
low-emission 
and climate -The GoR is committed to developing an 
enabling policy and institutional 
framework for a more climate -resilient 
development pathway, as evidenced by 
the large number of government policies 
and strategies focus ed on improving 
climate mitigation and adaptation. 
However, climate change is not being 
comprehensively considered by all 
sectors, cross -sectoral planning is rare, 
and new institutions are needed to low An integrated planning approach 
is used to reconcile cross -sectoral 
tradeoffs while explicitly 
considering climate resilience 
actions. New institutions have 
permanent capacity in place to 
ensure that spatial data on 
climate, forests and ecosystem 
services is i ncorporated into land 
planning and management.  The project will facilitate development of an 
integrated land use plan for the CND which 
will reconcile the cross -sectoral (e.g., tourism, 
environment, forestry, food production, cash 
crops for export) trade -offs necessary to 
sustain forest ecosystem functions, deliver 
critical ecosystem services and improve 
community livelihoods.  
 National 
level (one 
country)  
 
142  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR); The Fifth Rwanda Population and Housing Census, Main Indicators Report, Februa ry 2023  
143  National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Agricultural Household Survey 2020 report, December 2021


---
*Page 536*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 resilient 
development 
pathways in a 
country -driven 
manner  provide relevant spatial data to inform 
planning  The project will facilitate the development and 
adoption of an integrated landscape level 
planning taskforce, in line with t he JADF to 
bring the relevant stakeholders (ministries 
and their agencies, districts, private sector 
and civil society organizations) on board, to 
strengthen inter -sectoral collaboration on the 
planning and implementation of the FLR 
plans. The project will  also support capacity 
development of relevant technical staff 
working on FLR and land use planning (from 
central government agencies, district 
government, and NGOs) and will assist the 
GoR in developing a dedicated SPU within an 
appropriate ministry to  provide the technical 
expertise needed to process and integrate 
spatial planning into decision -making within 
and across sectors.  
 
 
Core 
Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 
6: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or 
transfer, and 
innovation  Climate -resilient development in 
Rwanda is hampered by a lack of 
modern technological advances, both in 
terms of generating information required 
for land -use management and decision 
making, and in deploying climate -
resilient practices and technology. 
Rwand a has only recently developed a 
system to monitor plantation forests and 
lacks a robust system to monitor 
indigenous forests. Similarly, agricultural 
and forest management techniques are 
generally rudimentary, and most rural low The GoR has an innovative, 
scientifically credible system for 
monitoring indigenous forest 
cover and condition, as well as 
the technical capacity for 
incorporating spatial data into 
land-use management. Improved 
agricul tural practices (e.g. 
terracing, modern beehives) are 
widespread, and locally produced 
improved cookstoves are in use 
by most households.  The project will design and finance the 
establishment of a new indigenous forest 
monitoring system for Rwanda. The project 
will also establish improved agricultural 
practices across 3,346 ha, as well as 
increasing use of modern beehives to reduce 
forest fi re risk. Finally, the project will upskill 
technical colleges to enable local production 
and distribution of improved cookstoves to 
8,500 households.  National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 537*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 communities in the CND do not u se 
modern cooking technologies.  
Core Indicator 
8: Degree to 
which GCF 
investments 
contribute to 
effective 
knowledge 
generation and 
learning 
processes, and 
use of good 
practices, 
methodologies 
and standards.  While GoR recognizes the need for 
developing an enabling policy and 
institutional framework for a more 
climate -resilient development pathway, 
the value of forests and ecosystem 
services for climate adaptation is poorly 
understood, both in government and by 
communities. There is no system to 
regularly produce data on indigenous 
forest cover and condition, and no 
specialized government unit dedicated  to 
producing spatial data on climate 
change, forests or ecosystem services. 
Agricultural and forest management 
practices are generally rudimentary.  low Rwanda has an innovative, 
scientifically credible system for 
generating and sharing 
information on nat ural forest 
cover and condition, and a 
government unit dedicated to 
ensuring spatial planning 
knowledge is incorporated into 
land-use management. Improved 
agricultural practices (e.g. 
terracing, modern beehives) are 
widespread, and degraded forest 
plantati ons are restored and 
managed according to 
government best -practices.  The project will design and finance the 
establishment of a new indigenous forest 
monitoring system for Rwanda, as well as 
establish a spatial planning unit within 
government that has the capacity to generate 
and integrate spatial planning knowledge into 
decision making. Project activities will also 
establish best -practice agricultural and forest 
management practices across 144,058 ha of 
land, and create community structures (e.g. 
farme r cooperatives) which facilitate 
knowledge and information sharing among 
community members.    National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 538*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1: Landscape planning, policies & management effective & coordinated across sectors and scales to address climate risks & adaptation benefits  
Output 1.1.  Landscape -
wide land -use plan 
developed for climate -
resilient livelihoods and 
forest ecosystems, 
integrating district 
strategies.  Operationalization of an 
Integrated Land -use Plan 
for Resilient Livelihoods 
and Ecosystems in the 
CND  
Climate change and 
biodiversity reflected in 
District Development 
Strategies (DDS)   Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Performance 
evaluations of the 
districts  0 integrated plans for 
the CND  
 
 
 
 
Climate change and 
biodiversity Indicators 
and targets not 
included in 
evaluations  1 draft integrated 
land use plan 
developed  
 
 
 
Climate change 
and biodiversity 
Indicators and 
targets fully 
integrated in 
evaluations  1 final integrated 
land use plan 
develop ed, 
approved and 
used  
 
Climate change 
and biodiversity 
Indicators and 
targets fully 
integrated in 
evaluations.  
 
 District land -use plans are 
updated within project 
timeframe  
Key stakeholders are 
supportive of cross sector 
collaboration.  
Sectoral ministries  
incorporate biodiversity 
and climate change into 
sectoral plans and 
programmes.  
Output 1.2. Local and 
national institutional 
capacities strengthened to 
integrate biodiversity and 
climate risks into land use 
planning and management  District planners, staff 
within REMA, RDB, NLA, 
RDB with the skills and 
capacities to use spatial 
planning tools, generate 
data necessary for 
mainstreaming climate 
change, understand 
gender barriers and how to 
mainstream gender 
equality principles into 
planning, including 
supporting women, youth Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Pre/post training 
assessments of unit 
members  
  0 units with capacity  
 
 
0 staff reporting 
improved awareness 
and capacity.  
  Draft structure & 
function of spatial 
planning unit 
developed.  
Training materials 
in development  
  Spatial planning 
unit formally 
established.  
 
36 Staff reporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (18 
Female, 18 
Male)  Lack of leadership of the 
hosting institution/ 
government agency could 
delay the establishment of 
the unit.  
RFA is committed to lead 
and invest in the capacity of 
its staff to implement the 
monitoring system.


---
*Page 539*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
and marginalized groups 
participation in meetings  Capacity building programs 
can overcome the effects of 
high staff turn -over and 
frequent re -arrangement of 
the institutions of natural 
resources management 
(transfer of departments, 
merging and creation of 
new Ministries)  
UR GIS center with the 
capacity and skills to train 
students and staff from 
government agencies on 
spatial planning and 
climate modeling  
  Pre/post capacity 
assessment of the 
UR GIS Center  Staff with knowledge 
in spatial analysis and 
climate modeling but 
without quantitative 
skills to use new 
technologies/software 
to generate data for 
decision making  Training modules 
developed and 
staff to be trained 
identified  10 lectures and 
assistant 
lectures 
reporting 
improved skills, 
20 students 
trained each year 
from year 3.  
A system for monitoring 
forest  trends is 
established and in use by 
the GOR  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  0 systems in place  Operational 
structure & function 
of forest monitoring 
system developed  Forest 
monitoring 
system in 
operation


---
*Page 540*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Rural people, specifically 
women and youth, are 
trained and participate in 
land use planning 
processes at district level  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  0 3 women per 
district 3 youth  
per district  30 youth  
30 women  Rural women and youth 
groups in targeted districts 
are motivated to invest time 
and ef forts in the activities.  
Outcome 2: Natural forests protected, connected, more resilient to climate impacts & risks  
Output 2.1.  Protected Area 
management effectiveness 
improved re climate risks 
and adaptation  Climate adaptation 
reflected in the new 
general park management 
plans  
  
  Progress report, mid -
term evaluation and 
final evaluation  0 plans currently 
contain climate 
adaptation plans  3 General 
management plans 
updated and 
approved by key 
stakeholders  Updated general 
management 
plans guiding 
RDB 
management 
decisions  General Park management 
plans are in the process of 
revision during the project 
intervention


---
*Page 541*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
RDB has adopted a 
landscape approach to 
conservation.  
 
New iterations of park 
management plans 
reference integrated CND 
land use plan  
A framework for 
conservation planning at 
landscape level is 
operational, and RDB 
planning and monitoring 
dept at each park is 
actively engaging 
stakeholders  Progress report, mid -
term and final 
evaluations  0 park management 
plans reference CND 
land use plan  1 new park 
management plan 
referencing CND 
land use plan  
RDB proactively 
engaging 
stakeholders in the 
land use planning 
process of the CND  3 new park 
management 
plans referencing 
CND land use 
plan Limited engagement of 
RDB beyond parks’ 
boundaries could delay the 
operationalization of the 
planning framework


---
*Page 542*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
 Number of RDB, RFA, 
districts staff and local 
communities trained in fire 
forecasting, detection and 
management  Post-training 
assessments of 
change in capacity of 
trained park staff in 
designated positions 
on 1) fire detection, 
early warning 
methods and fire 
danger rating system 
and 2) management 
of climate 
information and its 
relevance for park 
management  
Post-training 
assessments of 
change in capacity of 
trained individuals in 
designat ed positions  0 staff reporting 
improved awareness 
and capacity  
0 staff reporting 
improved capacity for 
fire management  15 Staff reporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (8 
Female, 7 Male)  
15 staff reporting 
improved capacity 
for fire 
management  15 Staff r eporting 
improved 
awareness and 
capacity (8 
Female, 7 Male)  
30 staff reporting 
improved 
capacity for fire 
management  Capacity building programs 
can overcome the effects of 
high staff turn -over and 
frequent re -arrangement of 
the institutions of natural 
resources management 
(transfer of departments, 
merging and creation of 
new Ministries)  
All stakeholders embrace 
the concept of information 
sharing and learning 
willingly and 
enthusiastically.  
  
Financial instruments to 
generate revenues post 
GCF identified and piloted  Interim and final 
evaluation reports  
Technical reports  0 financial 
instruments  1 financial 
instrument 
identified  3 financial 
instruments 
identified and 1 
instrument 
piloted  GoR commitment to 
enactment of policies 
conducive to att racting 
investment in emerging 
financing solutions


---
*Page 543*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 2.2. Natural forest 
cover restored, biodiversity 
connections established  Area (# ha) of degraded 
natural forest restored in 
national parks  
  GIS mapping of 
cleared areas using 
field GPS data  
  0 ha restored  4,500 ha initially 
cleared  4,500 ha cleared 
at least four 
times, ensuring 
natural 
regeneration can 
take place in 
Nyungwe NP  Major fire outbreaks during 
project implementation 
may prevent reaching the 
targets  
0 ha restored  500 ha under 
restoration in 
GMNP  500 ha restored 
in GMNP  The park is well managed 
and there are no major 
illegal activities  
Area (#ha) of riparian 
lands restored with 
indigenous species in the 
CND  GIS mapping of 
restored areas using 
field GPS data  0 ha restored  500 ha  1500 ha restored  District officials are 
committed to protect and 
create 10 m buffer around 
streams/rivers as per land 
use policy  
Area of remnant natural 
forest loss avoided  Interim and final 
evaluation   TBA Draft strategy and 
action for the 
protection and 
conservation of 
remnant forests   Strategy and 
action plan 
developed and 
implemented for 
the conservation 
of remnant 
natural forests  RDB, REMA and District 
officials are committed to 
protect remnant natural 
forests


---
*Page 544*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
 Area (ha) of pastoral lands 
brought under climate 
resilient silvopastoral 
packages in GMNP  
Average tree density/ha in 
restored silvopastoral 
lands  
  GIS mapping  
Bi-annual technical 
report  
Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Annual forest 
inventory  TBA 
  
TBA 
  
TBA 500 ha  
  
Density: 50 tree/ha  
  
 1000 ha  
  
Density: 50 
tree/ha  
 Farmers are willing to 
integrate trees on their 
pasture lands  
Outcome 3:  Vulnerable rural livelihoods more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable & nature -positive  
Output 3.1 Farming 
methods enhance 
productivity, reduce 
erosion and flooding risks, 
contribute to ecosystem 
services, and support 
connectivity.  
  Area (# ha) of forest 
restored on  slopes >55%  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
 
Annual forest cover 
report144 
  
Catalogue of geo -
referenced area 
under restoration  
 0 hectares  2,500 ha under 
restoration on 
slopes >55% 
planted with 
seedlings.  
 2,500 public and 
private hectares 
restored and 
maintained.  
 
density: 1,200 
trees/ha  Farmers, women, and 
youth groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
 
144  The Annual  Forest Report is prepared by Rwanda Forest Authority. The Monitoring system for the preparation of these reports has been dev eloped.


---
*Page 545*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
% of tree species diversity 
in restored areas on 
slopes >50%  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Annual forest 
inventory  0 30% indigenous 
species and 70% 
exotic species on 
private land  
 
70% indigenous 
species and 30% 
exotic species on 
public land  30% indigenous 
species and 70% 
exotic species on 
private land  
70% indigenous 
species and 30% 
exotic species on 
public land  
Number of target 
beneficiaries (households) 
in target sites who have 
adopted agroforestry 
measures (and report 
improvements in soil and 
water management  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
 
Household surveys  0 5,405 households 
(of which 50% are 
women headed 
households) 
adopted 
agroforestry 
measures  5,405 
households 
beneficiaries (of 
which 50% are 
female).   
Average tree density/ha in 
restored agroforestry 
lands  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Household surveys  
Catalogue of geo -
referenced area 
under restoration   
Annual forest 
inventory  0 
  
  
 TBA   
  
  
 100 trees/ha  3,346 ha of 
agroforestry 
established.  
  
100 trees/ha


---
*Page 546*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Output 3.2. Rural 
livelihoods generate 
alternative incomes & 
reduce pressure on forests  Number of value chain 
products that are viable 
and marketed (Honey, 
Avocado, macadamia, 
horticulture)  Interim evaluation 
and final evaluation 
report  
 
Annual sales reports  0 3 products 
developed  5 products 
developed  Stakeholders in the value 
chains are collaborative  
Number of 
businesses/cooperatives 
with viable business plans 
established and 
operational for climate 
resilient value chains  Bi-annual technical 
report Interim 
Evaluation and Final 
Evaluation Report  37 beekeeping 
cooperatives with 
1,965 members (32% 
women, 16% youth)  
0 seed enterprise, 
nurseries farmer’s 
cooperatives  
  
0 cooperative of 
tourism guides  15 new 
cooperatives (40% 
women, 50% 
youth)  
5 seed and nursery 
enterprises owned 
by y outh and 
women.  
 2 cooperatives  20 new 
cooperatives 
(40% 
women,50% 
youth)  
 
10 seed and 
nursery 
enterprises 
owned by youth 
and women.  
 3 cooperatives  Willingness of farmers’ 
representatives of and 
Rwanda Cooperative 
Agency (RCA) to 
participate in the project  
Increase in household 
income within community 
associations/cooperatives 
engaged in the project 
(disaggregated by gender 
and social category)  Household surveys  TBA in year 1  20% additional 
income in 
participating 
households in new 
income generating 
activities.  
 
Targets for health 
benefits, and time 
and firewood 
savings TBD  An additional 
10% Successful rolled out of 
capacity building and 
linkage to outside (input -
output) market


---
*Page 547*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
# of target beneficiary 
households adopting 
cookstoves  Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  
Household surveys  0 target households 
using Tier 2 
cookstoves  4000 target 
households of 
which 50% are 
women -headed 
households  8,500 target 
households 
using Tier 2 
cookstoves    
Number of employments 
generated from the 
selected value chains  
 Interim and final 
evaluations  
 
Annual reports on 
employees hired per 
value chain  TBA in year 1  # women:600  
# young:400  # women:900  
# young:600  No outbreak of a new 
pandemic  
 
Farmers, women and youth 
groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
Output 3.3. Financial  
services & private sector  
investment engage  Agriculture Credit 
assessment tool upgraded 
to include forestry  Loan approval 
reports generated by 
the tool  
 
Interim and final 
evaluation  0 3 MFIs and PFIs 
are using the tool to 
provide loans to 
smallholder 
farmers  
 
70% of the 
smallholder 
farmers and 
gradually grow  5 MFIs and PFIs 
are using the tool 
to provide loans 
to smallholder 
farmers  MFIs and PFIs are willing to 
participate in this project  
Number of financial 
products refined, 
contextualized ,  and rolled 
out to improve access to 
finance for agriproducts for 
1) vulnerable groups/ 
smallholders and 2) 
horticulture, bee products, Bi-annual  technical 
report  
 
Interim Evaluation 
and Final Evaluation 
Report  TBA 4 financial products 
refined and rolled 
out . At least 1 for 
each value chain (4 
total)  6 financial 
products already 
deployed by PFIs 
are refined, 
contextualized  
and at least 5 
rolled out by PFIs 
for financing MFIs are willing to 
contribute in terms of staff 
and resources


---
*Page 548*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term  Final  
energy efficient 
cookstoves and 
ecotourism value chains  selected value 
chains.  
10 approved 
loans’ 
applications  
Number of people 
including women and 
youth with organizational, 
technical and financial 
improved capacity  Interim and Final 
Evaluations  0 7,800 (40% youth, 
50% women)  
 12,445 (40% 
youth, 50% 
women)  Farmers, women and 
youth groups in targeted 
districts/sectors are 
motivated to invest time 
and efforts in the activities.  
 
Number of men, women 
and youth who have 
access to thriving financial 
services  Interim and Final 
Evaluations  0  3,000  (40% youth, 
50% women)  
 8,500  (40% 
youth, 50% 
women)  
 Men, women and youth 
are open to access 
financial services  
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1 Synthesize & disseminate 
information on value of natural forests & 
ecosystem services  Ensure that the value of natural forests 
and ecosystem services for supporting 
climate change resilient livelihoods is fully 
appreciated by all sectors involved in land 
use decision making  1.1.1.1: Map the sectors involved in land -
use planning in the CND and review how 
forests, ecosystem services and  climate 
resilience is incorporated into each 
sector’s planning process.  
1.1.1.2: Conduct comprehensive 
literature review & stakeholder 
consultation to collect & synthesize 
information on climate risks for various A map of the sectors involved in the land -
use planning in the CND  
Information package on climate risks, 
value of forests for increasing resilienc e of 
local communities, adaptation options 
developed and disseminated to 
ministries, local government and local 
NGOs


---
*Page 549*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
sectors (e.g. agriculture, forestry), the 
value of forests for increasing resilience of 
local communities, and highlight 
adaptation solutions with cross -sectoral 
implications  
1.1.1.3: Host workshops & presentations 
with key ministries, government 
organizations, NGOs and community 
organizations to disseminate high -level 
knowledge on value of forests for 
increasing resilience of local communities  
1.1.1.4: Develop guidelines for integrating 
climate risk into land use planning and 
cross sectoral planning  
1.1.1.5: Develop outreach materials on 
climate r isk in the CND and the value of 
forest ecosystems for increasing 
resilience  
1.1.1.6: Implement outreach program 
tailored to different stakeholders (local 
government, civil society, communities) to 
enhance capacities for land -use planning, 
funding mobilizat ion, and delivery of 
climate adaptation actions  
1.1.1.7 Conduct climate literacy courses 
for local government and civil society 
organizations, aimed at increasing 
women and youth participation  
1.1.1.8 Provide financial and logistical 
support to trained organizations in 
grassroots mobilization to increase Guidelines for integrating climate risk into 
land use planning and cross sectoral plan 
developed  
104 episodes of radio drama to educate 
communities on climate change and 
gender issues, climate risks, value of 
forests and forests ecosystems, climate 
adaptation options developed  
Broadcast of 104 radio program episodes 
on a popular national radio station


---
*Page 550*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
women and youth participation in climate 
adaptation planning  
1.1.1.9 Introduce social safeguards at a 
high level at each meeting, including the  
GRM, FPIC, and Access Restrictions 
Mitigations as safeguards to be in place 
for work with local communities  
Activity 1.1.2 Develop climate -resilient 
landscape land -use plan  Ensure that climate change adaptation 
requirements are fully integrated into 
planning processes at local, district and 
national scales.  1.1.2.1: Engage district officials, JADF, 
and community members in the CND 
(especially women) in reviewing and 
interpreting the NLUDMP, to ensure the 
plan accounts for current and future 
climate risks, while building local support 
for climate sensitive planning.  
1.1.2.2: Conduct participatory land -use 
planning process in communitie s from 
village to district level to support 
integrated climate resilient land use 
planning  
1.1.2.3: Develop Integrated Land -use 
Plan that supports Resilient Livelihoods 
and Ecosystems in the CND, ensuring 
alignment with National Land Use and 
Development M aster Plan and ensuring 
the CND plan guides the district plan  
1.1.2.4: Develop and rollout a series of 
trainings (virtual sessions and online 
modules) on gender sensitivity and 
mainstreaming women and youth into 
planning  A summary of the current NLUDMP  and 
its recommendations relating to forestry, 
agricul ture and climate adaptation.  
Reviewed/updated district level planning 
schemes to ensure they account for 
current and future climate risks (e.g. 
DFMPs, District Development Strategies)  
 
A community natural resources mapping 
manual to outline main steps in 
community land -use planning process  
A comprehensive review of national and 
district development plans/strategies, 
guidelines and projects to understand 
planned future land -use & climate 
adaptation projects in the CND and 
identify synergies and conflicts be tween 
land-use & climate adaptation plans from 
different sectors  
Integrated Land Use Plan developed


---
*Page 551*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1.2.5: Assess specific climate i mpacts 
on historically marginalized and Category 
c,d,e populations through a participatory 
NR process to ensure the component 
projects address their needs for 
adaptation   
Activity 1.2.1: Create interagency 
taskforce institutionalizing integrated 
landscape planning & policy  Collaborative integrated landscape 
planning suppo rted, which secures 
climate resilience undertaken with 
appropriate social safeguards. This 
activity aims to strengthen collaborative 
efforts, in particular between institutions 
(from local to national level) in charge of 
natural resources management to 
encourage synergies and avoid 
overlapping mandates and redundancy in 
different climate resilience interventions.  1.2.1.1: Review & strengthen 
operationalization of the current cross -
sectoral task force  
1.2.1.2: Hold quarterly sectoral planning 
meetings with both national and district 
administrations in CND  
1.2.1.3: Facilitate discussions and provide 
technical support (e.g., policy briefs) in 
decision -making for cross -sectoral 
actions around climate adaptation and 
forest resilience in the CND  
1.2.1.4: Continue to introduce social 
safeguards at each meeting including the 
GRM, FPIC, and Access Restriction 
Mitigations as safeguards to be in place 
for work with local communities. For those 
at the district or community level, provide 
options for feedb ack on the process and 
best ways of communication with local 
partners  A cross -sectoral planning task force 
operational as recognized by a ministerial 
order  
Activity 1.2.2: Build capacity for spatial 
planning in national agencies re climate 
change  Capacity  for integrated land use planning 
which supports climate change resilience 
and delivery of ecosystem services is 
improved. This activity aims to build the 
technical capacity of staff in the Ministry 1.2.2.1: Recruit spatial planning expert to 
support spatial planning unit  Spatial Planning Unit Operational  
Capacity needs assessment completed


---
*Page 552*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
of Environment and University of Rwanda 
to generate and u se the data on forest 
cover and ecosystem service values 
necessary for mainstreaming climate 
adaptation and forest resilience into land -
use planning..  1.2.2.2: Assess and identify th e 
institutional home and operationalize the 
spatial planning unit  
1.2.2.3: Conduct a capacity needs 
assessment and identify the appropriate 
tools for spatial planning to fit the 
Rwandan context and conduct 
familiarization  
1.2.2.4: Led by the spatial planning unit, 
develop capacity within the University of 
Rwanda and the  MoE to use remote 
sensing, climate change modeling and 
spatial planning tools (e.g., Marxan, 
InVEST, RIOS, SWAT) to incorporate 
climate risks into land use planning 
processes  
1.2.2.5: Deliver training workshops on 
utilization of earth system models for la nd 
use planning purposes, utilization of 
remote sensing resources (lightning, 
satellite radiances) for hazards detection 
and climate monitoring and on regional 
climate monitoring and applications  Capacity for forest mapping, climate 
change modeling and spatial analysis 
built within UoR and MoE  
Activity 1.2.3: Develop an effective forest 
monitoring system to underpin forest 
management decisions  An effective forest, climate change and 
land use monitoring system is established 
to support climate resilient forest 
management decisions.  1.2.3.1: Recruit Forest ecologist or 
remote sensing expert to support the 
design and implementation of indigenous 
forest monitoring system  
1.2.3.2: Review existing forest mapping 
data and monitoring software, and assess 
utility for generating quantitative A report on the status of existing forest 
mapping data and monitoring software  
A design of the structure and operation of 
forest monitoring  
Two weather sta tions installed and 
operational  
Forest monitoring system operationalized


---
*Page 553*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
assessments of indigenous forest cover 
from local to national scales  
1.2.3.3: In collaboration with REMA, 
MINAGRI, RAB, RDB, RISA, MoE and 
affiliated agencies and University of 
Rwanda, design structure and operation 
of forest monitoring system, including 
required inputs (data, computing, 
personnel), desired outputs, and 
operational structure (e.g. location, 
reporting structure, funding)  
1.2.3 .4: Purchase and install 2 new 
weather automatic stations in the CND  
1.2.3.5: Establish & operationalize forest 
monitoring system  
1.2.3.6: Generate updated maps & 
statistics for indigenous forest cover, 
forest type etc. using forest monitoring 
system  
1.2.3.7: Develop capacity within hosting 
institution for continued operation of forest 
monitoring system  Updated maps and statistics for 
indigenous/natural forest cover and type 
generated  
Trainings delivered to develop the 
capacity of staff within hosting institution 
in forest monitoring  
Activity 2.1.1: Facilitate revision of PA 
management plans to address climate 
risks Park planning process expanded to 
ensure full incorporation of buffer zone 
and landscape linkage requirements, and 
ability to engage with the larger CND and 
district landscape management planning 
processes.  2.1.1.1 Review and update existing 
national park management plans to 
ensure climate and related landscape 
changes risks, impacts and required 
management responses are integrated  
2.1.1.2 Provide technical and financial 
support to planning, research and 
monitoring as well as community based 
conservation units within RDB in General management plans for NNP, 
GMNP and VNP updated


---
*Page 554*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
managing the parks as part of larger CND 
landscapes  
2.1.1.3 Train PA staff to integrate gender 
and social inclu sion into programming  
2.1.1.4 Train PA staff on integrating needs 
of women, youth, historically marginalized 
and Ubudehe Categories c,d,e 
populations into climate adaptation risks 
and responses  
2.1.1.5 Train PA staff on SEAH, GRM, 
FPIC, and Access Restric tion Mitigation 
Processes to ensure NP climate change 
responses are undertaken in a way which 
supports social inclusion and equity  
Activity 2.1.2 Establish long -term plans for 
CND financial sustainability post -GCF Identify financial instruments that could be 
employed for revenue generation post 
GCF as part of a broad and 
comprehensive RDB business planning 
effort for the sustainable management of 
the CND landscape  2.1.2.1 RFA to Recruit a Tec hnical 
Advisor to guide RDB, MoE, REMA, 
FONERWA and MINECOFIN on 
sustainable conservation finance.  Technical Advisor recruited  
 
CND long term financial sustainability 
developed  
 
 
Activity 2.1.3 New fire management 
curriculum developed and operationalized 
in PAs  Capacity increased for improved fire 
management in core PAs and adjacent 
landscapes. A collaborative effort in fire 
management planning and 
implementation in CND districts will be 
carried out and facilitated.  2.1.3.1 Develop a curriculum tailored to 
needs and capacities of different 
stakeholders  
2.1.3.2 Build the capacity of RDB to 
manage fire in National Parks  
2.1.3.3 Build the capacity of RFA, local 
authorities and commun ities to 
collaboratively manage fire in forests 
outside PAs  A fire training program that addresses 
local needs and skills gaps developed  
Train the trainer process completed for 25 
RDB staff allowing them to instruct future 
classes without assistance  
Fire detection, early warning, and fire 
danger ranger system is established and 
operationalized


---
*Page 555*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
2.1.3.4 Implement a “fire wise” outreach 
and awareness program for communities 
and local government (district, sector, 
cell), as well as Rwanda Forest Authority, 
surrounding natural forests to red uce the 
incidence of human -caused fires  200 community facilitators (youth) trained 
to raise awareness on fires in 
communities surrounding natural forests 
and forests plantations  
10,000 community members reached 
through soc ial marketing events  
Activity 2.2.1 Secure key remaining 
natural areas outside PAs  Remaining priority natural forests and 
other ecosystems required for climate 
change resilience secured through 
appropriate land use planning processes  2.2.1.1 Raise awarene ss on remaining 
protected natural forests in CNDL to 
secure their protection  
2.2.1.2 In collaboration with RFA, REMA, 
districts identify and implement actions 
that support conservation and 
management of remnant protected 
natural forests in CNDL  Action plan for the conservation of 
remnant natural forests developed 
and implemented  
Activity 2.2.2 Restore natural forest cover 
in & outside PAs including riparian 
linkages  Support natural forest restoration 
processes in PAs through improved 
management of alien and invasive 
species; and actively restore nature forest 
in priority areas next to core PAs and 
protected forests to expand the natural 
forest estate  2.2.2.1 Review mapping of degraded 
natural forest areas in core NPs, stepping 
stones a nd unprotected riparian lands 
using updated imagery and ground 
truthing  
2.2.2.2 Identify parcels for restoration in 
core PAs, stepping stones and riparian 
lands using desktop and field -based 
assessment  
2.2.2.3 Establish indigenous tree seed 
nurseries in th e CND to serve core PAs, 
stepping stones, riparian land restoration 
and promotion of indigenous trees on 
farms and in protective forests  
2.2.2.4 Recruit, train in forest restoration 
methods and equip community workers to Indigenous tree seed nurseries 
established and operational  
4,500 ha of indigenous forest in NNP 
restored  
500 ha restored in Gishwati Mukura NP  
1,500 ha of riparian lands restored


---
*Page 556*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
be involved in core PAs restoration  and 
riparian linkages  
2.2.2.5 Restore 4500 ha of indigenous 
forest in NNP  
2.2.2.6 Restore 500 ha Gishwati Mukura 
National Park  
2.2.2.7 Restore 1,500 ha of riparian lands  
2.2.2.8 Using permanent plots sampling, 
collect field monitoring data on tree 
species recruitment and growth for 
estimation of biomass, species richness 
etc. in restored parcels in Nyungwe and 
Gishwati -Mukura National Parks in 
restored parcels in Nyungwe a nd 
Gishwati -Mukura National Parks as well 
as on riparian lands to assess success of 
initiatives, then replicate or adapt as 
needed  
2.2.2.9 Perform Environmental and Social 
Screening on all positions being created 
by the project  
2.2.2.10 Establish a grievan ce process for 
laborers  
2.2.2.11 Update emergency and 
preparedness plan including risk 
mitigation guidance to local conditions at 
restoration sites  
 2.2.2.12 Train all workers on their rights 
and how to access the GRM


---
*Page 557*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
2.2.2.13 Provide code of conduct and 
emergency preparedness and safety 
training for all laborers  
2.2.2.14 Hire and train labor and safety 
leads at each site to provide guidance to 
staff, be available for grievance issues, 
and monitor health and safety con ditions 
for workers  
2.2.2.15 Develop and implement strategy 
(including social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth participate and benefit 
from forest restoration projects  
Activity 2.2.3 Promote silvopastoralism 
with indigenous trees in Gishwati Pasture 
areas  Existing pasture lands will be 
characterized and livestock farmers 
clustered according to the size of their 
grazing lands. Tree species that exist on 
their grazing land  will be identified and 
grouped according to the level of their 
resilience to climate change. A 
participatory approach will be used to 
assess livestock owners' preferences for 
indigenous species on their farms. Sites 
will be identified for indigenous tree 
nursery establishment and nurseries will 
be established in project sites and 
managed by the livestock communities.  
 2.2.3.1 Assess the status of pasture lands 
in Gishwati area and identify key areas for 
restoration and the potential to introduce 
indigenou s species  
2.2.3.2 In collaboration with landowners, 
identify suitable indigenous species for 
fodder trees, shrubs, grasses, and 
herbaceous legumes that have potential 
to improve pasturelands and increase 
their climate adaptive capacity  
2.2.3.3 Produce and disseminate fodder 
trees, shrubs, grasses, and herbaceous 
legumes to project beneficiaries  
2.2.3.4 Train beneficiaries on improved 
livestock and pasture management  1,000 ha of pasture land in Gishwati 
grazing area restored with indigenous 
tree species


---
*Page 558*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 3.1.1 Restore high slope areas 
(>55%) as protective forests  Promotion of protective forest and 
agroforestry practices to improve 
landscape connectivity and ability to 
deliver ecosystem services  3.1.1.1 Introduce and raise awareness of 
indigenous s pecies to target stakeholders 
in CND  
3.1.1.2 In consultation with RFA, National 
Land Authority, districts and communities, 
determine fragile areas (steep slopes > 
55%) to be allocated for protective forests 
and their ownership  
3.1.1.3 Assess the current st atus of the 
indigenous tree species in selected areas 
for protective forests and select 
indigenous tree species appropriate to 
CNDL  
3.1.1.4 Develop restoration plan for 
protective forests  
3.1.1.5 Build capacity of local 
stakeholders (men and women) on PFMU 
approach and methods  
3.1.1.6 Design and approve SFMPs of 
private FMUs  
3.1.1.7 Ensure consent of smallholders 
prior to planting trees (SS)  
3.1.1.8 In collaboration with smallholders 
reforest/restore 2,500 ha of public or 
private land with slopes >55%  and 
ensure sustainable management under 
private FMUs according to approved 
SFMPs  
3.1.1.9 Support monitoring and evaluation 
of restored private FMUs  2,500 ha of protective forests on high 
slope areas restored


---
*Page 559*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 118 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
3.1.1.10 Assess impacts of exotics on 
neighboring lands and mitigate their 
negative impacts (SS)  
3.1.1.11 De velop and implement strategy 
(including social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth participate and benefit 
from forest restoration projects (G)  
3.1.1.12 Assess the benefits and costs of 
each proposed tree and plant species and 
how those benefits affe ct different 
population segments (SS)


---
*Page 560*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 119 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 3.1.2 Develop on -farm 
agroforestry for high caloric and 
indigenous tree species  Implement agroforestry/sustainable land 
management (SLM) over 3,346 ha of 
smallholder farmland  
 3.1.2.1 Identify sub -areas of intervention 
for agroforestry dissemination in the CND  
3.1.2.2 Introduce and raise awareness of 
agroforestry in target communities  
3.1.2.3 Develop the capacity of extension 
agents at district/ sector level and NGOs 
to support adoption of agroforestry 
technologies  
3.1.2.4 Establish agroforestry/fruit tree 
nurseries to facilitate access to quality 
planting material  
3.1.2.5 Promote sustainable land 
management practices by stabilizing 
existing terraces, and plant high calorific 
agroforestry species to provide a 
sustainable source of fuelwood for energy 
efficient cookstoves to protect sloping 
land against severe soil erosion  
3.1.2.6  Train RFA, extension agents, 
Project participants and community 
members on specific techniques for 
identification of and management of 
invasive pests and pathogens (SS)  SLM/agroforestry established on 3,346 ha 
of smallholder land


---
*Page 561*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 120 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
● Activity 3.2.1 Develop forestry 
and agroforestry -related value 
chains for marke t access  Vulnerable groups of youth and women 
identified and their capacity for production 
(quality and quantity) enhanced in sync 
with particular niche markets demands  3.2.1.1 Identification and mapping of 
vulnerable groups of youth and women 
within the CND  
3.2.1.2 Capacity building for farmers' 
cooperatives/unions on good agricultural 
practices (GAP) for market standards in 
the selected agroforestry -related tree 
fruits and horticulture  
3.2.1.3 Development of Global GAP 
standards modules and market ac cess 
linkage for the selected value chains  
3.2.1.4 CND Honey value chain capacity 
production, market, and financial 
development  
3.2.1.5. Tourism value chain development  Vulnerable groups of youth and women 
within the CND identified and grouped 
into coopera tives 
5 Value chains identified and 
beneficiaries selected  
GAP training for 900 people from targeted 
cooperatives and unions completed  
Train of trainers completed for 30 
cooperative members  
New tourism trails and base camps 
outside of Gishwati -Mukura NP 
developed and operational  
Community freelance tour guides trained 
and operational  
● Activity 3.2.2 Facilitate and scale 
up climate -resilient value chain 
products  This activity aims to build the capacity of 
smallholder farmers in producing, 
processing and marketing quality 
products that meet national and 
international standards to be competitive 
on the market  3.2.2.1 Value chain contextualization in 
focus areas in the CND  
3.2.2.2 Facilitating market accessibility  25 youth and women 
cooperatives/enterprises with the 
capacity to deliver quality products and 
services  
● Activity 3.2.3 Facilitate access to 
markets for vulnerable farmers  This activity will focus on enhancing 
productivity (quantity, quality, and 
sustainability at the farm le vel) and 
exploring the market linkages model 
between farmers, suppliers, and buyers.  3.2.3.1 Development of farmer -inclusive 
business models  
 900 cooperative members are linked to 
the market from farming inputs suppliers 
and production aggregators through 
inclusive farming -as-a-business.


---
*Page 562*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 121 
 
 
 E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
● Activity 3.2.4 Scale up 
production, use and sales of 
fuel-efficient cook -stoves  Evaluate and promote financing models 
that sustainably foster energy efficient 
cook -stove access to historically 
marginalized communities and other 
vulnerable groups of the CND  3.2.4.1. Identification and production of 
Energy Efficient Cooking -Stoves  
3.2.4.2. Energy efficient cook -stoves 
distributed to CND community members 
and categorization based on UBUDEHE 
Categories  8500 households have access to EES  
● Activity 3.3.1 Facilitate access to 
finance & private sector 
investments  Build common understanding between 
value chain actors and private financial 
institutions towards selected value chains  3.3.1.1 Tailoring credit assessment tool 
for selected value chains, while 
integrating climate impact data  
3.3.1.2 Facilitate access to finance for 
selected value chains  Agriculture Credit assessment tool 
upgraded and adopted by PFIs  
 
At least 15 projects of the 5 selected value 
chains funded by PFIs  
● Activity 3.3.2 Set up & support 
savings & loan groups, enhance 
asset -building  Strengthen the capacity of local 
smallholders’ farmers in financial literacy 
and access to finance  3.3.2.1 Establish/form saving groups for 
access to finance  
 Cooperative members are linked to PFIs 
and at least 70% have accessed to 
financial service and loan  
● Activity 3.3.3 Build capacity of 
financial institutions to serve 
targeted value chains and 
communities  Undertake a climate screening of financial 
service providers using the green index 
tool and support PFIs to access and adopt 
a digitalized forestry and a gri-loan 
assessment tool  3.3.3.1 Capacity -building of PFIs  
 PFIs have developed an environmental 
policy and strategy for their organization 
including staff awareness training and 
integration of climate and livelihood 
impact measurement systems  
 
 
● Activity 3.3.4 Facilitate learning 
& knowledge sharing  Produce and share lessons learned 
during the implementation of this project  3.3.4.1 Programme -embedded learning 
and reflection  ESMP


---
*Page 563*
---

E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 122 
 
 
  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements  
The Project’s logical framework outlines the expected results, indicators, means of verification, baseline values and target values at mid -term and 
end-term. The Project Coordinator will be responsible for the overall  monitoring of Project progress and reporting to the PSC. A national M&E Specialist 
hosted under the PMU, supported by EE -based Specialists, will be employed to develop practical guidelines for — and operationalize — a 
performance monitoring framework to t rack the Project's progress towards achieving its targets. The national M&E Specialist will be responsible for: 
i) establishing a performance monitoring framework to define biannual targets; ii) measuring the indicators at least 1 –2 times per year to evalu ate the 
progress of the Project; iii) reporting to the Project Coordinator and PSC; and iv) participating in the production of report s. RFA M&E Specialist will 
support the National M&E Specialist by: i) following guidelines developed by the national M&E sp ecialist to conduct performance monitoring; ii) 
measuring the program indicators at least 1 –2 times per year; iii) ensuring all activities comply with the Project’s ESMF process and procedures; iv) 
supporting environmental screening and helping to follow t he Environmental Management Plans; and v) participating in production of reports. The 
M&E Specialists will be supported by a Gender Specialist to oversee and monitor the application of gender disaggregated indic ators. The M&E 
Specialist and Gender Speciali st will perform regular visits (at least once/year), randomly selecting villages to monitor implementation. They will use 
these visits to cross -check the information provided by EE and beneficiaries in monitoring reports. During each visit, the team will c ollect qualitative 
data on implementation outcomes and difficulties through focus group discussions with beneficiaries and interviews with key s takeholders. The 
national M&E Specialist, supported by the EE M&E Specialist will then compile quarterly Project  reports outlining progress in each site, allowing for 
feedback and support from the PMU and PSC in case of delays or challenges. MoE, as the AE, will perform supervision missions from year two 
onwards, selecting sites to visit each year and assessing the status of implementation. In addition, the MoE procurement office — which oversees 
the destination and use of funds disbursed to the EE — will monitor the Project's compliance with policies and procedures, as well as alignment 
between implementation and ob jectives. The annual performance reports will include a narrative report (with supporting data) on implementation 
progress based on the logical framework in the Project, including a report on ESMS as well as gender. The report will be alig ned with the moda lities 
set out in the GCF results management framework and its performance measurement frameworks.  
As per the AMA, an independent consultant will be contracted to conduct an Interim Evaluation and Final Evaluation. Both will  comply with GCF 
evaluation policy and international standards and make use of qualitative and quantitative data analyses, including interview s with relevant 
stakeholders, data provided by the Project, EE M&E Specialists and Gender Specialist, and participative workshops a nd focus groups with 
beneficiaries. The MTE will analyze whether the Project is on track, any problems, and challenges, and required corrective ac tions. The PSC and 
PMU will develop a management response to the recommendations along with an implementation plan, and the PMU will monitor implementation of 
the recommendations. The Final Evaluation will be an independent assessment of Project performance against its contributions to a paradigm shift 
and enabling environment.


---
*Page 564*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 123 
  
  
● (f)  RISK ASSESSME NT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures  
Selected Risk Factor 1 - Lack of coordination, institutional resistance, and regulatory barriers to mainstreaming 
climate change into land use planning  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Macroeconomic/Political  Low High  
Description  
Despite its progressive policies, Rwanda has historically had limited capacity for mainstreaming climate 
change into government/institutional practices and given the pervasive ways in which the impacts of climate 
change impact across numerous sectors, mini stries and government agencies will need to work across any 
perceived or real institutional barriers to align and mainstream climate change in land use planning. For 
example, the Rwanda Development Board has historically not worked beyond Park boundaries, and this will 
be integral for institutionalizing the climate change adaptation processes across the Congo Nile Divide as a 
large interconnected landscape. Additionally, insufficient coordination, collaboration and information -sharing 
between relevant gover nment departments, and research institutions may hinder or limit participation of 
relevant institutions and agencies, reducing the timely delivery and effectiveness of the Project, especially 
the aspects related to mainstreaming climate change in land use planning and other components of the 
Project as well. Furthermore, the perception of an uneven playing field, with larger or more well -connected 
institutions and companies able to evade the payment of environmental fees and fines under existing 
legislation , may undermine the uptake of the other options for financial sustainability of improved PA and 
forest ecosystem management.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Project is part of a larger suite of efforts supported by the multi -agency Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) to create a spirit of cooperation among the various agencies and institutions charged with addressing 
climate -related issues. The PSC demonstrat es Rwanda’s commitment to fulfilling mainstreaming of climate 
adaptation into regular government processes and procedures. As such numerous government agencies 
have already had the opportunity to work together on a variety of climate -related issues, align institutional 
policies and reduce any potential regulatory barriers to ensure successful implementation of projects related 
to climate change. The PSC will directly oversee the Project Management Unit, and with this larger guidance 
structure, the EE will c ommunicate to the PMU and the PSC on a regular basis to prompt collaboration and 
address any unforeseen institutional or regulatory barriers encountered during the life of the Project for 
immediate attention and remediation. PSC will address the risk of ev ading the payment of environmental 
fees by facilitating buy -in from stakeholders such as RDB and MINECOFIN into compliance with 
environmental laws through greater emphasis on the links to climate resilience and NDC objectives . These 
measures will reduce th e impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 - Extreme weather/climatic events hinder the ability to deliver Project objectives   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description


---
*Page 565*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 124 
  
 The activities that will deliver overall Project success involve dependencies on weather conditions for 
successful implementation of the projects that rely on accessing steep slopes, planting trees, and establishing 
beekeeping operations. Extreme events su ch as heavy rainfall or prolonged drought could severely limit the 
success of these endeavors making sites inaccessible, creating unfavorable conditions for seedling survival, 
and decreasing the potential success of new beekeeping operations. This region, given its topography and 
the expected climatic variability, is likely to experience these types of disruptions. Severe disruptions may 
impede implementation, including potential implementation delays and fall under GCF's policy on 
restructuring and cancell ation. That said, it is unlikely these extreme conditions will present themselves in 
the next 5 years for the duration of the project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
As weather is unpredictable, any mitigation measures will not change the probability nor address the impact 
in the short term. As the entire project is envisioned to improve the resiliency of this landscape to climate 
variability and promote adaptation, th e specific activities will be able to mitigate, and in some cases prevent, 
longer -term impacts. As our implementation arrangements involve bolstering the climate adaptation capacity 
of the government and the communities in the CND, the entire project itsel f will serve as mitigation to this 
unlikely outcome.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 - Project staffing and capacity  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Implementation of the Project hinges on staffing of the Project Management Unit, hiring additional staff within 
the EE and recruiting thousands of additional laborers in the form of community engagement specialists, 
contractors for building terraces, individuals to remove ferns, contracts to construct and deliver stove s, 
consultants to contribute expertise on behavior change, invasive species/pest management, and gender 
sensitization. Many factors could intervene to slow or thwart hiring progress including the high turnover of 
staff in the implementing institutions as f requent changes in government bodies could result in a disruption 
and/or delays in implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Rwanda has a successful track record of implementing large scale projects through government ministries. 
Competent staff will be avai lable for project implementation, and their abilities will be enhanced through the 
commitment to training individuals involved in the program. This risk, if realized, may impede 
implementation including potential implementation delays and fall under GCF's policy on 
restructuring and cancellation. Therefore, the Project will invest heavily in strengthening institutional 
capacity to promote climate resilience and apply actions that directly increase the resilience of ecosystems 
and community livelihoods. The Project will also document decisions, best practices and lessons learned to 
support the institutional memory to sustain Project activities in case of high staff turnover. Labor and safety 
as well as community security plans to be establish ed as part of the ESAP (Annex 6) will make the Project 
a desirable place to work. Mitigation measures reduce impact to LOW.


---
*Page 566*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 125 
  
  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 - Inadequate incorporation of gender, and environmental and social safeguard (ESS) 
considerations into the implementation of the proposed Project activities as well as its management structures and 
systems  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Low Medium  
Description  
Should ESS be inadequately considered in the Project or in the management and governance structures, 
there could be social and environmental implications. To start there may be a disproportionate distribution of 
benefits to certain segments of society. Although the Project’s primary beneficiaries inc lude women and other 
most vulnerable people, there is a risk that the Project implementation will experience preferential treatment 
at sites that favor certain groups over others. For example, despite tremendous policy and legal efforts, a 
patriarchal cult ure and persistent disparities in education, employment, land ownership and other factors 
characterize gender relations in Rwanda and could cloud implementation efforts. Likewise, some vulnerable 
groups may be unable to benefit from the efforts, such as la ndless people unable to benefit from trees or 
having a safe place for a new cookstove. One serious risk afflicting major projects such as that proposed, if 
not properly addressed, includes sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment (SEAH) whi ch 
may be prevalent if preferential treatment occurs (e.g., interfamily SEAH in retaliation for benefits received 
by women rather than men) or there may be power dynamics with hired staff who work with communities 
and withhold Project benefits within a SEA H conflicts (e.g. requesting sex for an opportunity to participate in 
the project, harassment if potential beneficiary refuses).  On the environmental side, several environmental 
risks detailed in Section F and Annex 6 could undermine the success of the Pr oject including topsoil loss 
and possible collapse of the terraces, unsustainable practices for sourcing clay for the cookstoves, and 
inadvertent introduction of invasive species, pests or pathogens from the nurseries to the field sites.  
Mitigation Measur e(s) 
The Project anticipates these challenges and has envisioned multiple participatory aspects to the Project 
that are guided by the gender action plan and the ESAP. To mitigate social risks, local community 
engagement will be facilitated by the EE in co operation with local community organizations through the 
integrated landscape delivery teams (ILDT) and the Joint Action Development Forums (DJAF). Safeguards 
in place to support Labor and Community Health & Safety will require training/sensitization to SE AH and the 
repercussions for those who engage in such activities (i.e., termination of employment). In the hiring process, 
staff will be screened for prior infractions. Hired staff will be trained in survivor -centered and gender -
responsive approaches to su pport any victims of SEAH in association with the Project activities.  To minimize 
environmental risk, the PMU and the EE will adhere to the environmental action plan and oversee the hiring 
of contractors to perform the activities. Multiple consultants or specialists, if not part of subcontracts, will be 
recruited to train project participants on mitigating measures to reduce these risks. If the proposed ESAP is 
followed properly the impacts will be LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 - Lack of adoption among target populations for livelihoods activities  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and Operational  Medium  High


---
*Page 567*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 126 
  
 Description  
The success of the Project depends upon the integration of activities such as beekeeping, improved 
cookstoves, planting of fruit trees and terrace construction on private lands by the project beneficiaries. If 
planned and executed incorrectly a myriad of issues could prevent beneficiaries from adopting the activities 
beyond the life of the Project. This includes but is not lim ited to overlapping or misalignment between the 
proposed Project activities and those being implemented by other government departments or non -
government organizations in the Project area.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Numerous international development projects  have experienced mixed results upon completion regarding 
the uptake of promoted activities into daily lives. This Project has a strong behavior change component based 
on current best practices in identifying the barriers to behavior change, removing those  barriers, and 
changing norms thus ensuring, through adequate participation and training, that the activities will be adopted 
and maintained over time. The work plan involves ample collaboration with women and youth groups through 
the ILDTs to build long -term community ownership for the Project. Further, if there are activities being 
promoted by the government or other NGOs that either overlap with the proposed activities or contravene 
with the Project activities, adoption by intended beneficiaries may be d isrupted. As such the NSC will serve 
as the overarching body to ensure such projects within similar geographic regions remain aligned. These 
mitigation measures reduce the impact to MEDIUM.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 - Unforeseen disruptions due to another COVID variant  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Medium  
Description  
As demonstrated during the recent years of the COVID pandemic, variants may cause unforeseen 
disruptions to travel and Project implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Project will likely start well after COVID has run its course; however, in the event  of new variants the 
PMU and EE will be ready to implement necessary COVID -safety practices such as masking, social 
distancing and reducing travel to areas with low health care options. Mitigation will reduce impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 - Prohibited practices including money laundering and terrorist financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Prohibited Activities  Low Medium  
Description  
The Project involves a large number of actors for successful implementation including ministries, government 
agencies, NGOs, sub -grantees, vendors, service providers, community members and beneficiaries. 
Specifically, there is an intention to distribute or  disperse to beneficiaries both directly and indirectly 
commodities and other items of value such as the distribution of seedlings for trees that will produce fruits or 
contribute to enhancing biodiversity of farming systems, access to improved cook stoves  as well as the


---
*Page 568*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 127 
  
 possibility for distribution of bees to start honey operations. As with any project infusing large sums of money 
directly or indirectly with multiple actors, corruption could occur.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Since the 1990s Rwanda has set a s ocial foundation for anti -corruption efforts by establishing policies and 
procedures to prevent corruption/reduce vulnerability to corruption and sanctioning misbehavior through 
prosecutions. Specifically, a reduction in administrative corruption is of not e for a large project such as the 
one proposed. The systems in place will reduce the potential for prohibited activities. Additionally, 
commitment to campaigns for individuals to report corruption has created a societal norm for intolerance. As 
a result, R wanda moved from a state of high corruption 20 years ago to a level on par with middle income 
countries. The International Monetary Fund published an assessment of Anti Money Laundering and 
Combating Financing of Terrorism in 2015 indicating that while the  risk of AML/CFT is low, at that time more 
could be done to bolster the systems in place to address the issue. At present, the GoR has robust measures 
to fight money laundering and terrorist financing. This was done first by enacting the law N° 001/FIC/202 2 of 
16/02/2022 on Regulations relating to anti -money laundering, combating the financing of terrorism. The 
Rwanda government has also put in place a special agency for this purpose named Financial Intelligence 
Center (FIC) with a clear mission to promote financial system integrity by conducting effective financial 
intelligence to counter money laundering, the financing of terrorism and related financial crimes in 
governmental institutions, projects, and parastatal agencies under the supervision of the Mini stry of Finance 
and economic planning. MoE and the GCF Project under its supervision will also comply with FIC regulations. 
The MoE also has an Internal Audit function as well as regular audit conducted by the Office of the Auditor 
General to carry out the  efficiency and effectiveness of internal controls.  
Regarding higher level security threats, at present, there are no UN Security Council Sanctions against 
Rwanda, though it is noted that there are sanctions in Democratic Republic of Congo, close to the Congo 
Nile Divide. The UN Security Council Consolidated Sanctions list indicates approximately 20 individuals with 
ties to Rwanda, a small percentage of whom may live in the country. This list has been circulated to the AEs 
and will be cross checked when h iring for the project and once project sites are selected to ensure these 
individuals will not be involved in any manner with the Project or its activities, either as a counterparty, 
implementer, or beneficiary.  
To report and remedy any risks that may occu r, the MoE will maintain a Project level grievance redress 
mechanism to which anyone can report on the occurrence of prohibited activities. All complaints will be 
investigated following the process identified in Annex 6. Any complaints believed to contribu te to prohibited 
activities will be referred to the appropriate authorities in Rwanda.  
Assuming all staff will be made aware of the prohibited activities, all subcontractors/counterparties will be 
screened for engagement of activities and made aware of th eir obligations to alert the PMU and/or submit 
grievances related to such activities occurring as part of the Project, the overall impact of the money 
laundering and financing of terrorism risk on the Project will be LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 - Politica l Risk  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Low 
Description


---
*Page 569*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 128 
  
 Political risk is in part driven by long -standing frictions with neighboring countries and the potential for 
domestic instability in these countries to spill over into Rwanda. These geopolitical challenges constrain 
Rwanda’s longer -term development as a se rvices hub. Although the government of Rwanda has been 
effective in its pursuit of social stability through targeted transfers and support and improving accountability 
at all levels from Villages and to national levels through village councils, JADF and Um ushyikirano (National 
Dialogue Council - an annual forum that brings together leaders and citizens to reflect on the country’s 
progress and share ideas to solve ongoing challenges, this political risk may impede implementation 
including potential implement ation delays and fall under GCF's policy on restructuring and cancellation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Much of the work of the project will be taking place within a Ministry and through work at the community level. 
Oftentimes, regardless of political instabil ities, communities with devolved decision -making structures and 
local capacity will have a greater chance to withstand that instability and continue to operate.  For this project, 
much of the work will be turned over to the local community leaders and the laborers hired locally who will 
be trained and will then own the capacity to do this work in the long -term, regardless of what national 
leadership is in place. The structures resulting from this workplace citizens participation in decision making 
which wil l constitute a buffer against potential domestic instability. Mitigation will reduce impact to LOW.  
Selected Risk Factor 9 - Expansion of tea plantations  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Macroeconomic/Political  Low High 
Description  
Projected climate changes predict significant elevation rises in CND agro ecological zones, including the 
potential for tea cultivation at much higher elevations than at present. This is unlikely to threaten Rwanda’s 
existing montane forest protected areas, as forei gn revenues from tourism in these reserves far surpass 
those from tea. However, tea remains a significant source of foreign revenue and a government target for 
expansion. Any increased tea production in the CND would therefore most likely affect lands outs ide of 
parks: smallholder, cooperative, and district holdings, many of which might also be targets for reforestation, 
agroforestry, and biodiversity stepping stone initiatives under this Project.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The integrated land use planning inc luded in this Project design, will bring together tea industry, agriculture, 
forestry, biodiversity, and tourism interests to identify and reduce such potential conflicts over use of the 
CND’s limited land resource base. Through this integrated land use pl anning we aim to establish a formal 
public -private sector forum at the landscape level to help improve communication across sectors, 
appreciation of environmental issues, and increase synergies between interventions to avoid conflicting 
targets and indicat ors between sectors and advocate for mainstreaming biodiversity and climate change in 
different economic sectors.  
Selected Risk Factor 10 - Timely provision of Co -financing  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Low Low


---
*Page 570*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 129 
  
 Description  
The Project co -financiers may delay providing their co -financing commitment which can jeopardize 
implementation and hence project intended objectives could not be met.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The Accredited Entity has already requested for commitments of co-financing from all the project co -
financiers which are already Government of Rwanda institutions, and all the committed co -financing are 
already part of the Institutions Day  to day mandates hence there is anticipated low impact on the project 
implementa tion  
 
 
 
(e) GCF  POLICIES  AND  STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  
As proposed, the environmental and social risk category for the Project is Category B or ‘moderate risk” 
according to GCF classification. The project was  partially screened for potential social and environmental 
risks, following GCF requirements (Annex 6). All preliminary potential negative impacts for activities and sub -
activities were determined to be minimal, reversible and readily mitigated through gen erally accepted 
mitigation measures and standard international practices, thus in the low to moderate categories. While the 
impacts will occur within the Congo Nile Divide Project area boundary and implementation zone, the specific 
locations and communitie s affected by Project activities will be determined in Project implementation thus 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework has been developed for a more thorough screening 
of all activities by the AE/EE.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measu re and Management 
Strategies


---
*Page 571*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 130 
  
 Environmental and social risks: For all Project 
components, disproportionate benefit distribution to 
some groups and not others including women, youth, 
historically marginalized people and Rwanda’s poverty 
categories ( Ubudehe) C, D, and E is a risk. Such power 
differentials could exacerbate exposure to sexual 
abuse, exploitation and harassment, a risk that may 
affect all Project components if unmitigated. The 
Project may cause social risks including loss of access 
to la nds due to new land classifications or stricter 
implementation of land use and park laws, 
displacement of informal land occupants due to 
afforestation/reforestation, and loss of access to land 
for food production. The potential for invasive species 
spread in the reforestation/afforestation components, 
water usage during increased seedling production at 
nurseries, terrace stabilization for planting, loss of 
topsoil to erosion during planting, disturbance to wildlife 
during afforestation or reforestation, mod ification of 
water flow and topsoil that could increase exposure to 
disease, increased human -wildlife interactions with 
increased tree cover and fruit trees, air quality impacts 
from cookstove production at scale, and supply chain 
impacts for livelihoods i nterventions all have associated 
environmental and social risks to be thoroughly vetted 
as specific sites and beneficiaries are identified.  The PMU will hire an Environmental and Social 
Safeguards (ESS) Specialist to oversee the application 
of the ESMF for  a more thorough assessment of impacts 
by specific activities during Project implementation. The 
ESS Specialist will also oversee stakeholder 
engagement, sensitize all relevant staff on social 
safeguards and community engagement including SEAH 
training, an d ensure Project activities target vulnerable 
groups to build resilient livelihoods. Consent processes 
will be established with communities. The Project will 
have a Project -level grievance redress process available 
to address complaints that aligns and com plements the 
grievance redress used by the MoE. The PMU will also 
hire an Environmental Management Specialist (EMS) 
who will work with the ESS on environmental 
assessment and implementing proper mitigation 
processes as required.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measure and Management 
Strategies  
Labor and working conditions: The dangers involve 
the potential for sexual abuse, exploitation and 
harassment (SEAH) in the hiring process or while 
working, forced labor, child labor, and exposure to 
occupational health and safety risks. These risks 
include safety of laborers removing ferns and planting 
trees on steep slopes, exposure to potential disease 
vectors in standing water or soil and large scale 
fabrication of stoves, risks using the machinery in the 
production of stoves, exposure to bees in honey 
production as well as other si milar risks.  The ESS will coordinate with AE/EE human resources 
staff to conduct a Labor and Working Conditions Risk 
Assessment that will inform the development of a Labor 
and Working Conditions Risk Management Plan. The 
ESS and HR staff will appoint fiel d safety leads within 
each sector. These individuals will receive training on 
National Laws governing labor and working conditions, 
SEAH, and other risks relevant to the activities that 
involve the hiring of laborers during the course of the 
Project.


---
*Page 572*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 131 
  
 Resource efficiency and pollution prevention: The 
stabilization of terraces risks topsoil loss and terrace 
collapse due to deteriorating conditions and improper 
long-term maintenance and extreme weather events. 
Pollution/waste may be created across the sup ply 
chains for stove production and distribution. Pesticides 
and fertilizers may be used for seedling production. 
Water usage in nurseries could divert resources for 
others. The release of CO2 emissions in the sourcing 
and distribution of materials in 
reforestation/afforestation as well as the livelihood 
enhancement activities could also pose a risk.  The ESS, EMS, and a Procurement Specialist will 
conduct activity -specific assessment for resource 
efficiency and pollution control. During implementation 
they will oversee subcontracts for 
reforestation/afforestation and all livelihoods 
enhancement projects. For stabilization of terraces, the 
subcontractor will have an engineer oversee the 
technical components of stabilization to ensure best 
practices and reduct ion of risks.  For livelihoods 
enhancement projects the ESS and Procurement 
Specialist will ensure environmentally sourced materials 
and establish measures to minimize production waste 
and maximize distribution efficiency of stoves. The EMS 
will work with nurseries on plans for mitigating pesticides, 
fertilizers and water use.  
Community safety and security: Increased risk of  
forest fires due to increasing tree coverages, increased 
exposure to vector -borne diseases, human wildlife 
conflicts associated with reforestation/afforestation and 
the influx of international funding that shifts power 
dynamics and creates environments prone to increased 
incidents of SEAH. With expected changes in land 
classifications, interactions among law enforcement 
and informal land owners or communities who use the 
resources could become more prevalent and increase 
risks of harm if law enforcement lacks proper training 
for working with communities. Work on steep slippery 
slopes, working with bees, use of new cook st oves and 
work in remote locations (e.g., fern removal) will require 
safety considerations for participating community 
members. Extreme weather or global events (e.g. 
pandemic) may disrupt safety and security.  The ESS will screen each activity for communit y, safety 
and security risks. The EE will have at a minimum, an 
Emergency Response and Preparedness Plan to 
address specific local hazards and response at each site; 
all staff will be trained on the plan as well as on disease 
prevention and hygiene, SEAH p revention, and 
addressing human -wildlife conflicts. The PMU will need 
to address at a high level across the GoR the potential 
for escalating conflicts among landowners and law 
enforcement as land classifications change in the course 
of the Project.  
Summary of Risks  Mitigation Factors / Measure and Management 
Strategies  
Resource access/restrictions: Land classification 
processes could result in changes that affect resource 
access due to existing land use, occupancy, and land 
tenure in the CND especially among farmers, settlers, 
and traditional uses of the land and forest. At a smaller 
scale with less risk, as tree planting and transitions to 
native or value -added species (e.g. fruit trees) 
commence, access to tree resources may be 
diminished un til trees grow larger and become usable.  The ESS will screen all Project activities for the potential 
to cause displacement, namely access restrictions to 
resources. The Project is committed to stakeholder 
engagement and will mitigate access restrictions r isks 
through a process framework and mitigation hierarchy. 
The AE grievance redress process will manage access 
complaints.


---
*Page 573*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 132 
  
 Biodiversity conservation: The inadvertent 
introduction of non -native/invasive pest 
species/diseases during forestry/agroforestry related 
activities could negatively impact production and forest 
health. Wildlife may be disturbed in the course of fern 
removal and/or tree planting as well as other potential 
livelihood activities that will be implemented. Human -
wildlife interactions may increase as a result of 
increased forest cover and fruit trees being available in 
the CND. This could cause landowners to retaliate 
against wildlife.  The ESS will screen all Project activities for biodiversity 
and conservation risks/impacts. Mitigation measures will 
be put in place to ensure tree planting, nursery 
management, and seedling distribution incorporate 
training by consultants on invasive speci es recognition 
and management and that options for managing human -
wildlife conflicts are able should issues arise.  
Historically marginalized peoples:  
Rwanda is a nation with a single/common culture, 
tribe, language and with a national constitution that 
recognizes all Rwandans are born and remain equal 
in rights and freedom (article 16 of Rwandan 
Constitution, 2015).  That said, there are historically 
marginalized groups as well as categories c,d, e, 
groups in the areas of the project activities.  The risks 
are that the impacts of project activities on these 
groups are not adequately considered and analyzed 
and further that the intended benefits for these  groups 
do not materialize given a lack of attention to their 
particular needs and vulnerabilities. Should this occur, 
the overall intent of the project could be in jeopardy 
given the focus on making such communities more 
resilient in light of climate chan ge uncertainties.  As the project focuses on providing benefits, in particular 
increased resilience to climate change for vulnerable 
communities, the ESS will pay particular attention to the 
screening for activity level impacts on historically 
marginalized and categories c,d ,e. Thus far, 24 focus 
groups with 4 exclusively historically marginalized, 5 
exclusively women and 3 exclusively youth participants 
informed the project design and provided insights on 
impacts and improved ways of benefiting individuals in 
these groups (s ee Annex 6, section 4). A detailed plan 
for engaging with women, youth, those below the poverty 
line and landless groups will be prepared by project staff 
in collaboration with district, sector, and local ngo leaders 
in the project implementation phase as specific projects 
and locations are determined . In addition,  all interactions 
with these groups will include processes for obtaining 
consent as well as clarity regarding access to the 
grievance redress process should complaints arise 
during the project.  
 
Risk details and screening assessment to be conducted in Project implementation are described in the 
Partial Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (Annex 6). Positive project impacts include a focus on  improving resilience of the most vulnerable 
communities, communities stewarding/ harnessing the carbon cycle and reducing greenhouse gasses by 
sequestering carbon (i.e., through conserving indigenous trees, increasing soil organic carbon, and 
practicing r egenerative agriculture); and utilizing efficient cook stoves. The PMU/ESS will be responsible for 
conducting screenings, including screenings for project -level impacts on historically marginalized groups of 
each Project activity as specific locations and beneficiaries are determined and with implementing mitigation 
measures aligned with Rwanda National Laws and GCF policies and practices. These measures include a 
commitment to training in all relevant EE staff on stakeholder and community engagement; conse nt with 
local communities; access restrictions mitigations; SEAH and adhering to the labor and safety laws that meet 
international best practices. The full Stakeholder Engagement Plan can be found in Annex 7. The EE and 
the AE will develop a compliance mon itoring, supervision and reporting schedule that meets requirements 
in the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy. The AE will establish a


---
*Page 574*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 133 
  
 Program -level grievance redress mechanism that includes a process of public notificati on, documentation, 
investigation and resolution. This GRM will complement the MoE GRM.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan  
Women, youth and marginalized groups in the CND are key stakeholders in the Project and its primary 
beneficiaries. The Project will be implemented across various sectors along the CND, where natural forests 
are particularly vulnerable due to high populatio n, increasing dependence upon fuelwood, and illegal use of 
forests to improve income streams. The Gender Assessment uses a range of primary (24 focus groups and 
18 key informant interviews) and secondary (published reports, policies and academic literature ) sources to 
triangulate our understanding of gender in climate resilience and Project design. The Gender Analysis 
identified and analyzed gender risks and impacts of the program and climate change through four steps: 
scoping; legislative and policy review ; stakeholder consultation and analysis; and baseline analysis. The 
Action Plan operationalizes the findings from the Assessment, the ESIA, and youth -based information 
collected during the feasibility studies and stakeholder consultation.  Despite tremendo us policy and legal 
efforts, a patriarchal culture and persistent disparities characterize gender relations in Rwanda. Disparities 
persist in post -primary education; in access to and control of property, including land and economic 
resources; in employment  opportunities and entrepreneurship; in decision -making at household and 
community levels; in family responsibilities and unpaid care work; and in the experience of violence, 
harassment, conflict, and insecurity. Sexual and gender -based violence persists a t high levels. While women 
have made impressive political progress, especially at the national level, their local political representation 
and engagement remains unequal. Economic opportunities remain markedly gender -differentiated. In 
Rwanda and the CND, structural barriers to economic and political equity and female empowerment have 
significantly impeded measures to adapt to climate change impacts. While these structural inequalities are 
lower compared to other countries because of leading gender -consider ate policies across sectors, the point 
remains that women’s ability to access, use and control natural resources, infrastructure and services is 
different and low compared to men. This means the degradation of natural resources and new infrastructure 
will affect genders differently and result in greater vulnerability for women. However, women are vital change 
agents and can be powerful leaders from community to global levels in mitigating and adapting to climate 
change. Three key themes in the Gender and So cial Inclusion Action Plan include i) Change negative gender 
and social norms, ii) Provide access to skills building, leadership and programmatic inclusion, and iii) 
Facilitate women’s financial autonomy. Youth account for over 50% of Rwanda’s population. An analysis 
was done to determine how GCF funding could support activities to align with and strengthen the 
sustainability of the overall program by supporting youth through the following activity themes: i) Non land -
based opportunities, ii) Access to skil ls building, and iii) Youth leadership and Programmatic Inclusion. Social 
norms are difficult to change, and deeply entrenched biases will require active engagement by men, women, 
and youth, in decision -making roles as well as grassroots stakeholders. By w orking through the themes 
outlined above, social and technical barriers to participating in decision -making, planning, and activities will 
be addressed. Specific targets will be developed after a brief inception phase. Further details are in Annex 
8. 
G.3.  Financial management and procurement  
Funds from GCF will be provided to the MOE's GCF account  (as the AE), under the terms of the  FAA.  MoE 
will be responsible for financial management and accountable for the use of GCF resources. Financial 
transactions will be subject to annual audits undertaken by internationally certified auditors. In addition, as 
the AE, MoE will: i) ensure that the p roject is executed in accordance with GCF standards; ii) supervise,


---
*Page 575*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 134 
  
 oversee and manage the implementation of project interventions; iii) report on Project progress; and iv) 
ensure that Project activities are well coordinated and aligned with countries' nat ional priorities. MoE will 
provide oversight to the project consisting of a) entering into a subsidiary agreement with the EE (RFA); b) 
managing and disbursing GCF funds to the EE, after providing no objection to work plans and budgets; c) 
reviewing financ ial expenditures and progress reports; d) overseeing Project implementation in accordance 
with the Project document and Annual Work Plans and Budgets, agreements with co -financiers and each 
executing entity rules and procedures; e) providing technical guid ance to ensure that the appropriate 
technical quality is applied to all Project activities; f) providing financial reports to the GCF for Project funds 
received; g) ensuring that the project complies with the terms agreed in the Project’s respective FAA as  well 
as the AMA signed between MoE and the GCF; and h) undertaking regular annual supervision missions 
according to the MoE’s guidelines and convene  Project  Steering Committee (PSC) meeting twice a year  
aimed to review progress and approve  work plans.  The PMU will manage, monitor and report on day -to-day 
implementation of the EE. The EE will execute the tasks within the overall project management structure: a) 
implementing day -to-day activities as per the project work plan and budget, including the Env ironmental and 
Social Management Plan; b) undertaking procurement activities as per the agreement signed by GCF and 
AE as well as the sub -agreement signed by the AE and EE; c) managing contracts of suppliers and services 
providers; d) hiring and managing p roject staff relevant to the EE -managed project areas; e) implementing 
activities as per the project work plan; and f) carrying out financial and technical monitoring of activities, 
including the achievement of outputs and outcomes the EE are in charge of.  The EE will enter into a 
Memorandum of Understanding with different partner agencies that will provide technical know -how to the 
implementation of the project activities. Procured parties will be contracted in accordance with MoE rules 
and regulations of procuring goods and services. The financial management structure of the project is built 
on the Permanent Secretary of MoE, the Project Coordinator/ Chief of Party and the Finance Management 
Specialist at the PMU level who will oversee and monitor the proj ect finances with project directors and 
finance managers from the EE (RFA).  
The project will be executed by Rwanda Forestry Authority (RFA), a Rwanda government entity affiliated to 
the Ministry of Environment with a semi -autonomous legal entity. RFA has t ransparent and accountable 
financial management systems in place, which are essential elements for the effective, accountable 
management of the project. RFA will follow the Government of Rwanda procedures for planning, budgeting, 
and accounting, which are outlined in the law n° 12/2013/ol of 12/09/2013 on state finances and property, 
and ministerial order n°001/16/10/tc of 26/01/2016 relating to financials; and supporting operational manuals 
issued by the Ministry of Finance.  
The MoE shall ascertain that t he EE has in place efficient internal control systems, review financial reports 
and proceed funds disbursements and will also periodically inspect the project for compliance as well as 
coordinate audits exercises for the EE. RFA will enter into agreements with MoE that outline general 
modalities of the funds management in line with GCF grant requirements and RFA’s policies. GCF funds will 
be transferred to an RFA designated bank account. Funds will be disbursed to the EE based on agreed 
annual work plans an d budgets, and its reporting will be on a quarterly basis. The project financial processes 
will rely on the EE’s charts of accounts, internal control systems, disbursement plans, budgeting, expenditure 
management and accounting, reporting, and assets manag ement as assessed by MoE. Procurement 
regulations embed the principles of fairness, transparency, accountability and the promotion of competitive 
economy and efficiency. The Project will be audited annually and commissioned by the Accredited Entity 
(MoE) t o produce certified financial statements and reports to ascertain that GCF funds are well managed. 
The project will maintain a regularly updated record of all assets and documents that will be retained for at 
least 5 years after the end of the project.


---
*Page 576*
---

F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 135 
  
 G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.


---
*Page 577*
---

H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 136 
  
  
(f) ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones  
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval    
☐ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☒ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☒ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)


---
*Page 578*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 579*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
 
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide t hrough Forest 
and Landscape Restoration   
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Ministry of Environment  (MoE) of the Republic of Rwanda  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project  or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Three Provinces of Rwanda (Western, Southern, and 
Northern) in 10 Districts (Karongi, Musanze, Ngororero, 
Nyabihu, Nyamagabe, Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru, Rubavu, 
Rusizi, and Rutsiro).  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans . 
Link to disclosure  English : 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76268&token=0d001d8f3dc586127656b6b8280
da983d72dda02  
 
Kinyarwanda*:  
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76248&token=a3f7cf9afd24f1eacdd08dc21dd9cd
9299ad1e25  
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans .  
Link to disclosure  English : 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76268&token=0d001d8f3dc586127656b6b8280
da983d72dd a02 
 
Kinyarwanda *: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76248&token=a3f7cf9afd24f1eacdd08dc21dd9cd
9299ad1e25


---
*Page 580*
---

Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”  
Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website   Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Kinyarwanda  
Explanation on language  Kinyarwanda is the national language spoken by all 
Rwandans . 
Link to disclosure  English : 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76268&token=0d001d8f3dc586127656b6b8280
da983d72dda02  
 
Kinyarwanda *: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFil
e&t=f&f=76248&token=a3f7cf9afd24f1eacdd08dc2 1dd9cd
9299ad1e25  
Other link(s)  N/A 
Remarks  A Historically Marginalized Peoples Plan , which serves as an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework , is contained as an 
Annex to the ESMF.  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples  (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, September 22, 2023  
Place  To accommodate for those who may not have access to the 
Internet, a computer, or a reliable power source, the 
Ministry of Environment will be sharing the ESMF 
documents to the following districts:  
• Karongi district  (2.0526° S, 29.4128° E), P.O Box: 23  
Kibuye , village: Kamuvu nyi, Cell: Gacaca, district: 
KArongi  
• Musanze district  (1.5020° S, 29.6332° E), P.O Box: 03 
Musanze, village: Byimana, Cell: Ruhengeri, District: Musanze  
• Ngororero district  (1.8537° S, 29.6347° E) , P.O Box: 
103 Muhanga, village: Ngororero, Cell: Kazabe, 
district: Ngororero  
• Nyabihu district  (1.5911° S, 29.5220° E) , P.O Box: 
125 Musanze village: Mukamira Cell: Rubaya 
District: Nyabihu


---
*Page 581*
---

• Nyamagabe district  (2.4671° S, 29.5736° E) , P.O 
BOX: 36 Gikongoro , village: Nyarusange , Cell: 
Nyamugari , district: N yamagabe 
• Nyamasheke district ( -2.342014193676258, 
29.08901503907659), P.O Box: 72 Nyamasheke, 
village:Gikuyu, Cell: Ninzi, district:Nyamasheke  
 
• Nyaruguru district  (2.6987° S, 29.5703° E) , P.O Box: 
215 Butare village: Nyarusovu Cell: Mubuga , district: 
Nyaruguru  
• Rubavu district  (1.6736° S, 29.2886° E) , P.O Box: 173 
Gisenyi; village: Ny aburanga , Cell: Nengo , district: 
Rubavu  
• Rusizi district  (2.4830° S, 28.9054° E) , P.O Box: 253 
Rusizi , village: Ntwali, Cell:Cyangugu, district: 
Rubavu  
• Rutsiro district  (1.9617° S, 29.3857° E)  P.O Box: 49 
Kibuye , village: Nduba, Cell: Congo -Nil district: 
Rutsiro  
 
and request them to have physical copies of ESS reports  in 
their local government offices , publish an Executive 
Summary of the ESMF on their not ice board in both 
Kinyarwanda and English and publish it on their website to 
ensure it is accessed by all affected people in their location 
as well as to those who may have access to the Internet, a 
compute r. 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, October 23, 2023  
 Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.  
 
* Subsequent to  the disclosure of the ESS report to the Board and active observers on 22 September 2023, the 
following update has been made: the links to the Environmental & Social Management Framework (ESMF), 
in which the ESMF document -had been made available, have bee n updated for both English and 
Kinyarwanda. The footnote 86 has been removed.


---
*Page 582*
---

GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 144 
Secretariat’s assessment  of FP 217 
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda  
Country/(ies):  Rwanda  
Project/programme size: Small  
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
This Congo Nile Divide  project will 
safeguard Rwanda ’s biodiversity, enhance 
climate resilience, and support vulnerable 
communities.  The project should ensure linkage to other 
GCF funded projects in the country. In 
addition, we encourage MOE Rwanda to 
establish finan cial mechanisms to upscale 
across the wider landscape.  
The project is  located in  the Albertine Rift, 
which is one of the most biologically rich 
regions in Africa, containing more than half 
of Africa’s birds and 40% of its mammals.  The project should ensure monitoring and 
evaluation of the project interventions is 
undertaken.  
With more frequent extreme rainfall events 
in recent years, this agricultural landscape is 
recognized as the region of Rwanda most 
vulnerable to floods and landslides.  
Project interventions will include improved 
management  on 250,000 hectares (ha)  
(including promotion of natural 
regeneration/planting on 10,000 ha) and 
improved agroforestry practices on 2,000 ha 
of on -farm plantations . 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XXI titled “List of proposed conditions 
and recommendations” , respectively.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’ s assessment
2.1 Project ba ckground  
3. The proposed project’s goal is to improve the resilience of vulnerable communities to
climate variability and shocks by increasing the extent and integrity of natural forests and by
strengthening the capacity for climate -responsive forest and land scape management. The
project will:


---
*Page 583*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 145 
 
 
(a) Strengthen institutional and regulatory frameworks for low -emission climate -resilient 
development pathway s by mainstreaming climate change into integrated land -use 
planning.  
(b) Increase the climate resilience of vulnerable rural communities through forest and 
landscape restoration and reducing demand for fuelwood.  
4. The proposed interventions will target districts along the Congo Nile Divide  (CND)  
region. Rwanda’s CND, an area of 444,600 hectares  (ha) , is a high -elevation land scape of 
remnant natural forest reserves embedded in a mosaic of intensively managed smallholder 
farms and commercial plantations. The CND separates the drainage basins of the Congo and Nile 
Rivers. It is part of the Albertine Rift, which is one of the mos t biologically rich regions in Africa 
and “one of the most important regions for conservation” on the continent, containing more 
than half of Africa’s birds and 40  per cent of its mammals.   
5. Though covering barely 5  per cent of the country, this archipelag o of protected forests is 
of critical importance for:  
(a) Its globally recognized high biodiversity values ; 
(b) Its role in Rwanda’s acclaimed ecotourism offerings , serving as the primary source of 
Rwanda’s foreign revenue and as a major economic development drive r; 
(c) The ecosystem services provided for surrounding subsistence farmlands as well as 
commercial tea and coffee plantations offering employment opportunities for women 
while providing the  second and third  highest sources of foreign revenue ;  
(d) The regulation o f water capture and release to growing urban centr es on the CND 
periphery, the nation’s extensive river network, and downstream hydroelectric 
operations; and  
(e) The sequestration and storage of nearly 60  per cent of Rwanda’s national carbon stocks . 
6. These values and services are already compromised by a combination of anthropogenic 
and climatic factors; they will be much more severely threatened by the potential negative 
feedback loops associated with projected climate change impacts. The project will  promote an 
ecosystem -based approach to forest protection and restoration and will increase the extent and 
resilience of forest ecosystems and species, including by functionally linking currently isolated 
forest fragments. Through these approaches, the project will protect, restore and rehabilitate 
forest ecosystems,  thus  enhancing biodiversity and reducing key threats while increasing the 
provision of critical ecosystem services to strengthen  the adaptation of vulnerable communities.  
7. Project interventions will directly benefit 1,254,242 people (654,404 women). The 
project will also indirectly benefit 9,260,745 people and create approximately 24,212 job 
opportunities in forest -dependent communities. The total mitigation impact is estimated to be 
1,204,448  tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  (t CO 2 eq) by 2043.  
8. The total project financing is USD 50,000,000 with a request for GCF grants of USD 
39,056,422. The Rwanda Forestry Authority  (RFA) , Rwanda Water Board  (RWB) , Rwanda 
Development Board  (RDB)  and the Minis try of Environment  of Rwanda (MOE Rwanda)  will 
provide co -financing of USD 10,831,308 in grants. MOE  Rwanda  will also provide  an in-kind 
contribution of  USD  112,271. The project is submitted under environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category B.


---
*Page 584*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 146 
 
 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1: Mainstreaming climate adaptation into integrated land-use planning (total cost: 
USD 2.9 million; GCF cost: USD 2.9 million)   
9. This component aims to integrate climate change adaptation considerations into land -
use planning at the national and subnational levels. The goal is to achieve climate resilience 
through col labor ation among government agencies, civil society, the private sector and diverse 
partners. The component has two main outputs : The first is to deve lop a climate -resilient land -
use plan for the CND by integrating climate adaptation information into existing land -use 
planning efforts. The second aims to strengthen institutional capacities in Rwanda to integrate 
biodiversity and climate risks into land -use planning.  
Component 2: Forest and landscape management and restoration (total cost: USD 18.9 million; 
GCF cost: USD 16.3 million)   
10. In this component, targeted interventions will integrate climate change awareness and 
adaptation into national forest pa rk planning, policies  and management, as well as restore 
degraded areas within those parks. These efforts will help sustain the forests’ rich biodiversity, 
the lucrative tourism revenues that flow into local and national economies, and the ecosystem 
servic es needed for  the climate resilience of vulnerable communities. This suite of activities will 
also identify priority areas outside of parks – in remnant natural stands, around wetlands and 
along streams – for protection and restoration.  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods (total cost: USD 22.6 
million; GCF cost: USD 15.3 million)   
11. The activities under this component aim to combine environmental conservation with 
socioeconomic development, creating a multifaceted app roach that resonates with the global 
commitment to sustainable growth. They include initiatives such as enhancing and restoring 
forest plantations, providing sustainable fuel sources, delivering carbon sequestration benefits 
totalling 522,606 t  CO 2 eq over  20 years, and developing comprehensive land -use planning. The 
other activities focus on rural livelihoods, financial services and sustainable farming methods.  
12. The component will support reafforestation on steep slopes on both public and 
smallholder privat e lands. It will develop farm -based agroforestry for climate -resilient species 
that produce fuelwood and/or market products, while conserving and enriching soils. The 
component will complement land -based production with a scaling -up of alternative value -chain 
products for smallholders that are nature -positive, including , but not limited to , tourism -based 
income, beekeeping, and improved cooking stoves. Central to these activities will be the 
facilitation of access to market chains and financial mechanisms f or establishing and 
maintaining businesses. Given that these activities are designed at the core to be profitable and 
promote financial sustainability, it is intended that they be replicable and sustained once GCF 
funding expires.  
Project management (total  cost: USD 3.1 million; GCF cost: USD 2.7 million)  
13. The Project Management Unit (PMU) of the CND project will be established under MOE 
Rwanda /Single Project Implementation Unit ( SPIU ) to manage day -to-day operations of 
complex program me interventions. Heade d by the Project Coordinator, who will also serve as 
the secretary and rapporteur of the Project Steering Committee , the PMU will be responsible for 
tasks such as managing and monitoring identified risks and reporting new risks to the  
accredited entity  (AE) and the Project Steering Committee . The PMU will adhere to MOE 
Rwanda /Government of Rwanda  recruitment practices and provide quarterly progress reports. 
The Project Coordinator  will report  to the MOE Rwanda /SPIU  Coordinator as the immediate 
supervisor an d to the Permanent Secretary as the secondary supervisor.


---
*Page 585*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 147 
 
 
14. The PMU ’s structure will comprise various specialists , including for monitoring and 
evaluation, procurement, gender, financial management, communication and outreach, along 
with an office manager and driver. Its staff will be selected and recruited following M OE 
Rwanda /Government of Rwanda  procedures, aiming for a lean management structure. 
Operations will conclude once the final project evaluation report and other required documents 
have be en submitted to M OE Rwanda , signifying a comprehensive and organized approach to 
the management of the entire program me. 
15. The GCF portion of this project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GC F Policy on Fees.  
III. Assessment of performance against  investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                                                                 Scale: N/A  
16. The projec t has  1,254,24  direct beneficiaries,  representing  30.9 per cent of the CND 
population , and 9,260,745  indirect beneficiaries , representing almost 70  per cent of Rwanda’s 
population. Additional adaptation benefits will include the training of 45,992 community 
members in forest management and restoration for clim ate resilience. Altogether, t he project 
will contribute to the restoration of 5,000 ha of intact forest, 2,500 ha of protective forests , 
3,346 ha of smallholder farmland, 1 ,000 ha of pastures and 1,500 ha of riparian linkages. 
Overall, 275,617 ha of landsc ape could potentially be positively impacted by the project. 
Although the project is focused on priority landscapes covering 275,617 ha, it is likely that 
benefits due to increased adaptive capacity could feasibly extend across the full 700,000 ha 
CND. The  project will generate mitigation benefits by sequest ering  approximately 250,841  t CO 2 
eq during the five-year project period, which is about 0.9  per cent  of the 28. 2 million t CO 2 eq 
reduction target in Rwanda’s Vision 2050. The total mitigation impact fr om reduced 
deforestation,  the introduction of  forest restoration and adoption of improved cookstoves is 
estimated to be 1,204,448 t CO 2 eq by 2043.  
17. The project contributes to  the implementation of Rwanda’ s updated nationally 
determined contribution ( NDC ) (2020) commitments. It is also aligned with the country’ s Green 
Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy and other national policies. The proposal objectives are 
also well aligned with the country’ National Forest Policy and related plans for reversing trends  
of high deforestation.  
18. With support from the NDC Partnership, Rwanda now has a single NDC implementation 
framework that captures both national and subnational climate actions and investments plans 
and includes a strategic program me for climate resilience,  scaling up renewable energy 
program me, green climate fund strategic framework, public investment priorities , sector 
strategic plans and district development strategies. Therefore, the proposed project is well 
supported by this existing NDC implementation framework that provides an enabling 
environment that will ensure climate actions undertaken are integrated in to national planning.  
19. The proposed project further strengthens the country ’s national and subnational 
adaptation priorities, approaches and plans through promoting ecosystem -based adaptation 
while utilizing climate science, effective landscape planning, p olicies, cross -sectoral 
coordination and management in addressing climate risks and adaptation benefits.  
20. The project in general seeks outcomes at a range of levels (from national through to 
catchment  level ) across the public sector, while scaling  up lesso ns and initiatives from aligned 
programming. It will build the capacity of MOE Rwanda (AE) and other related agencies and 
stakeholders to coordinate and col labor ate more effectively to help accelerate  subnational and 
local climate action. It is envisaged t hat these funds will also crowd in additional private sector


---
*Page 586*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 148 
 
 
capital (e.g. cookstoves and forest plantations ) while enabling the g overnment to implement the 
adaptation interventions. However, without a clear private sector framework or plan, this might 
be challenging to implement. Nonetheless, Rwanda has a GCF country program me and strategic 
framework and has managed GCF funded projects and program mes. 
21. Furthermore, the project clearly articulates the alignment, additionality and/or 
complementarity with seve ral ongoing or planned program mes funded by significant 
international and multilateral agencies (e.g. World Bank, Global Environment Facility  and 
United Nations Development Programme , etc.), which reflects on the experience  and track 
record of MOE Rwanda  to deliver on this project  interventions.   
3.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                                     Scale: N/A  
22. By utilizing integrated landscape and ecosystem -based adaptation approaches in 
addressing climate change impacts in Rwanda , the project  offers myriad opportunities for 
upscaling and replication to similar ecological zones across the country. This approach to land -
use planning and management is entirely new for Rwanda and will restore and sustain varied 
ecosys tem services for both adjacent and nationwide populations. The project coordination and 
collabor ation efforts across both geographic and sectoral boundaries , while mainstreaming 
climate risks in management planning , represents a fundamental paradigm shift for land -use 
planning and management in Rwanda.  
23. The project has the potential to contribute  to the regulatory frameworks and policies for 
driving climate investments in the forest and renewable energy sectors. The project will finance 
the development of t he integrated land -use plan , which will be adopted by all ten CND districts 
as a framework for seeking synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity 
protections, reconciling land -use conflicts that arise, and guiding development decisions  and 
climate change adaptation. It will also update the National Land Use Master Plan  to ensure it 
incorporates climate resiliency and is accurate and relevant to local contexts. The adoption of an 
integrated land-use planning approach helps to better reco ncile cross -sectoral trade -off’s  and 
improve climate adaptation planning in the CND ; this approach will prove a successful model 
for application in other regions of Rwanda and other forest/farming landscapes beyond. In 
addition, revising two national park management plans to include climate concerns will serve as 
a model for the remaining parks of Rwanda, as well as for the East Africa region.  
24. Overall, the project ’s efforts in shifting policy, practice and col labor ative learning 
processes symbolize a fundam ental change towards climate -resilient development pathways in 
Rwanda, with implications for broader regional application.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                              Scale: N/A  
25. The project is closely aligned with several Sustainable Development Goals. Key 
environmental benefits include restoration of degraded lands to reduce erosion, sedimentation, 
and landslide risks; the planting of native trees to enhance biological connectivity; and 
mitigation of greenhouse gas  emissions through both increased carbon sequestration and fuel -
efficient cookstove technologies.  
26. Social benefits extend to more than a million people, focusing on increased awareness of 
climate change, empowerment of the rural poor (with an emphasis on wo men ’s participation), 
and creation of social capital through col labor ative adaptation strategies. The project aims to 
significantly reduce poverty and inequality . It will provide economic co -benefits such as 
increased agricultural productivity, employment opportunities for around 24,212 households, 
modern beekeeping practices yielding significant income, and a net present value (NPV) of USD 
369 million over 20 years from forest restoration and other activities. Private capital


---
*Page 587*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 149 
 
 
investment is also targeted,  thus fostering a “triple bottom line” that balances social, 
environmental and economic benefits. Emphasis on gender -sensitive impacts ensures that 
women are actively engaged in planning and decision -making, leading to increased income, 
improved health and n utrition, and strengthened leadership and entrepreneurship skills.  
27. Overall, the project offers a comprehensive and strategic approach to sustainable 
development, thereby promoting climate resilience, economic growth, social cohesion and 
gender equality wi thin the CND region.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                Scale: N/A  
28. The project proposal interventions were designed from key findings and 
recommendations of a climate change vulnerability assessment of the selected project 
geographical area ( see a nnex 2). Climate exposure, sensitivity, adaptive capacity, impacts and 
barriers as well the greenhouse gas emissions profile were established and either quantified or 
supported with reference to scientific publications. Further, climate change impacts on t he 
target sectors as well as size and economic and social development of the target population , 
including critical barriers to reduce their vulnerability , are e labor ated herein. The proposed 
interventions are targeted to match the identified barriers. The vulnerability of the target 
sectors is quantified to the extent possible, however , gender disaggregation is covered in 
qualitative terms only.  
29. The CND landscape districts support nearly one  third of Rwanda’s population on barely 
one fifth of its land base . The total population is 1,598,536, of which women account for 52.2  per 
cent . Through the project interventions, targeted vulnerable groups will attain more climate -
resilient livelihoods  from reduced exposure to landslides, floods and soil erosion and mor e 
knowledge on climate risks, the value of forests and forest ecosystems, climate adaptation 
options, access to  quality  indigenous and agroforestry materials , and improved ecosystem 
services.  
3.5 Country ownership                                                                      Scale: N/A  
30. MOE Rwanda,  which is the AE for this proposal , clearly played a pivotal role in defining 
and drafting the proposal stakeholder engagement report and plan ( see a nnex 7) as it is aligned 
with Rwanda ’s GCF country program me stakeholder engagement strategic framework. In its 
country program me, Rwanda arti culated how it will conduct stakeholder engagement at the 
readiness stage and in delivering GCF concepts, projects and program mes. This process has 
provided Rwanda with an overarching framework that supports its stakeholder engagement 
processes, which is c learly seen in this proposal . This framework  can support the strengthening 
of local climate action from national to local levels with clear feedback loops and avenues for 
incorporating learning.  
31. The proposal indicates that a detailed stakeholder and gende r analysis were conducted, 
augmented by extensive consultations of various actors from national, subnational and local 
levels. A range of stakeholders from the public and civil society were consulted , in addition to 
government agencies at all levels that w ill be engaged throughout the project cycle, cutting 
across all key sectors and scale. The general concern relates to  local ownership and the transfer 
of knowledge that can sustain interventions after the project closure. It w ould be  ideal if 
Indigenous kn owledge and technology transfer is well factored in to implementation.


---
*Page 588*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 150 
 
 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                        Scale:  N/A  
32. Utilizing grant financing reflects the public good character of the investments, the 
proj ect aims to create a model that overcomes barriers to private  sector investment in 
Rwanda ’s forestry s ector. With an economic internal rate of return of 43.32  per cent  and a 
financial internal rate of  return  of 42  per cent , the project is estimated to generate a n NPV  of 
more than US D 120.48 million over 20 years,  which  translat es to US D 64 per direct beneficiary. 
The mitigation cost is estimated to be US D 43.84 per t  CO 2 eq. Implementing best practices for 
tree planting and utilizing cuttin g-edge monitoring technologies, the project is aligned with 
similar initiatives and sets the stage for potential replication in other regions. Its community -
focused approach, including measures to develop economically viable units, contributes to a 
threefo ld increase in net economic benefits compared to a scenario without the project.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
33. Project background : The project aims to increase resilience of vulnerable rural 
communities in the Rwandan side of the CND by building capacity for integrated planning and 
management through forest and landscape restoration and reducing demand for fuelwood. The 
project will involve the formulation and implementation of plans (i.e. int egrated district land -
use plans and enhancements of general management plans of national parks), coordination with 
various agencies, capacity -building, and physical interventions on the ground. This includes 
afforestation/reforestation of protected forest and private landholdings, installation of soil 
conservation measures, ecological interventions such as fern removal in natural forest s and 
restoration of degraded forest s in Gishwati -Mukura National Park , production and distribution 
of fuel -efficient cooks toves, beekeeping activities , and support for the value chain s of these 
enterprises. Among the environmental and social  (E&S)  co-benefits are the enhancement of the 
unique, endemic biodiversity of the area through decreased sedimentation, improved water 
quality and recharge, reduced erosion, decrease in loss of soil organic matter as a result of forest 
restoration and establishment of connectivity between the forests across the CND landscape. 
The project is also expected to contribute to the empowerment of the women and youth in the 
target areas.  
34. E&S risk category and safeguards instrument : The overall project E&S  risk category  is 
Category B (moderate). The Secretariat confirms the proposed E&S risk category since the 
project is, in itself, an environmental and social enhancement project. The potential adverse E&S 
risks and impacts will mainly come from the implementation of ground activities , are expected 
to be mostly minimal  and highly localized  and can be avoided/mitigated through careful design 
and the ap plication of generally accepted mitigation measures and standards. The Secretariat 
conforms to the assigned risk category and it is within the accreditation level of the AE. A partial 
environmental and social impact assessment and environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) have been prepared for the project.  
35. Compliance with the GCF ESS standards : The paragraphs below provide a brief 
description of the programme’s compliance with ESS standards.  
36. ESS 1 (Assessment and managem ent of environmental and social risks and 
impacts) : The ESMF discussed the baseline socioeconomic conditions of the project area. It has 
also provided a general assessment of the risks and impacts of the project. The assessment 
included an indication of th e positive and negative components of the activities and 
subactivities, the consequence of the impact, the probability that the impact will occur, the 
duration for which the impacts are expected to occur, and the overall significance of the impact.


---
*Page 589*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 151 
 
 
Neverth eless, given that much of the project activities cannot yet be fully specified in terms of 
location, ownership, design and approach and will only be identified and fully specified through 
consultations and coordination with various stakeholders during proj ect implementation, the 
ESMF provided the basis for identifying the risks and impacts of the subprojects and defining 
the processes and procedures to be applied in assessing and managing the risks and impacts of 
individual project activities during impleme ntation. The major anticipated negative impacts of 
the proposed activities and subactivities include , but are not limited to: disproportionate 
distribution of project benefits, potential for gender -based violence  (GBV) , risks related to 
labo ur and working conditions, community health and safety, potential for introduction of 
invasive species and pests on planted seedlings, water use at nurseries diverting from other 
uses, use of pesticides and fertilizers in seedling production, destabilization and erosion during 
construction/reconstruction of terraces, land classification that impact access and introduce 
restrictions, increased exposure to disease/vector -borne illnesses, potential for negative 
human -wildlife interactions, and environmental risks related to the supply chain. Among the 
mitigating measures include a commitment to stakeholder engagement, a process of consent, 
training on sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment ( SEAH ), establishing a grievance redress 
mechanism  (GRM) , adhering to the labo ur and  safety laws and international good practices, 
providing training on invasive species management, providing oversight in the supply chain, 
and adopt ion of  practices to reduce the use of chemicals and production of wastes.  
37. ESS 2 (Labo ur and working conditio ns): The project will likely require the hiring of 
professionals, service personnel and assistants , and activities on the ground such as terracing, 
removal of ferns and reforestation/afforestation activities will require  the hiring of field 
workers and labourers. Risks associated with these activities include , but are not limited to , the 
potential for SEAH in the hiring process or at work, forced labour , child labour , and exposure to 
occupational health and safety hazards. Workers may be exposed to hazardous working 
environments such as steep slopes, disease vectors in standing waters, safety hazards in the 
fabrication/production of stoves, and exposure to bee stings in honey production, among other  
things . The project will ensure proper labour  and working conditions are provided to workers 
(e.g. in forest camps) , and trainings on labour  and occupational health and safety standards will 
be undertaken. A Code of Conduct  as regards worker safety and security will also be reflected in 
contract documents. Moreover, the project will not support activities that include the use of 
forced labour , human trafficking and child labour. During implementation, risks and potential 
imp acts related to labour  and working conditions will be further assessed and managed through 
the development of a labour and working conditions risk management plan,  including ensuring 
that workers have access to a GRM . 
38. ESS 3 (Resource efficiency and polluti on control) : The nature of the proposed 
interventions does not entail  the use of substantial amounts of fuel, water, electricity  or raw 
materials, except for the operation of nurseries (for its water requirement) and the production 
and distribution of cook stoves (for raw materials and electricity). The project will however 
promote the increased use of energy -efficient cooking stoves to lessen the impact on forest 
resources for fuel. During implementation, further review on resource efficiency and pollution 
control risks will be undertaken to assess and manage issues as regards water use and water 
availability, use of pesticides and fertilizers, potential for soil loss, soil erosion and slope 
destabilization, and use of raw materials and waste generation in t he cook stove 
fabrication/production and distribution. The project will also ensure raw materials are from 
sustainable sources and will establish measures to minimize production waste and maximize 
distribution efficiency of stoves. Appropriate management m easures will be developed upon 
screening and assessment of these risks.  
39. ESS 4 (Community health, safety and security) : The project activities could have 
community health, safety and security issues , which include potential for increased exposure to 
vector -borne diseases should ecological balance be altered or stagnant water develop  as a result 
of the reforestation/afforestation and fern removal activities in the area (which may increase


---
*Page 590*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 152 
 
 
the population of certain disease vectors and insect pests). Some of t he mitigating measures 
include proper drainage design of terraces. There could also be possibility for human –wildlife 
conflict in areas where fruit trees are planted , which may inadvertently increase physical 
interactions with wildlife that could result in  crop loss or physical injury both to humans and 
wildlife. The risk related to the presence of migrant labour  is considered low given that the 
project will hire residents from surrounding communities. Nevertheless, the activities will be 
assessed more clos ely with regard to  such risks , with measures to be discussed and determined 
in consultation with the communities during implementation.  
40. ESS 5 (Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement) : The project does not include 
any activities that will require resettlement or involuntary taking of land. However, project 
activities could facilitate a potential loss of access to lands given that the 
afforestation/reforestation activities could result in stricter enforcement of land use and park 
laws in changes to  rules of access or land classification. To address this, the project will not 
establish protective forests on lands used for food production. On -farm afforestation will not 
involve the acquisit ion of lands, land rights or land -use rights through expropriation or other 
compulsory procedures and will comply with the country’s legal system. Communities will be 
engaged in an inclusive and participatory manner and will be part of the planning and 
afforestation processes , and agreements on land rights and responsibilities will be developed 
with them. An access restrictions mitigation process framework is developed and will be 
implemented as required.  
41. ESS 6 (Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources) : The project intends to enhance the region’s ecosystem to reduce the vulnerability 
of communities to climate change impacts. For instance, the proposed interventions on 
protected forests will be restoration (e.g. restor ation of the 500 h a of degraded forest in GMNP, 
and the fern removal covering 4,500 h a of Nyungwe National Park , while the proposed 
interventions in the Stepping Stones and Landscapes Linkages (located outside of the parks) 
will be composed of  the protecti on of isolated forest patches and afforestation on steep slopes 
and riparian areas supplemented with agroforestry activities to enhance ecosystem services. 
Nevertheless, care should be exercised in implementing these activities to ensure that negative 
impa cts such as potential for the introduction of alien or invasive species, pests and pathogens 
from poorly managed nurseries are adequately addressed. During project implementation, 
consultations with communities and stakeholders will aid in determining the selection of 
appropriate species suitable to the locality . 
42. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7 (Indigenous Peoples ): The AE recogni zes 
that while there are historically marginalized groups as well as "Categories C, D and  E, groups " 
that may meet the GCF criteria for Indigenous Peoples that could potentially be included in the 
project area, the screening so far has indicated that Indigenous Peoples have not be en found in 
the project area.  Given that specific sites will be selected fo r project activities during project 
implementation, each subproject will be subject to more in -depth screening for impacts to 
historically marginalized peoples, with particular attention to the GCF criteria of Indigenous 
Peoples, during project implementat ion. The AE will conduct a screening for subprojects as 
outlined in the “Screening for Presence of and Risks to Historically Marginalized Groups” to 
evaluate the characteristics of historically marginalized and Categories C, D and  E people. 
Should the scre ening process identify Indigenous Peoples , then the subactivity will require a 
historically marginalized peoples plan. The AE also recognizes  that there are potential barriers 
to integrating historically marginalized peoples into the project.  Nevertheless,  there is interest 
in working with historically marginalized groups  to identify how traditional livelihoods like 
beekeeping can be adapted and promoted  and how negative impacts on these livelihoods will be 
mitigated.  The AE has included in the project the hiring of an ESS specialist and community 
engagement specialist to minimize risks as well including a commitment to stakeholder 
engagement, free, prior and informed consent and the setting up of a project -level  GRM . In line 
with its roles and functions, the GCF Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group  (IPAG)  is available to


---
*Page 591*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 153 
 
 
provide advice to the AE , which  is also encouraged to share emerging good practices and 
success stories with  IPAG . 
43. ESS 8 (Cultural Heritage) : The physical interventions (i.e. afforestation, reforestation 
and terracing, etc.) will be undertaken in mountainous areas where there are few human 
settlements. The preliminary screening of target areas also indicated that it is not expected that 
the pro ject activities will disturb any cultural heritage sites. Nevertheless, the project has 
developed a chance find procedure to cover chance encounters of artefacts during project 
implementation.  
44. Institutional implementation arrangements : As the AE, M OE Rwan da will oversee 
and monitor the management and implementation of the project. The Wildlife Conservation 
Society (WCS)  and RFA  will serve as EEs for the project through a project cooperation 
agreement. All work will be coordinated by the PMU and supported b y other relevant 
government agencies , including the National Land Authority and the RWB within M OE Rwanda . 
The PMU will have oversight o f the day -to-day operations of the project , including monitoring 
and evaluation. It will engage specialists (e.g. Enviro nmental and Social Safeguards Specialist, 
Invasive Species Specialist, Community Engagement Specialist, Behavio ur Change Specialist, 
Gender Specialist, etc.) that will screen for the potential environmental and social risks and 
impacts and develop manageme nt measures for proposed activities. The PMU will also be 
responsible for coordination on trainings for all project EEs. As regards safety, a Labour  and 
Safety Coordinator will also oversee working conditions in the field. The project will also engage 
Comm unity Engagement Specialists and Labour  and Safety Officers.  
45. Stakeholder  engagement and GRM : The project benefited substantively from an 
extensive stakeholder consultation process, which started during the project conceptualization. 
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has also been prepared to engage the stakeholders throughout 
project implementation. The project will have a project -level GRM , which is described in the 
ESMF. The GRM is independent of governmental judicial procedures. The project also allows 
access to the GCF independent redress mechanism.  In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples 
Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples ’ focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, 
including before a claim has been made.  
46. Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment safeguarding : The SEAH 
safeguarding approach proposed by the AE is consi dered by the Secretariat  to be  in compliance 
with the SEAH provisions pursuant to the revised GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The 
project identifies that all project components may exacerbate the existing power differentials 
and expose the project ben eficiaries to potential SEAH risk. The AE will take a number of 
mitigation measures to prevent and manage SEAH, including ensur ing that all staff are trained 
on survivor -centred approaches to address SEAH, and that the Human Resources and 
Administration Of ficer and the ESS Specialist of the project will work together to develop a 
Security and Risk Management Plan to prevent SEAH incidences. The project’s Gender Specialist 
and Community Engagement Specialist will develop training on SEAH prevention, GBV 
prog ramming and survivor -centred approach. The project will also safeguard against SEAH 
through a Code of Conduct that explicitly indicates zero  tolerance for GBV . This  Code of Conduct 
will be shared with all personnel and used for training all employees. In addition to  the 
prevalence of GBV in the target countr y, the project also recognizes that the influx of funds and 
activities , combined with power dynamics , may disproportionately affect women, youth, 
historically marginalized people, and others in the poverty categories  of Rwanda . As the specific 
locations and beneficiaries will be determined during full implementation, each subproject will 
be screened to av oid any subproject that may aggravate risks of GBV and SEAH. The project will 
respond to SEAH incidents through GRMs at  the AE, EE, and project levels . Training  will be 
organized  for all project staff, implementing partners, key service providers and other  partner 
organizations to identify and regularly assess SEAH risks along the project cycle  as well as


---
*Page 592*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 154 
 
 
ensure that  both  the AE and all the EEs respond to SEAH incidents with  survivor -centred and 
gender responsive approaches.  
4.2 Gender policy  
47. The AE has provide d a gender assessment and action plan therefore complies with the 
requirements of the GCF Gender Policy.  
48. The gender assessment provided demonstrates the commitment of Rwanda to 
advancing gender equality and women’s empowerment. The assessment shows that Rw anda 
has a strong political commitment to promoting gender equality, reflected in its policy and legal 
framework and various sectoral strategies. It is the first country to have a majority female 
Parliament , with 61  per cent  of these positions being held b y women , and has established 
through its constitution a minimum of 30  per cent  female representation in public governance. 
The country has also made international commitments such as ratifying and implementing the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms  of Discrimination against Women , the Beijing 
Platform for Action and the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa. An institutional 
framework for coordinating and ensuring oversight of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment is in place , which mai nly rests with the Ministry of Gender and Family 
Promotion. The Ministry is mandated to coordinate the implementation of the national gender 
policy and advocacy on gender issues, a gender monitoring office and the National Women’s 
Council. All ministries a nd public institutions have gender focal points. However, there is 
divergence between the frameworks in place and implementation on the ground due to 
challenges such as lack of financial resources and technical capacity within the various 
ministries as wel l as existing norms and practices that run contrary to equality principles and 
practices.  
49. The gender assessment was conducted through desk review and stakeholder 
consultation. Additional stakeholder consultation will be conducted at national, district and  
project site level in order to further adapt project activities to  the local context. The assessment 
indicates that women and men have different roles and responsibilities within society and 
households. These roles rigidly set women as caregivers and home makers, while men are 
considered breadwinners engaging in income -generating activities, wage employment and 
decision -mak ing. Women own less land, have less access to extension services and financial 
support (loans) , and are less educated and able to  gain  experience in handling money. Women 
rely more on informal sources of loans as they do not usually have collateral to put up to access 
loans from financial institutions. Women engage and represent 66  per cent of the agricultur al 
workforce ; however , they  occu py 19.7 of the paid jobs. Women’s role s in afforestation and 
agroforestry is also curtailed by their lack of ownership and or land rights. Lack of land rights 
hinders the financial benefits women can get from resources on land such as trees. Women 
mostly u se trees that provide little commercial value ; rather they  are focused on fulfilling their 
household needs through fuelwood, fodder, bean poles and fruits. Discussion with women had 
indicated that women observed shortage s of fuelwood, fodder  and wood suitable to their bean 
poles , and also that there is declining soil fertility and crop yields. Fuelwood also is the main 
source for cooking , which has health hazards for women , and gaining access to cleaner, 
improved cook  stoves is a challenge. M en usually decide not to spend money to purchase the 
improved cook  stoves that can directly address the multiple challenges faced by women. 
Female -headed households are identified as much more vulnerable to climate change impact s 
compared to male -headed ho useholds owing to the prevalent gender inequality. Engagement in 
alternative source of incomes for women poses its own challenge s to women, one of which is 
affordability of required inputs, and this is particularly so for the beekeeping sector. The 
interes t of the government is this area is also high, and investments have taken place , but only 
23 per cent  of women engaged in the sector.


---
*Page 593*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 155 
 
 
50. The action plan includes activities that will address the challenges identified through the 
gender assessment. Activities  contain corresponding indicators, targets, gender expertise and 
budget while also including timelines for each of the actions. The project will direct investments 
to the areas of equal access to resources (e.g . land), services (finance), capacity developm ent, 
decision -making and also the participation of women in management, as beneficiaries /partners 
and as critical stakeholders in processes. Project intervention s will respond  to and address the 
growing pressure on natural resources , thus  ensuring that the resilience and adaptive capacities 
of communities , including that of women and disadvantaged people , are built. The gender action 
plan  is focused on  ensuring  (1) climate adaptation program mes and land-use planning address 
the priorities of women and youth ; (2) women , youth and marginalized households have 
increased capacity to effectively engage in and benefit from forest management and forest 
restoration ; (3) women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage 
in green jobs and livel ihood activities ; and (4) monitoring and evaluation effectively measures 
how women, youth and marginalized people  are benefiting to enable  the adaptive management 
of the project. A capacity -building component that focus es on strengthening cooperatives and 
village savings and loans institutions through gender mainstreaming across decision -making, 
membership , and products and services is included to ensure women  are able to benefit  from  
and engage in all aspects of the proje ct. Private landowners who will be willing to engage in land 
afforestation activities will create private forest management units , which will then be assisted 
in form ing and register ing cooperatives that are  at least 50  per cent  women. Further , the 
selecti on of tree species will take into consideration women’s us age and priorities. Women will 
be engaged and supported through knowledge acquisition, trainings , and skills development 
processes  so that they  benefit from the project implementation, particularly focusing on critical 
challenges such as rights to land  and access to decision -making positions. Further, the challenge 
of rights to land  will be addressed through advocacy work with men and local judiciary systems. 
This will be complemented by activities t hat will advocate for women’s land rights and access to 
redress mechanisms. The project will engage community leaders  and women and men 
community influencers to further promote equal and fair control of resources to mitigate the 
risk of men taking control  over  incomes earned by women.  
51. There are three recommendations to  the AE. The first recommendation is that the AE 
needs to ensure that gender issues are mainstreamed across all components of the project ; this 
is lacking for component 3 (output 3.1 of the gender action plan) , which presents many 
important opportunities to address gender issues. Secondly, the AE needs to refine and clearly 
show what outcomes it intends to achieve as a result of the interventions . Activity 3.1.1 in the 
funding proposal  states the following regarding the composition of administrative committees: 
"Note that gender consideration is mandatory (at least 30% women) ". It is not clear  if 30  per 
cent  refers to “women in decision -making bodies” or “membership of women in cooperatives”, 
or both. These results are different in nature and should be captured independently. The AE 
should provide clarification in this regard . Thirdly, as part of its expressed commitment to do so, 
the AE should consistently  collect  data  and report in a sex -disaggregated manner  on the gender 
action plan . 
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( low risk )  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk)  
52. We acknowledge th e important role of the Government of R wanda via MOE Rwanda  as 
the AE  (direct access) . The AE demonstrate d its comparative advantage and capability in


---
*Page 594*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 156 
 
 
relation to this project with references to its track record  in executing projects  of comparable 
size or above (including FP073  and FP167 with GCF) and existing affiliation with the EE,  RFA . 
53. The AE provide d adequate assurance that RFA  has the necessary capa city to undertake 
the role as EE.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific execution risks (Medium risk)  
54. Co-financing: We acknowledge the sizable amount of co -financing totalling USD 
10,493,579 (grants and in -kind) for a co -financing ratio of 1:0.27. If co-financing does not 
materialize then this may impede project imple mentation . The AE identified this risk , and the 
covenants in the term sheet are adequate mitigation measures – noting  that  the term sheet for 
the proposed project has not yet been agreed.  
55. Project viability (and concessionality) : The use of grants  (and 100  per cent  
concessiona lity) is justified given the country context , the beneficiaries in Rwanda’s CND , and 
the fact that  the proposed activities are  public goods in nature , including creating enabling 
opportunities for market development beyond the project to cataly se private investments  (see 
component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods) .  
56. Capacity -building activities and technology development/transfer  (i) represent 45 per 
cent  of total GCF funding requested ; (ii) may not result in realizing expected results in case 
issues arise during implementation ; and (iii) are embedded in the project ’s design and thus 
crucial to achieving intended  objectives and outcomes . On the other hand , we note that 
identification of risks and the mitigation measures proposed by the AE are adequate.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk (medium  risk )   
57. MOE Rwanda, in its capacity as AE, confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment of 
money laundering and terrorist financ ing (ML/TF) in relation to project implementation. The 
probability of occurrence was assessed as ‘low’, and the impact severity in the event of 
occurrence was assessed as ‘medium’.  
58. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that co -financiers have been identified based on their  existing 
mandates and activities implemented in the  CND region. Co -financiers ’ commitments will serve 
as a basis of M OE Rwanda  engagement during the project implementation. During 
implementation, annual work plans  for the project  will be adjusted in col laboration with the EE, 
and all co -financiers are to align with all activities. M OE Rwanda , per its oversight role, will 
ensure that all of these stakeholders commit during planning to their co -financing and report  
this in the a nnual performance reports submitted to GCF.  
59. MOE Rwanda  indicated that the Governme nt of Rwanda currently has robust measures 
to fight ML/TF risks (e.g. law N° 001/FIC/2022 on regulations relating to anti -money 
laundering and counter ing the financing  terrorism). The Governmen t of Rwanda has also put in 
place a special agency for this purpose, the Financial Intelligence Center (FIC),  which has  a clear 
mission to promote financial system integrity by conducting effective financial intelligence to 
counter ML/TF and related financ ial crimes in governmental institutions, projects and 
parastatal agencies under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. 
Both M OE Rwanda  and this project under its supervision will also comply with FIC regulations.  
60. MOE Rwanda c onfirmed that it has an internal audit function as well as regular audit s 
conducted by the Office of the Auditor General to ensure  the efficiency and effectiveness of 
internal controls , which includes handling ML/TF risks. In addition,  MOE Rwanda uses 
segrega tion of duties within financial management process es.


---
*Page 595*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 157 
 
 
61. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment of prohibited practices 
in relation to project implementation. The probability of occurrence was assessed as  Low , and 
the impact severity i n the event of occurrence was assessed as Medium.  
62. MOE Rwanda indicated  that to ensure materials or technology procured under the 
project are used only for the purposes intended and not diverted or misused for unauthorized, 
improper or illicit purposes, a c omprehensive set of controls will be used. This includes explicit 
terms and conditions in all procurement contracts or agreements that clearly  (i) state the 
intended purpose of the materials or technology being provided and explicitly prohibit any 
unauthor ized use or diversion ; and (ii)  define the individuals that are authorized to access and 
use the procured materials or technology. Furthermore, this will involve the implementation of 
strong authentication and access controls to ensure that only approved u sers have access . This 
refers to the record of any materials or technology procured under projects within  an assets 
register. The records include assets identification, the person using the material  and the 
location.  
63. Monitoring and auditing the usage of th e procured materials or technology will be 
undertaken to detect any anomalies or potential misuse, including periodic  site visits. Training 
sessions will also be conducted to educate all stakeholders involved in the project about the 
importance of adhering  to the intended use of the materials or technology and the consequences 
of misuse. For technologies that involve data transmission or storage,  MOE Rwanda  will ensure 
that appropriate encryption and data protection measures are in place to safeguard sensit ive 
information.  
64. MOE Rwanda confirmed that no projects will be undertaken in any jurisdiction or 
territory that is subject to or affected by sanctions or restrictive measures per the United 
Nations Security Council (UNSC) r esolutions. Additionally, no individual or entity that is lis ted 
on any UNSC sanctions list, including the U nited Nations  Consolidated Sanctions list , will be 
involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer 
or beneficiary.  
65. MOE Rwanda  acknowledged that there are United Nations  sanctions in the neighbouring 
country of the Democratic Republic of  the Congo, close to the CND. According to  MOE Rwanda,  
the U nited Nations  Consolidated Sanctions List indicates approximately 20 individuals with  ties 
to Rwanda, a small percentage of whom may live in Rwanda. MOE Rwanda  confirmed that the 
United Nations  Consolidated Sanctions List has been circulated internally and will be cross 
checked when hiring for the project and once project sites are selecte d to ensure these 
individuals will not be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a 
counterparty, implementer  or beneficiary.  
66. MOE Rwanda  indicated  that the project involves many actors for successful 
implementation , including m inistries, government agencies, non -government al organizations, 
subgrantees, vendors, service providers, community members and beneficiaries. MOE Rwanda 
confirmed that there is specifically an intention to distribute or disburse to beneficiaries , both 
dire ctly and indirectly , commodities and other items of value such as (i) the distribution of 
seedlings for trees that will produce fruits or contribute to enhancing biodiversity of farming 
systems ; (ii)  access to improved cook stoves ; as well as  (iii) the option for the distribution of 
bees to start honey operations. MOE  Rwanda  acknowledged that, as with any project infusing 
large sums of money directly or indirectly with multiple actors, corruption could occur.  
67. MOE  Rwanda  indicated that the distributions will  be coordinated through procured 
contractors. The contractors are hired based on the  Government of Rwanda /MOE Rwanda  
procurement policies , which are aligned with GCF policies and include due diligence in the 
hiring and contracting process. As for direct co mmunity contracting, the intended beneficiaries 
are screened and certified by local authorities in the area of project interventions, which 
mitigates the risk of prohibited practices.


---
*Page 596*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 158 
 
 
68. MOE Rwanda confirmed that  for report ing and remedy ing any risks that may occur, 
MOE Rwanda will maintain a project -level GRM t hrough which anyone can report the 
occurrence of prohibited activities. All complaints will be investigated accordingly. Any 
complaints believed to contribute to prohibited activities  will be referred to the appropriate 
authorities in Rwanda.  
69. MOE Rwanda indicated that all staff will be made aware of the prohibited activities, and 
all subcontractors/counterparties will be screened for current and past engagement in such  
activities and made aware of their obligations to alert the PMU and/or submit grievances 
related to such activities occurring as part of the project.  
70. Compliance risk rating : The Secretariat has conducted a review of the project in 
accordance with relevant GCF Board -appro ved policies and does not find any material issue or 
deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding 
proposal, the Secretariat has determined a compliance risk rating of ‘ Medium ’ and has no 
objection to this pro posal proceeding.  
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk )   
71. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
72. It is recommended that the B oard consider the above factors in its decision.   
Summary risk assessment  
Overall programme  Low  
Accredited entity/executing entity capability  Low  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
73. MOE Rwanda is the AE for the project and will provide oversight to the project 
consisting of , inter alia : (a) entering into a subsidiary agreement with the EE (RF A); (b) 
managing and disbursing GCF funds to the EE; (c) reviewing financial expenditures and 
progress reports; (d) overseeing project implementation following the project document and 
annual work plans and budgets, agreements with co -financiers and each EE’s  rules and 
procedures; and (e) providing technical guidance to ensure that the appropriate technical 
quality is applied to all project activities.  
74. RFA will serve as the EE for the project through a subsidiary agreement signed with  
MOE Rwanda . RFA will execute the tasks within the overall project management structure  as 
follows : (a) implementing  day-to-day activities as per the project work plan and budget, 
including the environmental and social management plan; (b) undertaking procurement 
activities as per the signed agreements; and (c) managing contracts of suppliers and service 
providers. The EE will enter into a memorandum of understanding  (MOU)  with different 
partner agencies, including WCS and the Catholic Or ganisation for Relief and Development,  
which will provide technical assistance services to implement the project activities. Procured 
parties will be contracted following  MOE Rwanda rules and regulations for procuring goods and 
services. The PMU will manag e, monitor and report on the day -to-day implementation  progress  
of the EE.


---
*Page 597*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 159 
 
 
75. As one of the project implementation partners, WCS will provide technical assistance to 
RFA through an MOU signed with RFA. The MOU will detail all the activities that WCS will 
dire ctly support during this project ’s implementation. The technical assistance  services will 
include advising RFA/SPIU, procuring and supervising international experts and consultants, 
and procuring materials to support the execution activities. Relevant tech nical experts from 
WCS will be embedded within RFA to advise SPIU on day -to-day project management. At the 
same time, the Catholic Organisation for Relief and Development will provide technical 
assistance to RFA through an MOU.  
76. The co-financiers (RDB, RFA, RWB and  MOE Rwanda ) will execute and manage the 
implementation of their activities.  
77. MOE Rwanda  shall ascertain that the EE has efficient internal control systems in place, 
review financial reports and proceed with funds disbursemen ts. It will also periodically inspect 
the project for compliance and coordinate audit exercises for the EE. RFA will enter into 
agreements with MOE Rwanda  that outline general modalities of the management of funds in 
line with GCF grant requirements and RF A’s policies.  
78. GCF funds will be transferred to an RFA -designated bank account. Based on agreed 
annual work plans and budgets, the funds will be disbursed to the EE, and its reporting will be 
quarterly. The project ’s financial processes will rely on the EE ’s charts of accounts, internal 
control systems, disbursement plans, budgeting, expenditure management and accounting, 
reporting, and assets management as assessed by MOE Rwanda . 
79. The project will be audited annually and commissioned by MOE Rwanda  to produce  
certified financial statements and reports to ascertain that GCF funds are well managed. The 
project will maintain a regularly updated record of all assets and documents that will be 
retained for at least five years after the end of the project.  
4.5 Results m onitoring and reporting.  
80. The Secretariat has provided various rounds of feedback on results monitoring and 
reporting, which have been generally addressed by the AE. This includes  a review of beneficiary 
numbers, revisions to the logical framework, mapping of project outcomes to GCF result s areas , 
and timelines and resourcing for the mid -term and final evaluations . However, there are some 
issues related to beneficiary calculation that are pending as of the final review . These should be 
appropriately addressed a s the project is mobili zed as follows :  
(a) It w ould  be helpful to provide gender disaggregation for beneficiary numbers wherever 
possible. This is currently done in section E (log ical frame work ), but not in section A6 
and annex 23;  
(b) In section E  (log ical frame work ), the AE should  also provide a brief description of how 
beneficiary numbers against GCF result s areas have been calculated.  These detail s are 
currently missing, and w hile we have mid -term and final targets for various indicat ors 
related to beneficiary count, we do not  have information to understand how these have 
been calculated, and how  potential double -counting will be avoided. If space is limited  in 
section E, the AE may consider including this information in a clearly marked section in 
annex 23 related to beneficiary count.


---
*Page 598*
---

 
GCF/B. 37/02/Add. 08 
Page 160 
 
 
4.6 Legal assessment  
81. The original Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 
23 June 2016, and it became eff ective on 1 August 2017, which agreement was amended and 
restated pursuant to the first amendment and restatement dated as of May 14, 2019, which 
became effective on even date. The Accredited Entity’s first term of accreditation lapsed on 31 
July 2022. The  Accredited Entity was reaccredited by the Board pursuant to Decision B.34/17. 
The second amendment and restatement agreement amending and restating the accreditation 
master agreement was signed on 22 November 2022, and the second amended and restated 
accr editation master agreement (the “AMA”) became effective on 26 January 2023.  
82. The Accredited Entity has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
83. The proposed  project will be implemented in the Republic of Rwanda. The GCF has 
signed a bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with the Government of the Republic 
of Rwanda. It was signed on 8 November 2022 and became effective on 25 May 2023.   
4.7 List of pro posed conditions (including legal)  
84. To address matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by the 
Board is made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 599*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 161 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP217  
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda  
Country:  Rwanda  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1. This funding proposal for a small -sized project in environmental and social safeguards  
(ESS)  category B is submitted by the Government of Rwanda  as a cross -cutting project 
contributing to both adaptation ( 92 per cent) and mitigation ( 8 per cent) results areas. The 
Ministry of Environment  of Rwanda (MOE Rwanda)  (a GCF d irect access entity)  is the 
accredited entity  (AE)  for the proposed project, and the executing entit y (EE) is the Rwanda 
Forestry Agency , with several  implementing partners , including other government agencies and 
the Wildlife  Conservation  Society (WCS ) in Rwanda.  The total co st of the funding proposal is 
USD 50 million,  of which USD 39 million is GCF finance and USD 1 1 million is co -finance from 
the Government of Rwanda . 
2. The project’s goal is to apply a landscape approach to reduce the exposure of 
populations in Rwanda’s Congo  Nile Divide (CND) landscape to the impacts of unfavourable 
climatic trends and hazards intensified by climate change, including flood s, landslide s, soil 
erosion and wildfires.  This is to be achieved  through integrated land -use planning and 
management that allows for protecting, restoring and managing a matrix of interconnected 
ecosystems , including pristine forest in protected area nodes, important landscape linkages, 
pockets of forest in stepping  stones , and agro -ecosystems in farmlands . Interventions in various 
spatially defined target areas include  forest protection and fire management , assisted natural 
regeneration,  afforestation of steep slopes , and support to silvopastoralism and agroforestry 
and its value chains.  
3. The project has three planned outcomes  (see the table below ), with outputs under each 
outcome as well as the parties responsible for executing them ( see t able 5 in the funding 
proposal ). 
Project outcomes and outputs  Executing entity 
per output  Technical 
implementation 
partners  
Outcome 1 : Landscape planning, policies and management are effective and coordinated across 
sectors and scales to address climate risks and adaptation benefits  
Output 1.1. Landscape -wide land -use plan developed 
for climate -resilient livelihoods and forest 
ecosystems, integrating district development 
strategies  Rwanda Forest 
Agency (RFA)  
  Wildlife Conservation 
Society (WCS) and 
National Land Authority 
(NLA)  
Output 1.2. Local and national institutional capacities 
strengthened to integrate biodiversity and climate 
risks into land use planning and management  RFA  WCS and NLA


---
*Page 600*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 162 
 
 
Outcome 2 : Natural forests are protected, connected, and more resilient to climate impacts and risks  
Output 2.1. Protected areas management 
effectiveness improved to address climate risks and 
adaptation  RFA  WCS and Rwanda 
Development Board  
Output 2.2. Natural forest cover restored; biodiversity 
connections established  RFA  WCS  
Outcome 3:  Vulnerable rural livelihoods are more climate -resilient, diverse, economically sustainable 
and nature -positive  
Output 3.1. Farming methods enhance productivity, 
reduce erosion and flooding risks, contribute to 
ecosystem services, and support connectivity  RFA  Rwanda Water Board  
Output 3.2. Rural livelihoods generate alternative 
incomes and reduce pressure on forests  RFA  Cordaid  
Output 3.3. Financial services and private sector 
investment engagement  RFA  Cordaid  
Monitoring and evaluation  Project Management Unit, h osted by the 
Ministry of Environment  of Rwanda  
1.1 Impact potential                                          Scale:  N/A  
4. The cross -cutting impact potential of the proposed project  and the relative weighting of 
the intended results can be s een in the attribution of GCF and co -financiers ’ contributions to the 
relevan t GCF result s areas as follows:  
GCF result s area GCF 
contribution  Co-financiers ’ 
contribution  
Mitigation Result Area 4 (MR4)  Mitigation through forestry and 
land use  8% 0% 
Adaptation Results Area 1 (AR1)  Enhanced resilience of most 
vulnerable people and communities  13%  49%  
Adaptation Results Area 2 (AR2)  Enhanced resilience of health and 
well -being, and food and water security  2% 0% 
Adaptation Results Area  4 (AR4)  Enhanced resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem services  77%  51%  
5. The emphasis on utilizing the GCF investment to enhance the resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services is reflected in the project’s focus on new mechanisms of land -use 
planning and management that consider the CND as a landscape  consisting of an 
inte rdependent mosaic of forests and farms, the management of each determining the health of 
the whole. The independent Technical Advisory Panel  (iTAP ) believes that such an approach 
(i.e. targe ting project interventions on the ground based on a systematic spa tial planning 
process that emphasizes “ecological infrastructure” functioning as well as biodiversity ) 
represents best practice for enhancing ecosystem resilience . Such an approach  ensur es that 
interventions are at sufficient scale to achieve a transformat ive effect : preserving landscape -
wide ecosystem processes and functions that help buffer impacts of climate change.  Maximizing 
connectivity is also important for maintaining the long -term health  and stability of forests as 
carbon sinks.  
6. Adaptation impact potentia l: The funding proposal  outlines the major climate change -
related hazards characterizing the landscape , in particular more frequent intense rainfall events 
increasing floods and landslides, and worsening soil erosion that is alrea dy widespread as a 
result of direct anthropogenic  pressures.  The project’s main a daptation benefits will accrue to


---
*Page 601*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 163 
 
 
vulnerable communities primarily engaged in agriculture on the CND’s steep terrain, achieved 
through improved soil management, forestry and a groforestry to reduce catastrophic events 
affecting production systems , lives and livelihoods . This will be achieved through integrated 
landscape planning and management to enhance tree cover in crop and grazing lands and 
improve the connectivity of natura l ecosystems and the key services they provide, including 
regulation of runoff and flows from increasingly extreme rainfall events; and  through  reduction 
of localized and downstream flooding, erosion and landslide incidence and risk.  
7. Indicators for the ma in adaptation results are as follows:  
(a) 135,104  hectares (ha) of land to be brought under climate -resilient management  
through targeted interventions for protection, afforestation and agroforestry (AR4): 
(i) Including  121,758 ha of core protected areas , linkages and stepping stones that 
will be brought under climate -risk informed planning and fire management  to 
maintain landscape -scale ecosystem services ; and 
(ii) Including  13,346 h a for focused interventions  (i.e. degraded forest in parks to be  
restored (5, 000 ha), riparian lands restored (1,500 ha), pastures brought under 
silvopastoralism (1,000 ha), steep slopes afforested (2,500 ha), and farmland 
with new agroforestry practices (3,346 ha) ); 
(b) 1,254,242  people , resident in the landscape where targeted  interv entions will be carried 
out, will benefit  directly  from reduced exposure to climate -intensified disasters  and/or 
enhanced adaptive capacity  (AR 1 and 2) ; and  
(c) 9,260,745 people, approximately  two thirds  of the country’s population, will benefit  
indirectly  from  a wide -scale education and outreach programme , including radio 
programming , on climate change and gender issues, climate risks, value of forests and 
forest ecosystems, and climate change adaptation op tions.  
8. Mitigation impact:  The project seeks to deliver greenhouse gas  (GHG)  emission 
reduction s and removal benefits equivalent to 224,871  tonnes  of carbon dioxide  equivalent (t  
CO 2 eq) during the five-year project implementation period, reaching a total of 1,084,291 t CO2  
eq after 20  years. The estimation of reductions and removals is made based on the difference 
between the projected emissions with and without the project interventions  – through  
impro ved cookstove s, and through on-the-ground interventions across a total of 13,346  ha of 
land . The land -based  interventions will have cross -cutting benefits , since they contribute to core 
indictor 4 on hectares of land to be brought under climate -resilient m anagement, as well as 
brin ging mitigation benefits . 
9. The following activities will contribute to achiev ing this mitigation potential: (i) assisted 
natural regeneration (ANR) in 4,500 ha of Nyungwe National Park through invasive fern 
removal; (ii) restoration of 500  ha of degraded forest through ANR in Gishwati -Mukura  National 
Park ; (iii)  afforestation on 2,500 ha of public and private land with a slope >55  per cent; (iv) 
planting 1,500 ha of  protective forest  in riparian zones (public and private) ; (v) implementing 
erosion control and  agroforestry practices on 3,346 ha of  smallholder farm land ; (vi) 
implementing silvopastoral ism on 1,000 ha in the  Gishwati  area ; and (vii) adoption of improved 
cookstoves  by 8,500 households . Indicators for achievement  of these targets are included in the 
project log ical frame work  in section E.3 of the funding proposal .  
10. The methodology for calculating GHG emission reduction s and carbon sinks mirrors two 
approved consolidated methodologies for the A/R CDM, AR -ACM0003 and AR -AMS0007. This is 
considered  a good practice because the applicability conditions of the methodologies are 
appropriate to the project conditions.  The method ology is clear and conservative , considers the 
relevant guidance from the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , and was used in an 
appropriate, clear and transparent manner when estimating the mitigation potential for each 
activity.


---
*Page 602*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 164 
 
 
11. With regard to mon itoring and reporting mitigation benefits, annex 22 proposes a clear 
and straightforward approach, but does not clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various 
actors that will be involved in the process over time , nor the frequency of the steps. 
Furthermore, the activities as presented in annex 22 are not reflected in annex 11 (monitoring 
and evaluation plan_rev August 2023).  According to its updated  nationally determined 
contribution  (NDC ) (2020, p age 6)1 Rwanda has already developed a  national  mea surement, 
reporting and verification ( MRV ) framework. At the present stage it is not clear how this project 
will be aligned with the existing arrangements for the national MRV system , and/or how  it will 
support or contribute to enhancing the functioning of  this system across the country.  
12. The iTAP assesses the impact potential of the  project as  high . 
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                                               Scale: N/A  
13. The proposed project is designed to bring about a paradigm shift away from the current 
situation of fragmented, unplanned decisions and a collection  of isolated sector -by-sector 
projects that fail to take into account evolving climate risk and allow contin ued degradation . 
Instead , a new approach of integrated land use planning and management  is promoted  that 
preserves ecological connectivity across the landscape and helps maximize valuable ecosystem 
services for buffering the impacts of climate change. The new approach is based on 
international best practice  and considers the  CND  as a landscape consisting of an 
interdependent mosaic of production and protected lands , the health of which is completely 
interconnected.  
14. The idea behind the project is that a new  holistic, climate -smart, evidence -based 
approach to planning and development will enable systematic, ecosystem -based, multi -sector 
analysis of land -use tradeoffs. Focusing on this larger scale, with coordination across both 
geographic and sectoral boundar ies, while mainstreaming climate risks in management 
planning , represents a fundamental paradigm shift for land -use planning and management in 
Rwan da. Success in putting such a system into place could represent a crucial first step in 
reversing the previou s negative feedback loop of ecosystem degradation to  achieve  a more 
positive, climate -resilient system.  
15. Utilizing integrated landscape  management  and ecosystem -based adaptation 
approaches in addressing climate change impacts in Rwanda offers a myriad of op portunities 
for scaling up and replication to similar ecological zones across the country. The project also has 
the potential to contribut e to the regulatory frameworks and policies for driving climate 
investments in the forest and renewable energy sectors . The project will finance the 
development of an integrated  land-use plan, which will be adopted by all 10 CND districts as a 
framework for seeking synergies between rural livelihoods and forest and biodiversity 
protection, reconciling land -use conflicts that arise, and guiding development decisions and 
climate  change adaptatio n. It will also update the National Land Use Master Plan, en suring it 
incorporates climate resilienc e and local plans.  
16. Systematic conservation planning : Although biodiversi ty conservation is considered a 
co-benefit of the project rather than a core focus, t he project makes innovative use of systematic 
conservation planning to identify spatial areas in the landscape that are targeted for restoration, 
afforestation and agrofor estry activities. This includes work to restore national parks as the 
core of an interconnected system , with landscape linkages and stepping stone s identified for 
interventions to promote connectivity between remaining areas of natural habitat. Optimizing 
this kind of mosaic of land uses with management actions for protection, restoration and 
sustainable use helps to maximi ze the functionality of landscape -wide ecosystem services such 
 
1 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022 -06/Rwanda_Updated_NDC_May_2020.pdf .


---
*Page 603*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 165 
 
 
as nutrient cycling, soil fertility, slope stability, water infiltration,  flood management and 
precipitation . 
17. Innovative f inancial mechanisms:  The project also includes an output to e stablish 
long -term plans for CND financial sustainabilit y post -GCF  by employing a technical advisor to 
support the establishment of  innovative mec hanisms such as those identified in the Biodiversity 
Finance Plan and also to refine existing financing mechanisms (for example, integrating climate 
resilience principles into the existing successful and growing Tourism Revenue Sharing 
Program ). Support wi ll be provided t o beneficiaries of the project in applying to the existing 
Community Adaptation Facility within  the Rwanda Green Fund  (FONERWA ). The Government 
of Rwanda, represented by the Rwanda Development Board, is also in advanced stages of 
negotiation with the World Bank for establishing a wildlife bond, potentially a gorilla  
conservation  bond, modelled on the successfully established rhino conservation bond in South 
Africa , with interes t shown by impact investors.  
18. Overall, based on the above, the paradigm shift potential of the project is assessed as  
medium to high. 
1.3 Sustainable development potential                                    Scale: N/A  
19. The proposed project is aligned with the Uni ted Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, including significant contributions towards Rwanda’s efforts to mee t Sustainable 
Development Goal  (SDG ) 5 (Gender Equality ), SDG 13 (Climate Action ) and SDG 15 (Life on 
Land ), and will contribute to the achievement of SDG 1  (No Poverty ), SDG 2 (Zero Hunger ), SDG 
3 (Good Health and Well -being ) and SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities ). 
20. Environmental co -benefits:  Key environmental co -benefits (beyond the core benefits 
related to ecosystem -based ad aptation) include restoration of soil fertility  through 
silvopastoralism and regenerative mixed-use agroforestry , and the enhancement of biodiversity 
through planting 50  per cent  native tree species . Promotion of improved cookstoves using 
significantly les s fuel will contribute to relieving pressure on the remaining indigenous forest.  
21. The iTAP was surprised to see the relatively low target of 50  per cent  (30 per cent  on 
private land and 70  per cent  on public land) in the  use of indigenous tree species in 
afforestation, reforestation and agroforestry interventions.  The AE explained that exotic species 
are more suitable for afforestation of steep slopes, where they can easily establish themselves , 
“but this does not mean tha t exclusively exotic species will be used on such sites ; there will be a 
mixture of both wherever applicable . In addition, while establishing blocks in the Participatory 
Forest Management Units , indigenous species will be used to separate one block from an other. 
Indigenous species will be given due consideration in agroforestry to create positive 
interactions in the farm as well as promoting native species, avoiding monoculture and 
benefiting from their positive impacts in terms of resilience.”  
22. It is under stood that  there is often a preference for fast -growing, easily available and 
usually cheaper species like eucalyptus, pine and alnus for urgent needs such as slope 
stabiliza tion and fuelwood, and also that a balance needs to be struck between promoting 
indigenous trees species and being responsive to farmers’ wishes . At the same time, the project 
could potentially make more o f the opportunity to rekindle traditional knowledge about 
indigenous species and their uses, and to build the nursery supply chain fo r quality native 
planting material  given the vast superiority of indigenous  tree species in terms of their multiple 
benefits, non -invasiveness,  positive  impact on soil and water quality, and resistance to pests and 
diseases that may worsen with a warming c limate.  
23. Social and health co -benefits:  In enabling the transition to more climate -resilient and 
productive livelihood models, the project aims to increase household incomes and the 
nutritional status of families. It is expected that significant social capi tal will be created through


---
*Page 604*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 166 
 
 
beneficiaries’ participation in co -designing and co -managing a range of adaptation strategies, 
with an emphasis on women ’s participation . Social cohesiveness will also be enhanced through  
the strengthening of joint saving and lending systems. Social benefits will also accrue to indirect 
beneficiaries, for example those listening to radio programming that leads to increased 
awareness of climate change, or of opportunities for climate -adaptive a groforestry and agri -
processing.   
24. Economic co -benefits:  Inequality and poverty will be addressed through increased 
financial inclusion and improved economic opportunities, especially for women, youth and 
historically marginalized groups. Forest and landsc ape restoration in the CND will bring 
economic benefits, since  soil erosion control measures, protective forests on public lands , and 
agroforestry on private lands will  all increase agricultural productivity and associated income. 
The project will create d irect and indirect employment opportunities, benefiting an anticipated  
24,212 households and stimulating the local economy. Private capital will be leveraged to invest 
in value chains , including those for improved cookstoves , irrigation pumps and beehives,  as well 
as honey , woodlots, macadamia, avocado  and vegetable  production and processing .   
25. Gender benefits:  The project aims to achieve positive outcomes around access to 
resources, improved livelihoods, and income generation opportunit ies and capacit ies for 
women. With support from a dedicated gender specialist , the project will engage women in 
project planning, investment and decision -making.  It is envisaged that w omen  will respond to 
incentives that address their families’ basic needs, s uch as better health and nutrition, link ed to 
agriculture and food security improvements. The project will also get support from  non-
governmental organization s that engage men in programming and discussions to increase their 
participation in household and parental responsibilities and enhance their  awareness of the 
importance of women’s fair access to and control of resources, including income. Women will 
benefi t from training and educational activities, leadership, entrepreneurship and decision -
making , as shown in annex 8  (Gender Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion 
Action Plan ). 
26. The iTAP assesses sustainable development potential a s high . 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                                 Scale:  N/A  
27. Western Rwanda and its  CND  region are highly vulnerable to climate change, and are 
expected to experience a continuing upward trend in average annual temperatures, total annua l 
rainfall (with  a longer dry season), and more intense rainfall events and storms  and increasing 
risk of flash floods, landslide, soil erosion and wildfires. Despite Rwanda’s solid economic 
progress since 2000, poverty remains widespread and pervasive. Ov erall, 38.2  per cent  of the 
country’s population lives in poverty and 16  per cent  in extreme poverty. Women are more 
affected by poverty than men, with 47  per cent  of female -headed households living in poverty 
compared with 44.9  per cent  of all households.  
28. The CND landscape supports nearly one  third of Rwanda’s population on barely one  fifth 
of its land base. Average population density is 736 people/ square kilometr e (km2), with some 
districts now exceeding 1,000 people/km². The highest rates of rural poverty in the country are 
reported from the CND, including its most vulnerable subsistence farmers. While high rainfall 
has historically permitted generally sufficient  food production, the region’s rugged topography 
requires farming on extremely steep slopes. With more frequent extreme rainfall events in 
recent years, this agricultural landscape is recognized as the region of Rwanda most vulnerable 
to flash floods and l andslides. Between 2013 –2016 , heavy rains generated landslides that killed 
at least 174 people and destroyed the homes of more than 5,000. Landslides wipe out  highly 
productive raised -bed cultivation systems in the CND’s valleys  and bottomlands, many hecta res 
of crops are washed away , and a n estimated 1.5 million ton nes of fertile soil are lost annually to 
erosion.


---
*Page 605*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 167 
 
 
29. The funding proposal  reports that d uring stakeholder consultations, communities 
indicated several socioeconomic changes stemming from changing c limate conditions. Notably, 
the longer dry season and unpredictable rains have reduced agricultural yield significantly, 
leading to more widespread malnutrition and extreme poverty, and farmers can barely meet 
their own families’ needs. In particular, wome n, youth, and historically marginalized people are 
feeling the impacts. As arable land is increasingly constrained, youth and historically 
marginalized people have few opportunities and are more focused on survival and short -term 
gains. This becomes  a nega tive feedback loop, in which poverty leads to unsustainable practices 
such as overharvesting from forests  and cultivation on extremely steep slopes, with degraded 
ecosystems then less able to provide services, worsening the cycle of poverty.  
30. As a result, t he Government of Rwanda has invested significantly in developing an 
enabling policy and institutional framework for a more climate -resilient development pathway. 
Yet, while adaptation is a top priority,  as a least developed country, Rwanda lacks sufficient  
public financial resources to implement its climate change and resilient green development 
objectives.  Currently there are no alternative funding options at the scale needed to secure 
Rwanda’s priority forests to reduce the vulnerability of rural communit ies to climate risks . 
Rwanda’s debt -to-gross domestic product  ratio stands at 64  per cent , making further loans 
difficult, and the Government of Rwanda  seeks maximum concessionality  from the GCF for the 
urgent adaptation actions proposed under the project.  
31. The Government of Rwanda  recogni zes that a piecemeal approach to decision -making 
has exacerbated competition over scarce land resources  and reduced the adaptive capacity of 
both e cosystems and rural populations . Additionally, district government staff and community 
members have limited technical understanding of the complex interactions between forest 
structure and functions, climate change , and the provision of ecosystem services , and limited  
technical capacity for complex forest monitoring.  In the face of worsening climate change 
impacts, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive approach that crosses siloes of 
government and achieves integrated land use planning and management informed by the 
evolving climate and socioeconomic conditions. The proposed interventions are well targeted to 
address the identified barriers and the great needs of these vulnerable communities .  
32. Overall, based on the above, the needs of the recipients are rated as high . 
1.5 Country ownership                                                 Scale: N/A            
33. Policy and strategy alignment:  The project is closely aligned with Rwanda’s national 
adaptation plan and three of its adaptation priorities: (i) promotion of non -agricultural income 
generating activities ; (ii) introduction of species resistant to environmental conditions ; and (iii) 
development of alternative sources of energy to firewood. It contributes to several priorities 
identified in the 2020 NDC: promotion of afforestation/reforestation; improvement of forest 
management; an integrated approach to planning and monitoring for sustainable land 
management; and development of a harmonized and integrated spatial data management 
system for sustainabl e land use management.  
34. The project will support the implementation of Rwanda’s Green Growth and Climate 
Resilient Strategy and the Rwanda National Strategy for Transformation (2017 –2022) and is 
aligned with the goals of the Rwanda National Forestry Policy  2018, the Forest Sector Strategic 
Plan 2017 –2022, the Strategic Plan for the Environment and Natural Resources Sector (2018 –
2024) and  the National Forest Management Plan 2017 –2026, thus reflecting the government’s 
intention to address climate change impac ts and mitigation targets by improving forest 
management. It is also aligned with the national Biomass Energy Strategy 2020 , which aims to 
ensure a more sustainable biomass supply and combustion technologies for homes and small 
enterprises.


---
*Page 606*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 168 
 
 
35. GCF country pr ogramme:  According to the  funding proposal  (section D.5), the project 
aligns with the forthcoming GCF country programme, which “prioritizes forest management 
through restoration and protection of natural forests, afforestation and agroforestry, as well as 
distribution of high -quality reforestation inputs and capacity development”. While this project 
proposal to GCF focuses on a different geographic area , the early and ongoing lessons from the 
experiences from existing GCF -funded projects “Strengthening Clim ate Resilience of Rural 
Communities in Northern Rwanda ”2 and “Transforming Eastern Province through adaptation”3 
will be applied during the implementation of this project in the  CND  landscape.  
36. Roles of key entities:  The proposed p roject was initiated by  MOE Rwanda  and 
supported by the  national designated authority , Rwanda Environment Management Authority, 
due to the high vulnerability to  climate change of the CND region of the country. MOE Rwanda  is 
well placed to oversee the project  as AE si nce the ministry is responsible for  (i) ensuring  the 
sustainable management of natural resources and for the development of policies, strategies  
and regulations ; and (ii) mobilizing resources for the development of the sector. M OE Rwanda  
managed USD 10 mil lion from the Adaptation Fund to implement the Reducing Vulnerability to 
Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based Adaptation Programme4 and 
has overseen a number of other climate projects , including: an early warning system project 
(fun ded by  the Least Developed Countries Fund  (LDCF )), the Landscape Approach to Forest 
Restoration and Conservation and the “Building resilience of communities living in degraded 
forests, savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem management approa ch” 
programme (funded by LDCF)5.  
37. Given the centrality of forest protection, restoration and management to the project, the  
RFA is well placed to carry out the role of EE. It is noted that this would be RFA’s first GCF EE 
role, since MOE Rwanda’s  other GCF project is executed by FONERWA. Strong support will be 
provided by a set of implementing partners – including the  WCS and government agencies such 
as RDB , which  are resp onsible for the national parks, RWB, Rwanda Environment Management 
Authority and the National Land Use Authority. The project activities overseen by each are 
shown in the table in the introduction  above and are aligned with their mandates , as well as  
secto ral plans and strategies.   
38. Consultation and engagement with civil society:  To better understand the interests 
of stakeholders and potential impacts of the proposed project, and as  a preparation for 
designing future engagement strategies, a comprehensive, gender -responsive, culturally 
sensitive, non -discriminatory, and inclusive stakeholder analysis was undertaken and is 
reflected in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan ( annex 7). In terms of future engagement, the 
funding proposal  indicates a number of specific  areas where consultations will be ongoing  to 
inform the rollout of activities , for example, consultations with communities  and civil society 
organizations representing men, women, youth, and historically marginalized people in local 
communities , as well a s district and national government agencies, on the following activities: 
Activity 1.1.1.  Synthesize and disseminate information on value of natural forests and ecosystem 
services; Activity 1.1.2. Develop climate -resilient landscape land -use plans; Activit y 2.2.3 
Promote silvopastoralism with indigenous trees around Gishwati;  Activity 3.1.1 Restore high 
slope areas (>55  per cent ) as protective forests;  and Activity 3.2.1 Develop  an agroforestry -
related value chain for market access.  
 
2Rwanda Ministry of Environment, 2018. FP073: Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern 
Rwanda. Green Climate Fund.  
3International Union for Conser vation of Nature, 2021. FP167: Transforming Eastern Province through Adaptation. 
Green Climate Fund.  
4Adaptation Fund, 2014. Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change in North West Rwanda through Community Based 
Adaptation. Link . 
5United Nations Environment Programme,  2016. Building resilience of communities living in degraded forests, 
savannahs and wetlands of Rwanda through an ecosystem management approach.


---
*Page 607*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 169 
 
 
39. Country  ownership of the project is thus seen to be high. 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                          Scale:  N/A  
40. Of the project’s total  proposed budget of USD 50,000,000, 78  per cent  (USD 39,056,579 ) 
is proposed to be a GCF grant, and 22 per cent (USD 10,943,579 ) is made up of government co-
financing to the project. The Government of Rwanda is providing grant financing via RFA, RWB, 
and RDB to support activities in component 3. In addition to these c ontributions totalling USD 
10,831,307, the AE will cover office costs in the form of an in -kind contribution equivalent to 
USD 112,271 for the Project Management Unit , which will be hosted at  MOE Rwanda .  
41. Government co -finance:  In response to a question fr om iTAP about the nature of the 
co-finance and the extent to which it represent s new and additional funds, the AE explained that 
“[t]he co -financing commitments were provided based on the existing Government 
commitments provided every year in the project i ntervention area . These are earmarked funds 
that go into  forest management, community revenue sharing around the parks, monitoring 
resources for catchment restoration interventions and also different in -kind contributions. All 
the details are indicated in the Annex 4 of the budget and activities to be covered by co -
financing resources and Annex 13 indicates the commitment letters from the co -financier s.” It is 
iTAP’s understanding that these funds will not be spent in a business -as-usual manner, but will 
be newly directed towards climate risk management, through support to the project’s 
adaptation and mitigation interventions and efforts to develop officials’ capacity for climate 
risk-informed integrated land use planning and management.  
42. Role of financial institutions : Participating financial institutions (PFIs) will be 
important in two ways – firstly as providers of credit to farmer cooperatives , savings groups  
and small enterprises in the targeted value chains, and secondly as recipient s of trai ning – to 
enhance their knowledge of good agricultural practices, equip them to assess the impact of 
climate change on their clientele and loan portfolio, and help ensure equitable access to 
financial assets by women, youth and historically marginalized co mmunities .  
43. In response to a question from iTAP about whether any consultation has happened with 
the potential PFI s, which are not mentioned in the extensive stakeholder consultations reported 
in annex 7,  the AE stated that “At this stage [neither] Cordaid  nor RFA have notified the 
participating financial institutions. As per the project implementation plan, a 6 -month to 9 -
month inception phase will include in -depth analysis of existing financial institutions including 
microfinance institutions  and saving a nd credit cooperative societies . They will be scored 
against a list of criteria to understand their leadership, financial  position and financial products 
portfolio on a case -by-case basis.”6   
44. The iTAP  believes this engagement will be crucial to the success of Output 3.3 on 
“Financial services and private sector investment engagement ” in order to ensure sustainability 
of livelihood interventions, and urges the AE to start dialogue with potential partner s as soon as 
possible since they will have experience and advice that can guide the way this output is 
approached for maximum effectiveness.  
45. Level of concessionality : The project’s proposed 100  per cent  concessionality level is 
justified because the projec t is investing  in multiple ecosystem goods and services  that are 
public in nature , including  landscape mosaics , at the core of which are public assets, in the form 
of national parks and other protected areas , as well as landscape linkages and stepping stones 
to promote connectivity and flood management, and steep slopes t o be afforested t o prevent 
landslides and er osion. Benefits will accrue also to privately owned small -scale family farms , but 
these are on a very small  scale , and any profits made through processing and sale of 
 
6 MOE Rwanda responses to iTAP, 4 September 2023 .


---
*Page 608*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 170 
 
 
agroforestry products will need to be retained at household level to buffer  against shock s and 
stresses to increase and diversify incomes , and to improve families’ nutri tional status.  
46. Market transformation for cookstoves : The project aims to avoid challenges which 
the feasibility study s ays were experienced with previous improved cookstoves (I CS) 
program mes in the region , which “have historically been characterized by poorly designed 
subsidy/incentive programs which in some instances have provided 100% subsidies to end -
users” and have sometimes led to “unnecessary long -term dependence and poorl y managed 
exits, which consequently created long -lasting ICS market distortions”. Instead, the project  
adopts a market -oriented approach to strengthening the improved cookstove supply chain in 
the region, creating “strong linkages and business relationship s among the key actors, including 
cookstove producers/youth  small and medium -sized enterprises , farmers/savings groups, and  
microfinance institutions  to ensure sustainable access and finance of cookstoves”.  
47. In collaboration with technical and vocational education and training  institutes , youth 
producers , central and local authorities , and experts on biomass and micro -finance will refine 
and test, for each type of ICS/fuel to be promoted, the category/profile of households to be 
targeted and the related subsidy/microcredit schemes to be implemented to facilitate stove 
adoption with minimum concessional ity. Subsidized  cookstove s will be supplied to 4,000 poor 
households identified as being in a category of vulnerable groups , including yout h, women , 
landless and disabled people. The stoves will be locally manufactured, with a competitive 
process leading t o the award of a supply contract to local  women - and youth -owned 
cooperatives or start -ups. A partnership with t wo integrated polytechnic regional colleges will 
enable the design of prototype affordable Tier 2 ICS customized to local conditions and 
customer preferences .   
48. After year 4, the start -ups that will have graduated from the training and incubation 
programme (also conducted for the manufacture of beehives and irrigation pumps) will be fully 
empowered to maintain the supply of new equipment an d repair of old equipment , as well as to 
market their products to producer organizations and households. Access to microfinance 
institutions will be facilitated to allow emerging cookstove  business to grow. The members of 
village savings groups will be abl e to use income generated from the sale of fast -maturing crops 
(chili and French beans) , coupled with savings accumulated from their groups , to buy new or 
replacement stoves over time. A specialized small business development fund  will be 
established to su pport dissemination, accompanied by public awareness -raising of the benefits 
of ICS.  
49. Return on investment : The project cost per direct beneficiary of USD 31 ( USD 40 with 
co-finance ) and 20 -year economic rate of return of project interventions for agroforestry  (49 
per cent ), protective forests (72  per cent ), and silvopast oralism  (51 per cent ) all highlight the 
project’s  viability , as does t he economic  net present value  of USD 10,586  for the improved 
cookstoves  intervention . The mitigation cost is hi gh, at an estimated USD 43.84 per t CO 2 e, but 
comes with a multiplicity of adaptation benefits and socioeconomic and environmental co-
benefits . The cost of restoring natural forest for providing both adaptation and mitigation 
benefits is significantly gre ater than the cost of simply planting trees for mitigation , since a 
complex multi -strata, multi -trophic level natural ecosystem (like a tropical rainforest) provide s 
more varied and in many cases more robust ecosystem services than a simpler ecosystem (lik e a 
monocrop plantation) . Restoration of natural forest in Rwanda is essential for sustaining the 
critical ecosystem services on which vulnerable rural communities and the national economy 
depend , and are now even more essential for  buffer ing intensifying climate change impacts .  
50. Best practices : The project will use Rwanda’s best practice guidelines for tree nursery 
establishment , tree planting and tree management. For assisted natural regeneration, methods 
developed and proven through multi -year research in Nyungwe and Gishwati -Mukura National 
Parks will be used . The project will use multiple contemporary methods for monitoring the  
success of project interventions , as well as  forest coverage and condition . Forest plantations will


---
*Page 609*
---

 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.0 8 
Page 171 
 
 
be mapped and monitored using the Rwandan Government ’s newly developed Forest 
Monitoring and Evaluation Software specifically developed for this purpose. T he project will 
develop a modern indigenous forest monitoring system, utilize the most high -resolution data  
sets currently available (<3  metres ) and take advantage of recent  remote -sensing advances , 
including cloud computing and machine learning. Although replication of effective and cost -
effective project techniques through knowledge -sharing with other countries in Africa is not 
planned in the project design , this could be a by -product of the project . 
51. The project’s overall efficiency and effectiveness is r ated as  medium  to high. 
II. Overall  remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
52. The iTAP believes this cross -cutting public sector project from the Government of 
Rwanda  is an important one that  will make significant strides towards effective management 
and sustainable financing of forest -and-farm  landscapes that play a vital  role in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation  in the  Congo Nile Divide . 
53. The iTAP recommend s to the AE that they undertake the  following actions to strengthen 
the measurement, reporting and verification  (MRV ) of the project’s core mitigation benefits:  
(a) Clarify the roles and responsibilities of the various  actors who  will be involved in the  
steps of the  MRV process over time , and t he frequency of the se steps ; 
(b) Capture the MRV activities as presented in annex 22 , also in  annex 11, such that they 
become part of the project’s overall monitoring and evaluation system ; and  
(c) Clarify how this project will be aligned with the existing arrangements for the national 
MRV system and/or will support or contribute to enhancing the functioning of this 
system across the country.


---
*Page 610*
---

GCF/B.3 7/02 /Add. 08 
Page 172 
Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP21 7) 
Proposal name:  Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and 
Landscape Restoration  
Accredited entity:  Ministry of Environment of Rwanda 
Country/(ies):  Rwanda 
Project/programme size: Small  
Impact potential  
The iTAP assessment of the impact potential of the project as high is well acknowledged and no 
further comments from the AE.  
Paradigm shift potential  
 iTAP assessment as Medium to High is acknowledged  by AE . The project is going  to utilize 
integrated landscape management and ecosystem -based adaptation approaches in addressing 
climate change impacts in Rwanda which offers opportunities for scaling up and replication to 
similar ecological zones across the country. 
Sustainable developm ent potential  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE . 
Needs of the recipient  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE 
Country ownership  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged  by the AE  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
iTAP assessment as Medium to High is acknowledged  by the AE . The AE has received t he 
confirmation letter regarding the co-financing from the Rwanda Development Board, Rwanda 
Water Resources Board and Rwanda Forestry Authority to support com plementary activities of th is 
project . The AE will  report on the co -financing in line with GCF Policy on co -financing  annually in 
APRs. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
The AE acknowledges iTAP overall assessment and recommendation for the Board approval.


---
*Page 611*
---

BUILDING RESILIENCE OF VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES TO 
CLIMATE VARIABILITY IN RWANDA’S CONGO NILE DIVIDE 
THROUGH FOREST AND LANDSCAPE RESTORATION
ANNEX 8 - GENDER ANALYSIS/ASSESSMENT AND GENDER & 
SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  Gender Documentation for FP217


---
*Page 612*
---

2 
 Table of Contents  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  3 
INTRODUCTION  4 
1.1 Purpose of the Gender Analysis  4 
1.2 Meth odology  6 
SITUATION ANALYSIS  7 
1.3 Policy framework  7 
1.4 National and international legal framework for gender equality  9 
1.5 Institutional framework for implementing gender policies in Rwanda  11 
1.6 Poverty and labor force participation  12 
1.7 Beliefs, perceptions and cultural norms  15 
1.8 Gender roles, responsibilities and labor allocation  16 
1.9 Access to and control over capital and natural assets  17 
1.10 Women’s health and access to health services  20 
1.11 Women’s educational attainment and access to education services  21 
1.12 Patterns of power and decision -making  24 
1.13 Social service and support systems that contribute to gender empowerment, wellbeing, and security  25 
CONCLUSIONS - ONGOING CHALLENGES TO GENDER EQUITY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE GCF CND 
PROJECT  26 
1.14 Afforestation, agroforestry and tree tenure  26 
1.15 Improved cook stoves  27 
1.16 Honey production and marketing  28 
1.17 Coronavirus (COVID -19) implications  in advancing gender equity  29 
1.18 Promoting gender equity within the CND GCF project  29 
5 LITERATURE CITED  31 
 GENDER, YOUTH AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  34 
1.19 Methods  34 
1.20 Gender Issues  35 
1.21 Youth Analysis and Key Issues  37 
1.22 Internal program considerations  40 
1.23 Gender and Youth Action Plan  42


---
*Page 613*
---

3 
 ● EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Since 1994, Rwanda has made significant progress in empowering women and countering the numerous 
inequities and discrimination to which women were historically subjected. Today Rwanda has one of the 
most progressive, gender equitable policy frameworks of a ny country in Africa, and has established and 
funded the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion and the Gender Monitoring Office to oversee the 
implementation of these gender progressive policies.  
There is no single definition nor understanding of gender equity and women’s empowerment, and the 
meaning, and reality of these terms differs across communities and cultures and over time. That said, 
the Government of Rwanda holds the simple belief in the fundamental equality of all people. In a just 
society, men  and women of all ages, at a minimum, should have the same rights to self -determination, 
should be equally represented at all levels of political leadership, and should not be subject to 
discrimination or gender -based violence.  
Today rural women continue t o play a vital role in ensuring the wellbeing and security of their famil ies. 
But being the caretaker of the family is getting harder for women as farmland becomes increasingly 
scarce, as soil erosion and declining soil fertility lowers crop yields, and as  fuelwood, fodder and clean 
water take ever longer to find and carry home. Changes in rainfall timing and intensity, driven by climate 
change, will further exacerbate the challenges women will face to meet the needs of their famil ies. 
Women, youth and marginalized groups are the primary targeted beneficiaries of the Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) proposal “Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate Variability in Rwanda’s 
Congo Nile Divide Through Forest and Landscape Restoratio n.” Empowering women, youth and 
marginalized groups to play an equal role in land and resource use decisions will ensure that their 
interests and concerns are incorporated into plans designed to increase the wellbeing and security of 
families in the Congo Nile Divide (CND) by helping them to evolve their livelihood strategies and 
practices in ways that adapt to climate change.  
Investing in women’s lives and strengthening their capacity to overcome existing and looming challenges 
will do much to implement Rw anda’s progressive gender policies and help reduce the continuing 
inequities and discrimination that rural women, in particular, still face in their daily lives. It will also reduce 
poverty, the incidence of child failure to thrive, and food and income ins ecurity within families across the 
CND.  By ensuring a robust integration of women and youth in programming, the resilience of 
households in the Congo -Nile Divide will be strengthened.  
The following summarizes the primary desired outcomes for women and you th that will be generated by 
implementing the four components of the GCF program in the CND.  
 
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning  
● Outcome 1: Climate adaptation programs in LUPs reflect and address the priorities of women and 
youth  
● Component 2: Forest Landscape Management and Restoration  
● Outcome 2: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage in 
forest management and restoration  
● Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods  
● Outcome 3: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacit y to engage in green 
jobs


---
*Page 614*
---

4 
  
Component 4: Monitoring & Evaluation  
● Outcome 4: Disaggregated and specialized monitoring generates data showing whether and 
how women, youth and marginalized people are benefiting from adaptive management systems  
 
● INTRODUCTION  
Decades of project design, implementation and impact evaluation have demonstr ated conclusively that 
gender equality and women's empowerment are necessary conditions for effective investment and 
action to achieve environmental conservation, economic development and climate change resilience. 
This program seeks to ensure that women p lay equal roles in determining how to improve the wellbeing 
and security of their families and communities in ways that maintain the agro -ecological systems, 
biodiversity, and environmental services essential to the economies, nutrition and safety of their  families 
in the Congo -Nile Divide (CND) now and in the future.  
Our approach goes beyond trying merely to ensure that women are no longer ignored or marginalized 
but seeks to empower women so that they can decide how they can best engage in determining what 
support would best help them and their families to increase fo od and income security and resilience to 
climate shocks. To do this we need to complete a thorough gender analysis that identifies the differences 
in men and women’s lives, including those that lead to sociocultural and economic inequalities, and 
applies t his understanding to project development.  
This gender analysis attempts to answer four questions:  
 
1. What roles do men and women play in determining wellbeing objectives and the allocation of 
labor and capital, and how do these differ in male versus female headed households?  
2. What are the inequalities, discriminations and rights denials faced by men and wo men in 
different social, economic and political contexts? How do these issues intersect with other factors such 
as age, ethnicity, disability, wealth class, etc.?  
3. How might gender inequity impact on the effectiveness and sustainability of the project 
inves tments, actions and desired outcomes?  
4. What are the risks that project efforts to reduce gender inequality by empowering women, 
actually exacerbates inequities and further undermines the status, and agency of women?  
 
The purpose of this gender analysis is to ensure that the project proposal des ign and implementation 
will be informed by a thorough understanding of gender roles, power relations and dynamics. This 
assessment provides information to address the relevant environmental and climate change critical 
issues from a gender perspective. Info rmation generated during the analysis will ensure that sufficient 
and appropriate attention is paid to gender issues within all CND project interventions.  
Furthermore, these gender inclusion methods fall in line with the GCF’s gender mainstreaming 
guidelines, designed to involve women, youth, and the historically marginalized in all climate adaptation, 
mitigation, and resilience strategies.  The gender asses sment will provide the foundation for a credible 
and practical gender action plan to be implemented by the GCF CND project.  
 
1.1 Purpose of the Gender Analysis  
Increased greenhouse gas emissions linked to human activity continue to threaten the livelihoods,


---
*Page 615*
---

5 
 safety, and wellbeing of communities worldwide. However, climatic impacts will vary based on numerous 
factors, including geography, socioeconomic status, age, and gender. Women experience unequal 
access to resources, land, and power, reducing their ability t o adapt to climate change as effectively as 
men. Women face greater domestic responsibility to maintain the home and raise children, reducing 
their time for education and careers. As a result, women are more tied to their land and more vulnerable 
to climat ic impacts, yet also represent a potential group of leaders to spur mitigation and adaptation 
efforts.  
Given the potential of women as environmental pioneers, climate resiliency efforts require a thorough 
understanding of gender roles in the region. MoE recognize the inextricable link between sustainable 
development of communities through gender pla nning and the conservation of wild places. Effective 
conservation strategy requires working to balance gender inequity and providing opportunities for 
women in the conservation space. Furthermore, the high dependence of women on agriculture as 
livelihood i n Rwanda impacts both conservation and climate change mitigation efforts. Smart 
conservation programs therefore target agricultural interventions to aid marginalized groups such as 
women and youth. Such projects offer employment opportunities and reduce th e threat of illegal or 
paramilitary activities that threaten conservation outcomes.  
Shifting the imbalance of power and access for women is not only a conservation target, but a human 
rights issue. Sustainable development at all levels, local, national, an d international, requires the 
empowerment of women. When women receive higher education, they have more flexibility in careers 
and are more likely to escape poverty. These women strengthen economies through diversified incomes, 
marry and have babies later,  and have greater independence (NISR, 2018). However, climate change 
is likely to worsen financial stressors, particularly in rural communities, and increase the risk of gender 
based violence (GBV). As the frequency of extreme weather events increases, und erstanding how 
climate change impacts women is essential to combatting the human rights issue of gender equality.  
There are numerous international human rights agreements that provide a framework for gender equity. 
Rwanda has signed on to several of these commitments, including the Convention on Elimination of all 
Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW), the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, 
and the Convention on Slavery and Repression of Human Trafficking (IUCN, 2021). Participating in 
these commitments requires periodic progress reporting and helps hold countries accountable.  
In Rwanda, the government has made significant strides to address gender disparity following the 
Genocide. Thirty -four percent  of households became run by widows post -Genocide, demonstrating an 
obvious need for the Rwandan government to address the newfoun d elevated standing of women 
(Vanhees, 2014). Several laws help ensure that on paper, Rwandan women have increased access and 
protection under the law. Such policies include the 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law ( Law/nº 
22/99 of 12/11/1999) , the 2008 Girls’ Education Policy, and the 2010 National Gender Policy (IUCN, 
2021). However, these policies are new and compete with a long history of patriarchal norms in Rwandan 
society, particularly outside of urban areas. Practice of these policies r emains inconsistent, especially 
when women do not know their rights. Helping men and women understand gender policy is the first 
step to shifting cultural perceptions. But gender equality cannot be achieved by women alone, it also 
requires the active parti cipation of men to accept the deconstruction of traditional gender roles and be 
aware of the intersectionality of women and other groups. For example, considering how to  includ e 
youth and marginalized communities, espec ially the women in those groups,  in equality strategies will


---
*Page 616*
---

6 
 help lift up the most at -risk groups and reduce illegal activity.  
 
1.2 Methodology  
This Gender Assessment uses a range of primary (24 focus groups and 18 key informant interviews) 
and secondary (published reports, policies and academic literature) information sources to triangulate 
our understanding of the gender context for climate resi lience and the project design.  
Key Informant Interviews (KII) were conducted, using purposive sampling, with senior decision makers 
in governmental organizations at local, district and national levels. Results from these interviews were 
validated and enric hed by 24 Focus Groups (FG) with 58 men and 91 women of different age groups 
within 21 communities bordering Nyungwe, Gishwati and Volcanoes national parks. Originally a large 
number of consultations was envisioned, but because of COVID constraints, includ ing limitations on 
travel between districts, a smaller sample was completed. Additional stakeholder consultations will be 
conducted at national, district and project site level to inform the implementation of the project and to 
adapt activity implementatio n to the local context.  These consultations will include the review of 
Environmental and Social Frameworks included in Annex 6. A desk study of secondary data sources 
gleaned from government reports and published policies, grey literature produced by civi l society groups, 
and peer -reviewed academic papers has also fed into the report.  
The following desired outcomes helped guide our interviews, the desk study and the analysis of all 
information garnered:  
● Gender roles, needs, concerns and aspirations in the context of the proposed project are well 
understood and documented;  
● Root causes of  existing gender inequalities in the context of the proposed project are identified;  
● Proven options for redressing traditional power imbalances between men and women are 
identified;  
● Increased confidence that gender focused investments and actions proposed by the project will 
deliver the desired results.  
 
The information generated from the gender analysis and assessment will be considered in all stages of 
the CND project cycle: design, work planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. In each 
of these stages, managers will both be enabled and en couraged to view the project through a ‘gender 
lens’ so that project investments and actions:  
● Reconcile gender inequalities that pre -date and might emerge from the project;  
● Ensure the differential needs and concerns of women and men are addressed;  
● Ensure women and men have equal access to resources, services, and human capital 
development;  
● Ensure equal participation of women and men in management arrangements and as 
beneficiaries, partners and key stakeholders; and  
● Ensure women’s equal participation in decision -making processes.  
 
 
 
● SITUATION ANALYSIS


---
*Page 617*
---

7 
  
1.3 Policy framework  
The implementation of gender focused policy and legislation after 1994 has provided Rwanda with a 
strong legal framework for advancing women’s status and rights. The high prevalence of female and 
orphan headed households, as a result of the Genocide, requi red the Rwandan government to reassess 
the country’s property ownership laws. The 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law provided women 
with the right to own and inherit property, protecting widows and orphans from losing their land to male 
family membe rs (Vanhees, 2014). However, this law only applies to formally registered, monogamous 
unions, and the children of such unions, denying inheritance rights to women engaged in consensual 
cohabitation or polygamous relationships and illegitimate children. Ful l equal rights to land titles and use 
of land for women were established by Law N° 43/2013 of 16/06/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda 
(IUCN, 2021). Furthermore, while the 1999 Inheritance and Marital Property Law established equal 
inheritance rights for male a nd female children, it was not mandated that all children should inherit equal 
amounts of property until Law N° 27/2016 of 08/07/2016 Governing Matrimonial Regimes, Donations 
and Successions (IUCN, 2021).  
The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda of 2003, revised in 2015, outlawed all forms of 
discrimination, provided legal equality within recognized marriages, and set a minimum of 30% female 
participation in the Senate and other public governance (East Af rican Community, 2009). These high 
gender equality standards have helped propel Rwanda to both become the first country with a majority 
of female representation in Parliament and rank 7th out of 156 countries for the smallest gender gap 
(World Economic For um, 2021). The 2010 National Gender Policy functioned to further advance gender 
mainstreaming and equality, confirming the Rwandan government’s stance on gender as a cross - cutting 
issue that must be addressed for successful development (Republic of Rwanda , 2019).  
This foundational principle of gender equality as a driving factor for growth is highlighted in Rwanda 
Vision 2020 and Vision 2050, which have been used as frameworks for Rwanda’s development 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2000; Republic of Rwanda, 2020). W hile the primary objectives of these 
frameworks were to elevate Rwanda to a middle -income country by 2020 and a high -income country by 
2050, these goals could not be accomplished without addressing gender inequality. Strategies for 
mitigating gender inequa lity included updating existing laws to account for gender aspects, increasing 
women’s representation in decision -making positions, developing gender training programs, increasing 
women’s involvement in associations and cooperatives, and increasing women’s  access to resources, 
such as education (IUCN, 2021). The 2008 Girls’ Education Policy further aimed to increase girls’ access 
to education by promoting elimination of gender disparities through the development of a 12 year basic 
education system, a school  feeding program, separate girl’s bathrooms, and increased infrastructure 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2019). Separate girl’s bathrooms were introduced to limit gender - based violence 
(GBV) in schools, while the 2011 National Policy against Gender Based Violence a imed to progressively 
eliminate GBV through the development of a preventive, protective, supportive, and transformational 
environment (Republic of Rwanda, 2019).  
To provide oversight and coordination of the gender policies, the Rwandan government establish ed a 
number of gender machinery institutions. The Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF) 
implements national gender policy and ensures gender mainstreaming (IUCN, 2021). The main 
responsibilities of the Ministry are to implement and assess poli cies and provide resources for programs. 
The Gender Monitoring Office (GMO) implements gender audits in the public and private sector, and the


---
*Page 618*
---

8 
 National Women’s Council (NWC) advocates for women’s rights and recruits female participation in 
development prog rams (IUCN, 2021). The National Gender Cluster is a forum of representatives from 
private sector, government, and development groups that meets to discuss the prioritization and 
coordination of gender equity efforts (IUCN, 2021). The Rwanda Women Parliamen tarians oversee legal 
issues related to gender and help create new gender policy. Together, these groups work to ensure 
gender policy is not only implemented, but practiced in Rwanda.  
At the international level, Rwanda has ratified several humanitarian agreements in support of gender 
equality. The Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW) is an 
international bill of rights for women. All signatory countrie s are evaluated for national issues that may 
conflict with the agreement. In Rwanda, GBV and lower rates of education among women are areas for 
concern (UN Human Rights, 2017). Almost every country in Africa has committed to the African Charter 
on human an d peoples’ rights on the rights of women (ACHPR), which provides a continental framework 
for human rights. Most recently, Rwanda prioritized several of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals, namely Quality Education (4), Gender Equality (5) and Reduced Inequalities (10) 
(United Nations Rwanda, 2021). These international agreements provide Rwanda with a level of 
accountability to implement and practice national gender policies.  
While the Rwandan government has made significant progress to advance women’s rights under the 
law, a gap remains for women not engaged in formal marriages. Approximately 30% of women in 
Rwanda participate in consensual partnerships but are not legally married, or are in polygamous 
marriages; neither of which are recognized under the law (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). This creates 
conflicts regarding land inheritance for women in these situations. Polygamous marriages do take place 
in Rwanda, and the status of wives is fluid; inheritance (without official marriage) can change base d on 
seniority or who had children in the partnership (Vanhees, 2014). However, the 2008 Gender Based 
Violence Law does assert that if a person in a polygamous relationship wants to officially marry one of 
the partners, common belongings must be divided eq ually between the other spouses (Vanhees, 2014). 
This law does establish a precedent to address the rights of polygamous women, but remains 
insufficient. The Rwandan government sought to increase legal protections for women by hosting group 
weddings in rur al areas, but further legislation to recognize women’s rights as human rights, regardless 
of marital status, are necessary (IUCN, 2021).  
 
1.4 National and international legal framework for gender equality  
The Government of Rwanda, State of Gender Equity Report (2019) provides a comprehensive summary 
of constitutional provisions, and national laws that support the principle of gender equality  and women’s 
empowerment in Rwanda. Information for the legislative  and policy review was drawn primarily from this 
report. Additional information was gleaned from Rwanda Vision 2020, the National Policy against Gender 
Based Violence (2011) and the National Gender Policy (2010).  
Rwanda is internationally recognized as a w orld leader in promoting gender equality principles and 
women's empowerment. In the aftermath of the 1994 genocide, the Government undertook radical and 
far-reaching reforms to address the political, social, legal, and economic status of women. Legal refor ms 
to give women property rights, and to enable them to inherit property, including land, were especially 
important. The Constitution, adopted in 2003 and amended in 2015, proactively promotes gender 
equality. It outlaws any form of gender discrimination, and enshrines the principle of equality within


---
*Page 619*
---

9 
 marriage.  
With 53% of the Rwanda population being female, the Vision 2020 national government strategy 
emphasizes  that Gender equality will be one of the driving factors towards achieving rapid growth and 
sustainable development. Vision 2020 commits to continuously update and adapt laws on gender, 
strategies for an increased access to productive resources by women, r epresentation in decision - 
making positions and apply positive discrimination in favour of women.  
The National Gender Policy (NGP) of 2010 formulated to support government programs in various 
sectors that are directly aimed at addressing gender inequalities and women’s rights. T he NGP seeks 
to free Rwandan society from all forms of gender based discrim ination and create an environment where 
both men and women equally contribute to and benefit from the national development goals.  
The main goal of the NGP is to contribute to reducing gender inequalities in all sectors, as a key 
component of sustainable de velopment. THe NGP was informed by the Economic Development and 
Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS I) of 2007 It helped to shape theThe Agriculture Gender Strategy 
(2010), the EDPRS II (2013), the National Strategy for Transformation (2017 -2024), the Strate gic Plan 
for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA3), the National Information and Communication Technology 
in Rural Agriculture (ICTRAg) Strategy (2016 -2022), the National Policy against Gender - Based Violence 
(2011), the National Strategy on Climate Ch ange and Low -Carbon Development (2011) and several 
others.  
Constitutional provisions and gender  
The Constitution of Rwanda of 4 June 2003, as amended on December 24, 2015, affirms the 
fundamental rights of all citizens of Rwanda, consistent with the United Nations Declaration of Human 
Rights and other human rights instruments. According to Article 11  of the Constitution: “All Rwandans 
are born and remain free and equal in rights and duties. Discrimination of whatever kind based on, inter 
alia, ethnic origin, tribe, clan, color, sex, region, social origin, religion or faith, opinion, economic status, 
culture, language, social status, physical or mental disability or any other form of discrimination is 
prohibited and punishable by law.” Article 16 further enshrines the principle of gender equality, and the 
Government has committed to establishing equity and equality at all levels of society.  
Key provisions within the constitution that relate to gender equality include the following:  
● The preamble reaffirms Rwanda’s adherence to human rights conventions, including the UN 
Convention on the Elimination of All  Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW 1979) and 
declares Rwanda’s commitment to ensure equal rights between women and men;  
● Articles 11 and 16 outlaw any form of gender discrimination;  
● Articles 9, 76, and 82 mandate a minimum quota of 30% female representation in the Senate 
and other areas of public governance;  
● Article 37 prohibits discrimination in employment; and  
● Article 26 enshrines equality within monogamous marriage.  
 
Since 1994, the Government of Rwanda has enacted a series of gender progressive policies. These 
include the following three key laws:  
Gender equity in the right to inherit property  
Enacted in 1999 Law n°22/99 (supplements book one of the civil code regarding succession) and revised


---
*Page 620*
---

10 
 in 2016 (Law Nº27/2016 of 08/07/2016 Governing Matrimonial Regimes, Donations and Successions) 
provides that both male and female children have the rights  to inherit their parents property. This in terms 
of that law obviates customary practices where only sons inherit land and tangible assets.  
Gender equity in the right to own land  
Enacted in 2013, Law N° 43/2013 OF 16/06/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda, ensu res that all women 
have equal rights to land titles registered in their name. This law enables women to secure loans from 
financial institutions using their land as collateral, which in turn removes a significant barrier from women 
engaging in commercial e nterprise that require capital investment.  
Gender -based violence  
Enacted in 2008, Law n° 59/2008 of 10/09/2008 on Prevention and Punishment of Gender -Based 
Violence makes explicit that gender -based violence is a crime that is punishable under Rwanda law.  
At the international level, Rwanda is party to key international i nstruments addressing women’s and 
children's rights, including:  
● The Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).  
● The Convention on Slavery and Repression of Human Trafficking and its Additional Protocol 
repressing and punishing the sale and trafficking of children and women.  
● The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the Optional Protocol within the 
UNC RC on Child Trafficking, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography.  
● The African Charter on Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACRWC)  
● The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the Protocol to the African Charter on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa.  
● ILO Convention 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor.  
 
The government has also ratified and/or implemented numerous international conventions and 
instruments. Those include:  
● The Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Violence against Women (CEDAW),  
● The Beijing Platform for Action, the African Charter on human and people’s rights on the 
rights of women (ACHPR),  
● The International Convention on Social and Cultural Rights (ICCPR),  
● The United Nations Security Council Resolution on Peace and Security (UNSC R 1325 and 
1820) and  
● The UN declaration on human rights (UDHR).  
 
Lastly, the Government of Rwanda is committed to delivering on the 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) which includes gender equality. To fast track attainment of the SDGs, the Government of 
Rwanda argues that policies must be in place and effectively implemented to ensure that both women 
and men equally participate in and benefit from development investments and processes.  
 
1.5 Institutional framework for implementing gender policies in Rwanda  
Key efforts to implement the Government of Rwanda’s gender progressive policies are included in the 
remit of the Agriculture, Justice, Health, Education, and Local Government ministries and  their


---
*Page 621*
---

11 
 executing agencies.  
To help coordinate and oversee Rwanda’s gender equality and women’s empowerment efforts and 
ensure their compliance with national policies and regulations, Rwanda has established four key 
governmental and civil society entities. These include the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion 
(MIGEPROF), the Gender Monitoring Office (GMO), the National Women’s Council (NWC) and Rwanda 
Women Parliamentarians (RWPF/FFRP).  
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF)  
The Ministry responsible for Gender has the mandate of coordinating the implementation of the national 
gender policy and advocating on gender issues at local to national levels. MIGEPROF formulates 
regulations and its staff support gender mainstreaming acr oss the Government of Rwanda.  
The Gender Monitoring Office (GMO)  
The GMO documents and reports the extent to which a “gender lens” influences the investments and 
actions of public agencies and private organizations. The GMO undertakes monitoring and evalua tion 
to assess the implementation and social impact of public and private sector implementation of activities 
that seek to comply with Government gender policies.  
The National Women’s Council (NWC)  
The National Women’s Council is a local to national organization of women that advocates for women’s 
rights and the promotion of gender equality. Its members help mobilize women across the nation at all 
social, economic and political levels to ensure that their voices are heard and acted on in development 
and conservation programmes and activities. The National Women’s Council provides a formal structure 
to give voice to women and through which women can raise ideas and concerns to inform policy. Lack 
of financial resources remains a constraint to the active engagement of village women in this process.  
Rwanda Women Parliamentarians (RWPF/FFRP)  
The RWPF/FFRP works to build the capacity of women Parliamentarians to navigate the halls of 
government successfully , to represent women’s voices in the formulation of all policies not just those 
related to gender equality, and to hold the parliament and its members accountable for redressing 
historical inequities in the rights of women and the power that they wield in determining the future of all 
Rwandans.  
The National Gender Cluster  
This is a Government convened forum in which the Government of Rwanda, development partners, the 
Private Sector and Civil Society meet and discuss planning, coordination and prioritization of Gender 
Equality interventions.  
 
1.6 Poverty and labor force particip ation  
The poverty rate in Rwanda averages 39% (NISR, 2018). The Western (CND) region is the poorest in 
the nation with a poverty rate that averages 47.7% and ranges from 33.5% in Rusizi to 69.3% in 
Nyamasheke. Between 2013/14 and 2016/17 (NISR, 20 18) 50.5% of female headed households had 
been poor during that time period, compared to 48.8% of male headed households. Poverty was more 
prevalent in households with more people and where the household head was older, had little education,


---
*Page 622*
---

12 
 was a farmer, and was not economically active (NISR, 2018).  
Figure 1: Poverty rates by district (Source: EICV5 NISR, 2018)  
 
 
Figure 2: Poverty in d istricts within Congo Nile Divide (Source: EICV5 NISR, 2018)  
 
Labor force participation is lower in women (48.2%) than in men (65.6%) 16 years and older (NISR, 2020), 
and unemployment is higher in women (20.3%) than in men (15.9%). Young women and men are less likely 
to be in the labor force and more likely to be une mployed. In 2020, women were less likely to be employees 
and employers, and significantly more likely to be a contributing family worker than were men.


---
*Page 623*
---

13 
  
 
 
Table 1: Population 16 years old and over by labour force status, sex, age group, and urban/rural area 
(Source: NISR Labor force survey report 2020)  
 
 
Table 2: Employed population by sex, status in employment, and urban/rural area  
(Source: NISR Labor force survey report 2020)


---
*Page 624*
---

14 
 1.7 Beliefs, perceptions and cultural norms  
Pre-1994 Rwandan families and society in general were characterized by a patriarchal social structure 
that translated into male dominance and female subordination (Mukabera, 2016). In principle, in 
traditional Rwandan society, women’s responsibilities incl uded raising and educating children, 
welcoming visitors, managing the household, advising their husbands and maintaining traditions 
(Mukabera, 2016). In practice, though women were allowed substantial autonomy in their roles as child 
bearers and food produ cers men remained the ultimate arbiters of most family decisions.  
Traditionally, the Rwandan woman was a symbol of fertility and weakness, while the man was a symbol 
of strength and protection who makes all major decisions. Rwandan women were valued as chi ld bearers 
and more specifically the number of boys they gave birth to (Mukabera, 2016). Boys were taught to 
defend the interests of the family. It was their job to build or repair a house, to engage in activities related 
to cattle, cut firewood, go to bat tle, milk the cows, make decisions on farm management, and generate 
income for the family. Girls were raised to help their mothers with household chores, raise children, and 
most importantly to be modest, reserved, silent, obedient, and present a submissiv e attitude toward men 
(Mukabera, 2016).  
These traditions effectively excluded women from accumulating material wealth and participating in 
economic and political decision making. The Family Code of 1992 precluded women from owning land. 
If a male head of household died, property passed to male h eirs or to the man’s brothers (Uwineza, 
2009). In the case of divorce or the husband’s death, a woman had no claim over the family property if 
she had not borne children; she would be forced to return to her birth family. Likewise, ‘the Commercial 
Code‘, d ating back to the colonial period, required the written consent of the husband whenever a wife 
wanted to engage in commercial activities, take up employment outside the household, or obtain credit, 
or take legal action (Mukabera, 2016).  
Prior to 1994 men m onopolized the public and political arena. Despite this, there have been some 
powerful women throughout Rwandan history, particularly the Queen Mothers who held substantial 
influence as advisers to the King in pre -colonial Rwandan society (Uwineza, 2009). In the customary 
system of justice, known as gacaca , women were not allowed to participate directly in public 
deliberations. Rather, they were expected to play an indirect role lobbying their husbands (Mukabera, 
2016). Women could and did hold powerful pos itions as high priestesses within the religious realm, but 
this was undermined with colonization and the introduction of christianity.  
Post-1994, the Rwandan government has taken large strides in improving gender equality and women’s 
rights policies, howev er these policies have yet to reach their full potential in making substantial changes 
in women’s lives. This may be due to gaps in policy and a dearth of resources applied to ensure proper 
functioning of the legislation and gender machinery institutions. There is a lack of capacity -building 
strategies to develop gender machinery institution staff’s gender based knowledge and skills, and these 
staff include only a limited number of gender experts that rarely occupy decision -making positions (IUCN, 
2021). St rategies to mainstream gender in capacity -building strategies of these institutions are not 
comprehensive, which contributes to functional issues such as lack of trained staff, staff retention 
measures, proper orientation for new hires, and clear handover procedures. This suggests that although 
the Rwandan government has passed strong gender -based legislation, implementation is limited by lack 
of concrete guidelines and limited resources.  
While setbacks to establishing fully functional gender machinery institutions limit the effective execution


---
*Page 625*
---

15 
 of gender equality laws, the current cultural norms and belief systems in place in Rwandan society 
profoundly diminish the positive effects that the se laws have on women’s daily lives. Discrimination 
against women continues to exist in multiple aspects of Rwandan society including economic 
opportunities, agriculture, politics, and division of labor. The long history of patriarchal dominance in 
Rwanda has led to the development of robust cultural norms, many of which define men’s and women’s 
roles in society, limiting women from taking advantage of the full range of opportunities within their legal 
rights. Other societal factors, such as the high preval ence of GBV, further limit women’s ability to venture 
outside of their perceived household roles. In a recent study 52% of women surveyed in districts within 
the CND agreed that men were justified in beating them if they: burned the food, argued with him, went  
out without telling him, neglected  the children, or refused  to have sex with him (Government of Rwanda, 
2016). Today, male and female policymakers are quick to acknowledge that many aspects of traditional 
Rwandan culture repressed women and abrogated their human rights (Uwineza, 2009).  
 
1.8 Gender roles, responsibilities and labor allocation  
Rwandan cultural norms divide household duties into activities that fall under either men’s or women’s 
responsibilities. Men are considered the breadwinners of the fam ily, and engage in significantly more 
off-farm and wage employment than women (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). Men also hold domain over 
any valuable property or resources that the family owns or acquires, including cash crops, livestock, and 
valuable trees (IU CN, 2021; Kiyani et al., 2017). Men possess the majority of the decision -making power 
within the family, and are largely able to engage in any activities they desire.  
Women’s role in society is predominantly seen as being a mother and caretaker of both the family and 
the home. Primary duties include caring for children and elderly, cooking, growing food for the family, 
and providing labor on their husband’s land. While the law allows for women to engage in other 
endeavors outside of their traditional duties, several factors often limit them from diverting from the 
cultural norm. The dominant barrier for women is lack of time, as the majority of their time is spent 
fulfilling their household responsibilities (IUCN, 2021). Women spend anywhere from 1 to 8 hours each 
day at their cookstove, not including the time it takes to collect the food, water, and fuel wood required 
for cooking (Campbell et al., 2012). Additionally, wo men are responsible for growing and tending to 
subsistence crops for the family, and are often required to take on other informal jobs on their husband’s 
farms. These duties, on top of childcare, take a large toll on women’s available time, preventing many  
from engaging in wage labor, training, and other forms of off -farm activities (Republic of Rwanda, 2019).  
Innovations that reduce the time spent on these tasks, such as improved cookstoves and agricultural 
technologies, may increase women’s ability to eng age in activities outside of their traditional roles. 
Furthermore, male involvement in work traditionally delegated to women, such as childcare, would allow 
women to spend more time outside of the household. However, men are not expected, and are often 
unwilling to engage in what they perceive as women’s work (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). As a result, some 
Rwandan women believe that government promotion of women’s equality has increased their workload, 
as they are now expected to be bringing home money on top o f their childcare, domestic, and farming 
duties (Abbott & Malunda, 2016). Furthermore, any additional income earned by women outside of 
traditional female tasks may be taken by the husband or result in increased domestic violence due to a 
perceived emascul ation of the male role as breadwinner.  
Violence is an issue for both men and women (30% vs 37%, respectively), but women are more prone 
to being victims, particularly sexual and gender -based violence (SGBV) (6% for men vs 23% for women,


---
*Page 626*
---

16 
 DHS Survey, 2021). Although there are strong laws and policies against SGVB, trends of violence are 
not decreasing. Factors that impact higher rates of violence include lower education, earning money, 
household alcohol levels, and familial historical violence. In seeking sup port, both men and women turn 
to neighbors (32% vs 40%) and family (24% vs 33%), whilst some go to the local authorities (17%, 18%), 
police (17%, 11, ibid).  Women also seek out their partners’ relatives for support whilst men seek out 
friends. This demons trates the importance of social networks much more than government agents.  
 
 
Figure 3, Trends in spousal violence over time.  Source: Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey, 
2021  
 
1.9 Access to and control over capital and natural assets  
The 1994 genocide left behind unprecedented distortions in social relations and exacerbated the alrea dy 
existing gender imbalances and inequalities. This is illustrated by the fact that today, 25% of households 
in Rwanda are headed by women. Women performing non traditional roles such as decision making, 
managing financial resources, constructing houses a nd many others have characterized the post 
genocide roles of women period in Rwanda.” (Gender and Community Development Analysis in 
Rwanda, EAC 2009).  
Although collection and dissemination of credible data disaggregated by ethnicity is not available.1 There 
has been some recognition of some ethnic minorities as Historically Marginalized People (HMPO, see 
Annex 6 for further details). While there is limited data based on ethnicity of HMPO, which critically 
impacts the baseline for monitoring activities p otential impacts (positive and negative), we will refer to 
trends aligned with governmental policies supporting pro -poor programming, and rely on data from 
reports conducted by African Initiative for Mankind Progress Organization (AIMPO), Women’s 
Organizat ion for Promoting Unity (WOPU) and Minority Rights Group International (MRG) leading a 
project titled, ‘Strengthening the Capacity of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), Human Rights 
Defenders (HRDs) and Media Houses to Challenge Discrimination against HMP O and Promote their 
 
1 The project will be unable to disaggregate data based on traditionally marginalized people, however, all data collected 
will be disaggregated by sex and wealth category where possible


---
*Page 627*
---

17 
 Human Rights in Rwanda’.  
Women are likely to constitute the majority of genocide survivors which informs a  need for intersectional, 
or the interconnected nature of social categorizations’ integration of history, gender norms, social 
disparity, power dynamics, rural/urban divide, and most importantly access to land rights.  Despite  
policies and initiatives implemented by the government, other entities and projects, including this  project 
to ensure HMPO are equitably included in project  design, implementation and benefits, there are 
potential barriers which include: (1) Inadequate disaggregated data (2) Limited capacity and resources 
to analyze intersectionality (3) Limited access to decision -making (women) (4) Social inequality from 
increased long -term poverty of HMPO (5) Lack of promotion and protection of  HMPO rights, including 
land tenures.  
In addition, climate change is adversely impacting CND’s landscape with increasing temperatures and 
changing rainfall patterns contributing to e cosystem degradation and reduced livelihoods for the most 
vulnerable populations. The agricultural sector in Rwanda is primarily focused on subsistence farming, 
and most cultivated land is rain -fed, exposing farmers to significant climate -related food secu rity risk. In 
addition, Rwanda’s efforts to reduce poverty are affected by high dependence on agriculture, especially 
when combined with climate change, declining plot sizes, and limited investment in intensification and 
erosion prevention. Thus, the impac ts of climate change is a risk multiplier as it has exacerbated the 
social, cultural, and economic conditions of HMPO communities in Rwanda. In the face of the climate 
crisis, culturally -based climate resilient approaches should be adopted in policies alon g with ways to 
address the potential barriers listed above.  
Compared to men, women are significantly less likely to own land (productive assets), they are less often 
engaged in income -earning activities, have less access to higher education (Govt of Rwanda , 2018), 
financial services (though this is rapidly becoming more equitable), health services, employment, direct 
payments, and non - school training opportunities. But that is changing according to the 2019 State of 
Gender Equity in Rwanda report.  Women -headed households are more likely to use firewood (85% vs 
78%), less likely to use charcoal than male -headed households (13% vs 19%), suggesting increased 
labor burdens for searching for fuelwood.  However, women and male -headed households have the 
same acc ess to water sources (EICV 5, 2018).  
There are no significant differences by household’s poverty status [between male and female headed 
households], education or ownership of land (Abbott 2018). However, a s men receive 75% of agricultural 
loans, and women  only 25% this strongly suggests that land owned by married couples is in reality 
“owned” by the husband and not jointly, and the man in a married household is still culturally considered 
the head of the household. For married couples it is unclear whether  women, on the death of their 
husbands, inherit their assets or are these, according to tradition, bequeathed to the sons. In addition, 
should women grow crops or trees, or raise livestock on marriage land do these assets belong to her or 
him or both. The power of women in illegal but still common polygamous marriages is even less than 
those in monogamous marriages.


---
*Page 628*
---

18 
  
Figure 4.  Land ownership by men, women, and co -owned parcels in 2021  
(Source: Rwanda Land Dashboard https://rwandalanddashboard.rlma.rw/p20_o19 , accessed October 10, 2021)  
 
Though women are not the primary land or livestock owners in Rwanda they still play a key role in food 
production primarily to feed their family. In fact few Rwandans and almost exclusively men are involved 
in cash crops as land holdings are typically smal l and often barely enough to produce food sufficient to 
meet the nutritional security of the land owners’ families.  
Access to microloans and credit for women contributes to economic development of Rwandan society 
as a whole and helps women escape poverty ( Mpakaniye, 2016). However, microloans remain difficult 
for the poor to attain for a number of reasons. Transaction fees reduce the value of already small 
accounts, while complicated account registration procedures, minimum balance requirements, and 
illiteracy all hinder access to loans, especially for women, who are more likely to be illiterate or have less 
experience handling money (Mpakaniye, 2016). Women typically rely on more informal loans from family 
because they lack collateral to access credit from a financial institution (IUCN, 2021). In 2018, of rural 
Rwandan women who accessed loans from a financial institution, 44.2% used saving and credits 
Cooperatives (SACCOs), compared to 39% of rural men (IUCN, 2021). 22% of rural men used a 
commercial bank, as opposed to only 16% of rural women (IUCN, 2021).  
Helping women access loans from formal financial institutions will allow greater independence for 
women and more economic security for families. Several banks in Rwanda have already signed on to 
the Afric an Guarantee Fund, aimed to reduce poverty and increase female access to loans (Mpakaniye, 
2016). The fund helps those who lack collateral still receive credit (Mpakaniye, 2016). Annually, the 
number of microloans accessed by women in Rwanda is increasing,  but additional support to enhance 
female financial literacy will help maintain the upward trend (Mpakaniye, 2016).  
Agricultural extension services include training  to innovate farming practices, and improve profitability 
and efficiency. The 2010 National  Gender Policy (MIGEPROF), the 2018 Strategic Plan for the 
Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA3) and the 2010 Agriculture Gender Strategy (MINAGRI) have 
committed to increase extension staff in Rwanda, particularly women (IUCN, 2021). At present, women 
are significantly underrepresented as extension personnel, which furthers a cycle of reduced female 
access to extension services; 82% of extension workers are male in Rwanda (IUCN, 2021). Male 
extension workers are more likely to approach male farmers regardi ng men’s crops, perpetuating the 
exclusion of women.


---
*Page 629*
---

19 
 Similarly, farm promoters, village leaders who promulgate knowledge from extension services, are also 
dominated by men (IUCN, 2021). Women tend to be less educated than men and have greater domestic 
obligations that inhibit them from working with the community as promoters. Promoters are perceived as 
having elevated social status, leading men to more quickly jump on the opportunity than women (IUCN, 
2021). By enabling more women to hold leadership positio ns as extension workers and farm promoters, 
more women can subsequently benefit from extension services, training and innovative farming 
practices.  
This sector has vast potential for greater female involvement, but legal frameworks may be necessary 
to ensure more equal representation. Women represent 66% of the agricultural workforce, but only 
19.7% of women in the sector occupy paid jobs (IUCN, 2021) . Therefore, enabling women to become 
agricultural leaders through extension services and farm promoters may offer greater independence, 
financially and socially. Female -only extension service training  may motivate women to participate and 
bring more atten tion to female crops, and establishing hiring quotas may enable more female leadership.  
Women are equally likely as men to have access to a mobile phone and use mobile financial services. 
But are less likely to be mobile money account holders, or have acce ss to bank services such as an 
ATM bank card. This is particularly true for women in rural areas, and ownership of capital goods  is 
much less for women -headed households (see Table 3) , demonstrating their marginalization across 
communities.   
 
Head of 
hous ehold 
sex Living room 
set % owning at least one  Total 
surveyed  
Radio  TV Computer  Mobile 
phone  Bicycle  
Male  19.6  78.6  11.9  3.6 71.1  16.2  2,031  
Female  12.8  59.3  5.7 2.3 54.3  4.9 677 
Table 3:  Comparison of assets held by women and male -headed households (Data from EICV 5, 2018)  
 
1.10 Women’s health and access to health services  
In 2010 life expectancy at birth was 71.13 years for women, and only 66.82 years for men 
(https:// www.statista.com/statistics/971106/life -expectancy -at-birth-in-rwanda -by-gender/) .  
Based on the 2019/2020 Demographic and Health Survey report (NISR, 2020), the maternal mortality 
rate or ratio (MMR), which measures the obstetric risk associated with each live birth and is the age - 
standardized maternal mortality rate divided by the age -standardized fertility rate, declined from 10.7 per 
thousand live births in 2000, to 2.03 per 1000 in 2019 -2020.  
The mortality rate of children under 5 years of age continues to decline from 50 deaths per 1,000 live 
births in 2014 to 45 per 1,000 in 2020.  
Women’s health, proxied using Body Mass Index shows that on average 76% of women within CND 
districts are within the normal BMI range, 19% are considered obese and only 5% fall below 18.5 which 
is considered nutritionally compromised (Republic of Rwanda, 2016). The averages for Rwanda as a


---
*Page 630*
---

20 
 whole are 73% normal, 21% obese, and 7% too thin. Similarly,  only 18% of women exhibit signs of 
anemia, compared to 19% for the nation. Prevalence of malaria in children and women is low (0.5% and 
0.4% respectively ) compared to 2.2% and 0.6% for the country as a whole (Republic of Rwanda, 2016).  
In 2017 74% of women had health insura nce and 94% of women had access to community health 
services. The percentage of health insured households is lowest in Rubavu district (54%) and highest in 
Ngororero district (82%) according to the 2014 -15 demographic and health survey (Government of 
Rwand a, 2016).  
 
Figure 5: Percent population with health insurance by district ( Source: Government of Rwanda, 2016)  
 
 
Overall access to sanitation facilities is high among Rwandans (IUCN, 2021). However, due to unequal 
income distribution between men and women, households led by women are less likely to have 
sanitation access than male led households; 80.6% of female head ed households have improved 
sanitation facilities compared to 88.0% of male headed households (IUCN, 2021). Traditional pit latrines 
are seen as more cost effective than modern sanitation systems, but pose risks of disease, overflow 
during the rainy season , groundwater contamination, mosquito breeding, and an increased risk of GBV 
for women due to distance from the house and night use (Tsinda et al., 2013). Lack of sanitation services 
poses both a serious social and environmental threat in Rwanda, particula rly in informal settlements.  
 
1.11 Women’s educational attainment and access to education services  
Education can lead to better health and greater access to resources (Allan et al., 2018:26). In Rwanda, 
the rate of people who have ever attended school is high, at 87%, but rates are higher in urban areas 
than rural areas (IUCN, 2021). The rates of primary education are approximately equal between boys 
and girls in Rwanda, and in secondary education women actually attend in higher numbers than men, 
53% women to 46 % men (Education Statistical Yearbooks, 2018). However, the disparity between men 
and women shifts with regard to technical training and tertiary education, in which men are more 
dominant.


---
*Page 631*
---

21 
  
 
Figure 6: Gender balance in education in Rwanda ( Source: State of Gender Equality in Rwanda, 2019)  
 
In 2018, 92% of children (1.64 million boys and 1.68 million girls) were enrolled in pre -nursery to 
secondary education (Ministry of Education, 2018). Literacy rates continue to climb from 38.2% in 1978 
to 73.2% in 2018. By this time youth literacy was at 85%. Girls and women lag behind boys and men. 
Only 56% of girls, 41% of women, and 28% of elderly women are literate.  
 
 
Levels  Schools  Males  Females  Total  Percent  
Pre-Nursery  96 3,199  3,292  6,491  0.2%  
Nursery  3,210  112,044  114,662  226,706  6.3%  
Primary  2,909  1,259,344  1,244,361  2,503,705  69.0%  
Secondary  1,416  264,782  314,115  578,897  16.0%  
TVET  360 57,643  44,842  102,485  2.8%  
Tertiary  30 41,458  34,255  75,713  2.1%  
Adult literacy  4,991  51,220  81,145  132,365  3.7%  
Total  13,012  1,789,690  1,836,672  3,626,362


---
*Page 632*
---

22 
 Table 4: Levels of schooling in Rwanda ( Source: Ministry of Education, 2018 Education Statistics)  
 
 
The equal rates of primary education for boys and girls in Rwanda suggest a cultural value of education 
for all children, not only prioritization for boys. A lack of tuition fees for childhood education enables poor 
families to send boys and girls to schoo l, and increasing rates of education contributes to falling illiteracy 
rates in Rwanda (IUCN, 2021). Higher levels of girls in secondary education may be attributed to 
Rwandan policies such as the 2008 Girls’ Education Policy and the implementation of a sc hool meal 
program (IUCN, 2021). Despite lower rates of women enrolled in tertiary education, the percentage is 
increasing due to flexible programming, such as online learning or night school, which enables women 
with domestic responsibilities to participat e. According to the IUCN, the higher level of education men 
and women receive, the less likely they are to work in the agriculture sector (IUCN, 2021). In comparison, 
92% of women with no education work in agriculture (IUCN, 2021).  
Strong gender stereotype s in Rwanda still push girls into “traditional” soft trades including hairdressing, 
secretarial work and nursing (IUCN, 2021). 87% of women with a university degree work in the service 
sector (IUCN, 2021). Though women are more likely to be primary school teachers than men, they are 
rarely secondary, tertiary or technical/vocational teachers. In agriculture, women predominantly occupy 
informal roles, such as unpaid farming for the family, whereas the men typically hold higher paying 
positions or manage high er value products such as timber (IUCN, 2021). As a result, the majority of 
agroforesters are male in Rwanda (Anastase & Nahayo, 2020).  
One of the greatest challenges to achieving economic stability lies in challenges in achieving quality 
educational attai nment by female youth which leads to their lower literacy, especially in rural areas. 
Overall, social factors including traditional gender roles such as domestic chores and family care, historic 
marginalization of girls and women, patriarchal social tradit ions, and gender -based violence entrench 
girls’ underperformance throughout their schooling which has a cyclical effect, as low performance in 
the primary leaving exam results in girls being admitted to lower quality secondary schools, and 
ultimately into higher education institutions (HIEs) in lower numbers (Huggins & Randell, 2007).  
This results in limited access to paid labor and employment in sectors such as services or public 
government. Similarly, lower literacy has put them at a greater disadvantage  in agriculture, as 
commercialization of farming has made it more difficult to feed families. While there are national laws 
and policies to protect employment, there is little protection for the vast majority of women who work in 
informal sectors which sig nificantly affects women’s rights within the country (Abbott et. al., 2008). 
Women in rural areas are primarily care -providers for children and the elderly, which is unpaid labor and 
invisibilized due to gender norms (Abbot, 2015). Thus, understanding thes e barriers and challenges and 
how to overcome them will inform interventions at project -level.  
 
1.12 Patterns of power and decision -making  
Rwanda is internationally acclaimed for being the first nation to have a majority female Parliament, with 
61% of these positions held by women from 2018 -2022 (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). The Constitution 
of the Republic of Rwanda established a minimum of 30 % female representation in public governance, 
and this high level of female participation in upper levels of governance far exceeds this minimum (East 
African Community, 2009). However, female participation drastically decreases in many communities’


---
*Page 633*
---

23 
 level gov erning bodies.  
 
Figure 7: Female and male representation in different levels of local government in Rwanda in 2018 -
2019 (Republic of Rwanda, 2019)  
 
 
Although overall female representation in the Rwandan government is increasing, higher levels of female 
representation in upper levels of governance mirror the disparity between gender equality policy and 
practice in the country. In higher levels of govern ance, these policies are implemented well and appear 
effective, but at community levels, larger gender gaps in prominent roles are clearly evident. Comparable 
gender gaps exist in central government roles that undergo recruitment processes, with many of th ese 
positions not reaching the 30% female representation minimum (Republic of Rwanda, 2019). 
Furthermore, female participation in the police force is extremely low, although representation is high in 
most other areas of the justice sector.  
Similarly, in the private sector, women hold very few high level positions, particularly at the provincial 
level. Nationally, 30% of executive committee presidents are women, but there are 0 female presidents 
at the provincial level (Republic of Rwanda, 20 19). Women have high levels of representation in second 
vice presidency in the private sector, with 70% of national and 80% of provincial second vice presidential 
roles occupied by women, but have low levels of representation in more powerful executive pos itions 
(Republic of Rwanda, 2019). In more local organizations, such as cooperatives, men hold the majority 
of the decision -making positions, while women tend to hold stereotypically female roles, such as 
secretary, vice president, and treasurer (IUCN, 202 1). 
At the household level, women have very little decision -making power. Although under the 1999 
Inheritance and Marital Property Law women are legally allowed to own land, cultural barriers still inhibit 
their ability to control how this land is used. Th ese barriers are predominantly based in the belief that 
men are the head of the household, and thus are the primary owners of all of the family’s land and assets 
(IUCN, 2021). Women’s lack of power within their households limits their ability to make decis ions about 
the planting of crops and the use of land as collateral for credit, which would allow increased female 
engagement in other economic activities. Based on female reports, the majority of households (70%) 
make decisions jointly, while in 25% of hou seholds the husband makes the majority of the decisions


---
*Page 634*
---

24 
 (IUCN, 2021). However, even in households that make joint decisions, women’s decisions tend to 
revolve around day-to-day issues, while men’s decisions are primarily focused on productive assets and 
income.  
Women’s ability to make decisions within both their own households and broader Rwandan society is 
further hampered by GBV. The effects of a longstanding patriarchal regime in the country has created 
and perpetuated the notion that men must be dominan t and women must be submissive. Women break 
these gender norms by asserting their right to be involved in decision -making, and this can be seen as 
diminishing their husband’s masculinity, which can result in violent retribution. In 2010, around 57% of 
Rwan dan women reported experiencing GBV from their partner, and women who bring in more money 
tend to experience higher levels of GBV (RWAMREC, 2010). This suggests that increasing women’s 
opportunities to make decisions and earn their own income will have a v ery limited effect on female 
empowerment until GBV is addressed. Engaging men and boys in gender equality advocacy and action 
highlights that GBV is not only a women’s issue, and is believed to be successful in reducing the 
prevalence of GBV (UNDP, 2018).  
 
1.13 Social service and support systems that contribute to gender empowerment, wellbeing, 
and security  
Government mandated and running social support programs have reduced the percentage of extremely 
poor households from 23% and 26% in 2010 to 15% and 18% in 2 017 for MHHs and FHHs respectively. 
Three state managed social support systems have contributed significantly to these observed reductions 
in poverty and increasing wellbeing and security.  
The Girinka Program (One Cow per Family Program) of the Ministry of  Agriculture (MINAGRI) started in 
2006. By 2017 over 290,000 cows have been provided to vulnerable male and female headed 
households (approximately 6% of all Rwandan families) as a way to reduce child malnutrition, increase 
the productivity of agricultural  labor, generate a new stream of income through surplus milk sales and 
strengthen social cohesion amongst Rwandan families and communities as cow owners pass on surplus 
calves to other needy families. Male headed households were, however, more likely than female headed 
households to receive a cow through this government program.  
The largest social support program of the Government of Rwanda is the Vision 2020 Umurenge 
Programme (VUP) which was started in 2008 and is managed by the Local Administrative Entities 
Development Agency (LODA) within the Ministry of Local Government (MINA LOC). VUP has four 
components: wage labor through public works, direct cash transfers, financial services and awareness 
raising. The majority of public works support agricultural production, land conservation and the 
maintenance of physical infrastructure.  A review by FAO showed that VUP wages paid to women were 
often captured by men. Retaining control over VUP income was easier for women who owned an 
individual savings account (e.g., within a Savings and Credit Cooperative - SACCO), though most 
women only had accounts in Village Savings and Loan Group or informal tontines. Rural women were 
more disempowered than men through cultural constraints to speaking in public meetings, workloads 
that limited participation in community meetings and self -help associati ons, and limited access to credit 
and savings accounts. The FAO study also found that the majority of both MHHs and FHHs were 
unaware of the existence of a VUP GRM, or were skeptical about the effectiveness of this complaint 
process. The most important rec ommendations were to a) enable women to open their own formal bank 
accounts to increase their control over their incomes and strengthen their decision -making capacity, and


---
*Page 635*
---

25 
 b) redirect households with high dependency ratios and/or low labor capacity away fr om public works 
wage labor and toward VUP direct cash transfers.  
MINAGRI further supports poor rural families by offering subsidies for agricultural inputs, improved seeds 
and irrigation as well as offering credit through the Agriculture Guaranty Fund whic h provides specific 
opportunities for women.  
 
 
● CONCLUSIONS - ONGOING CHALLENGES TO GENDER EQUITY IN THE CONTEXT OF 
THE GCF CND PROJECT  
Despite tremendous efforts from the policy and legal perspectives, a patriarchal culture and persistent 
disparities continue to characterize gender relations in Rwanda. Disparities persist in post -primary 
education; in access to and control of property inc luding land and economic resources; in employment 
opportunities and entrepreneurship; in decision -making at household and community levels; in family 
responsibilities and unpaid care work; and in the experience of violence, harassment, conflict, and 
insecu rity. Sexual and gender -based violence persists at high levels in Rwanda. While women have 
made impressive political progress, especially at the national level, their progress in terms of local 
political representation and engagement remains unequal. Econo mic opportunities remain markedly 
gender -differentiated.  
In Rwanda and in the Congo -Nile Divide, structural barriers to economic and political equity and female 
empowerment have significantly impeded measures to adapt to climate change impacts. In Rwanda, 
these structural inequalities are at a lower level compared to other countries in the world, because of 
leading gender -considerate policies across sectors. However, the point remains that women’s ability to 
access, use and control natural resources, infras tructure and services differently is still low compared to 
men. This means the degradation of natural resources and new infrastructure will affect women and 
men differently, and will generally result in greater vulnerability of women. Women are vital agent s of 
change and can be powerful leaders from the community to global level in mitigating and adapting to 
climate change.  
 
1.14 Afforestation, agroforestry and tree tenure  
Kiptot et al (2012) noted that an ICRAF survey conducted across countries in eastern Africa concluded 
that women rarely have tenure over trees unless they exclusively have tenure over the land. Moreover, 
they stated that “Women’s rights to tree products ar e usually limited to products that are considered to 
have little or no commercial value. These products are mainly indigenous fruits….fodder and mulch.” 
They also noted that: a) the survivorship of trees and fodder shrubs planted by men and women was 
effec tively the same, b) low cost/input agroforestry techniques for replenishing soil fertility were attractive 
to women farmers given that they are both labor and capital limited. Fuelwood, fodder, green manure, 
and coppicing shrub production substantially inc reases benefits to women that cannot be captured by 
men. Women appear to grow trees/shrubs for domestic consumption (fuelwood, fodder, bean poles, 
fruit) and sell the surplus in local markets. It is unclear whether women who sell wood products from 
land th at is owned by their husbands are able to capture that revenue stream.  
Agroforestry offers multiple benefits to Rwandan farmers, in particular, women. Planting trees within 
farms represents a low effort pathway to high reward. To enhance climate resilience  of communities, 
agroforestry practices sequester carbon, prevent erosion, and enhance soil quality for sustainable


---
*Page 636*
---

26 
 farming. For women, trees provide additional income to elevate socioeconomic status and reduce the 
risk of GBV by eliminating the need to wa lk far distances for fuel wood (Anastase & Nahayo, 2020). 
Despite the majority of farms under female management in Rwanda, women are often excluded from 
agroforestry, as trees traditionally fall under male domain, women lack the necessary training and have  
less access to the retail market (Kiptot & Franzel, 2012). In order to better include women in agroforestry, 
training on forestry and marketing should be targeted to women. Tools and practices that reduce labor 
requirements for women, such as shorter tree s (which decrease the need for male labor) or more modern 
processing techniques, will save women time and make the field more accessible (Kiptot & Franzel, 
2012).  
Afforestation and reforestation on public lands should include measures where women and youth  
formally have the right to capture a proportion of the value of the trees at harvest time. Assuming a 
harvest cycle of 15 -20 years this will provide women with a long -term asset that could be used as 
retirement income, and/or given as gifts or bequeathed to children. Young men could use the trees as 
savings to be used to build or buy a house when they marry.  
Investments in agroforestry on private farmlands should reflect the different interests and concerns of 
women and men. During focus groups women reported shortages of fuelwood, fodder and wood suitable 
for bean poles. They were also concerned about soil er osion on their steeply sloped farmland, and 
declining soil fertility and crop yields. On -farm tree planting, to address the concerns of women, should 
focus on fast growing, nitrogen fixing, coppicing species that can be planted in contours between rows 
of crops. The nutrient rich leaves of leguminous species can be used as fodder for livestock, and as 
green manure. Cutting the stems to ground level before planting ensures that the trees do not compete 
with the crops for sunlight and soil nutrients, but the tree roots that remain intact help stabilize the soil 
and prevent erosion caused by heavy rains. The cut stems can be dried for fuelwood or used as bean 
poles. Surplus fodder, fuelwood and bean poles can be sold to neighbors or at local markets. Coppicing 
species readily re -sprout from the roots allowing an annual harvest.  
 
1.15 Improved cook stoves  
In rural areas of Rwanda, 98% of households rely on wood as their main cooking fuel. The GoR 
completed a comprehensive report on Gender in the Energy Sector. The rep ort noted that almost 60% 
of FHHs spent 1 -3 hours per day collecting firewood compared to 36% of MHHs. The latter purchased 
fuelwood twice as often as FHHs who primarily rely on gathering fuelwood. Over 50% of both Rwandan 
FHHS and MHHs still cook using th e three -stone method, and only 13.5% use efficient cookstoves. Over 
50% of FHHs are unaware of the health benefits of improved cookstoves. The report argued for 
supporting women to transition from fuelwood to Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) primarily to reduce smoke 
inhalation and respiratory disease. The report did not address the fact that in higher altitude areas 
cooking fires also provide a heating source for the home. The use of clean cookstoves has major positive 
impacts on gender equality, by reducing hou sehold work for women and providing opportunities for 
women to engage in paid work.  
Poor rural families, particularly FHH, are unlikely to be able to afford LPG stoves. Moreover, LPGs do 
not remain warm after the gas is turned off and thus do not provide a  heat source for the home during 
the night or during cold spells. Tier 1 Canarumwe clay stoves are relatively inexpensive, substantially 
reduce woodfuel use, and provide a thermal mass that keeps radiating heat long after cooking is


---
*Page 637*
---

27 
 completed. Though imper fect they are an improvement in efficiency compared to the 3 stones cookfire 
method. As men do not gather firewood nor do they cook they are often unwilling to spend “their” money 
to purchase an improved stove even though it substantially reduces fuelwood use and the time women 
must spend gathering fuelwood. Efforts to introduce improved cook stoves into MHHs in the CND must 
address this barrier.  
 
1.16 Honey production and marketing  
The Rwandan government has identified beekeeping as a potential source of additional revenue for 
farmers (Mushonga et al., 2019). The European demand for honey far outpaces the production in 
Rwanda, indicating a market incentive to raise bees beyond subsis tence level (Mushonga et al., 2019). 
Furthermore, global decline of bee populations reflects a high biological need for more apiarists in 
Rwanda. Despite the economic and environmental benefits, along with low startup costs, beekeeping is 
perceived as a vo cation for poor people. Out of 83,000 beekeepers in Rwanda, 86% are adult males 
and 71% lack primary education (Mushonga et al., 2019). To overcome the negative stigma around 
beekeeping, materials and training for modern hives need to be provided to women and youth. Modern 
hives produce a higher yield of honey, have lower risk of causing fires, and do not need to be placed as 
high up in trees as traditional hives, which deters some women due to cultural restrictions barring women 
from climbing trees (WCS, 2 018). In a WCS study, 83% of beekeepers used traditional hives in Rwanda, 
demonstrating a need for more modern tools (WCS, 2018). Additionally, marketing training may help 
women to better sell the honey, as women still have relatively low market and distri bution access in 
Rwanda. Despite the stigma, beekeeping remains a strong potential source of income, which could 
reduce reliance on more harmful forest livelihoods, such as deforestation and poaching (Fakhry et al., 
2010).  
A study by Mushonga (2019) sugges ts that people consider beekeeping for the poor and illiterate are 
largely the domain of older men no longer able to labor in agricultural production. Women do appear to 
be engaged in the production and marketing of honey beer. ADF provided $343,000 in 201 7 to 
strengthen the honey production sector in Rwanda. Production remains relatively low because of 
dependence on traditional hives rather than modern hives such as Kenya Top Bar or Langstroth (CODIT, 
2009). The CODIT report funded by the SNV noted that in  2009, of the estimated 30,293 beekeepers in 
Rwanda only 23% were women. The report recommended that the GoR do away with subsidies to 
beekeepers and their co -operatives, focus on addressing the root causes of the prevailing problems not 
the effects, encou raging beekeepers to actively participate in their own development and advocating for 
the replication of knowledge and skills from common to individual apiaries.  
During focus groups both women and marginalized groups noted that the cost of modern hives and other 
beekeeping equipment such as smokers was a barrier to entry as was lack of access to credit. A big 
concern was farmers’ use of pesticides that kill bees, m aking it impossible to locate apiaries near 
farmland.  
 
1.17 Coronavirus (COVID -19) implications in advancing gender equity  
The global coronavirus (COVID -19) pandemic left no country untouched from its impacts. While research 
is still emerging, the severity of t he pandemic is clear; struggling economies, vast unemployment, and 
threats to health and wellbeing continue to affect the global community. Women in particular are already


---
*Page 638*
---

28 
 vulnerable to socioeconomic inequity that is currently exacerbated by COVID -19. Ther efore, the impact 
of the pandemic must be considered in gender planning into the future.  
Rafaeli and Hutchinson (2020) compared the secondary impacts of COVID -19 to the Ebola crisis on 
women and girls in Africa, finding that women and girls are more likely to experience higher poverty and 
school dropout rates, an increase in unintended pregnan cies, reduced income and financial 
empowerment, greater domestic responsibility (increased childcare due to school closures), and food 
insecurity due to the pandemic. In times of crisis, school closures and financial stress also lead to 
increased rates of gender based violence (Rafaeli & Hutchinson, 2020). Women face greater exposure 
to COVID through their roles as caretakers in families and in healthcare, and have less decision -making 
power, rendering their needs unmet during COVID -19 (Parry & Gordon, 2020 ). Yet few countries have 
enacted policies to address the gendered impacts of the pandemic.  
In Rwanda, the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF), in partnership with UN WOMEN 
and UNFPA, conducted a 2020 study on the gendered impacts of COVID -19. The report indicates that 
44.2% of female respondents completely stopped their economic activities due to the pandemic, 
compared to only 17% of men (Bayisenge, Lo & Schreiner, 2020). In rural areas, the percentage was 
higher for women; 50% stopped their  work and thus sources of income, compared to 17.7% of rural men 
(Bayisenge, Lo & Schreiner, 2020). As women occupy more informal and unsecured jobs in Rwanda, 
they are at greater risk of income loss than men.  
The use of health care and maternal services i n Rwanda considerably declined during the COVID -19 
outbreak (Wanyana, Wong & Hakizimana, 2020). Declines in child health care services, particularly 
vaccinations, could be detrimental to avoiding future outbreaks of vaccine -preventable diseases 
(Wanyana, W ong & Hakizimana, 2020). Many women feared contracting the virus while attending 
regular checkups, which contributed to the decline of health services in Rwanda (Wanyana, Wong & 
Hakizimana, 2020).  
Recommendations to mitigate the impacts of COVID -19 on wome n in Rwanda include (Bayisenge, Lo 
& Schreiner, 2020):  
● Implement programs that offer employment or financial security in spite of COVID -19. 
● Provide online or socially -distant courses to prevent school dropouts.  
● Establish women -specific financial packages in the national economic recovery plan.  
● Strengthen the mobilization of men and boys in childcare and domestic responsibilities to offset 
increased labor caused by the pandemic in parallel with on -going “Men engage” national programmes.  
● Accelerate government interventions to address elevated levels of GBV.  
 
1.18 Promoting gender equity within the CND GCF project  
 
Gender equality and women’s empowerment should be considered in all stages of the CND project 
cycle: design, formulation, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. In each of these stages, 
project ma nagers should keep a ‘gender lens’ in mind, looking at ways the project can:  
● Address gender inequalities that emerge from the project;  
● Ensure the differential needs of women and men are addressed;  
● Ensure women and men have equal access to resources, services, and capacity development;  
● Ensure equal participation of women and men in management arrangements and as


---
*Page 639*
---

29 
 beneficiaries, partners and  key stakeholders; and  
● Ensure women’s equal participation in decision -making processes.  
 
Based on key expected outcomes, this gender assessment provides the foundation for a realistic gender 
action plan to be implemented in the CND project.


---
*Page 640*
---

30 
 5 LITERATURE CITED  
 
Abbott P, Malunda D. 2016. The Promise and the Reality: Women’s Rights in Rwanda. African Journal 
of International and Comparative Law 24:561–581. Edinburgh University Press.  
African Development Bank. 2014. Analysis of Gender and Youth Employment in Rwanda. Statistics 
Department, Rwanda Country Office, African Development Bank  
Allan EJ, Raupp M, Protik A, Ndirangu K (2018) Soma Umenye impact evaluation. United States Agency 
for International Development, Kigali, Rwanda  
Anastase GM, Nahayo L. 2020. Impact Assessment of Agroforestry Practices on Community Socio - 
Economic Livelihoods in Rwanda. International Journal of Environmental & Agriculture Research 6:59 –
71. 
Bayisenge J, Lo FA, Schreiner MB. 2020. Rapid Gender Assessm ent (RGA) on the Impact of COVID -
19 on Women and Men in Rwanda. Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Kigali.  
Campbell CA et al. 2021. Investigating Cooking Activity Patterns and Perceptions of Air Quality 
Interventions among Women in Urban Rwanda. Inte rnational Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health 18.  
CODIT. 2009. Beekeeping/ Honey Value Chain Financing Study Report. SNV Rwanda/IFAD  
East African Community. 2009. Gender and Community Development Analysis in Rwanda. Republic of 
Rwanda.  
Fakhry N, Gusak K, Hadjinian L, Vazquez M. 2010. Business Plan and Marketing Strategy for 
Beekeeping and Pottery Prod uct Development: Nyungwe Forest National Park, Rwanda.  
FAO. Public works and rural women’s economic empowerment: Rwanda’s Vision 2020 Umurenge 
Programme. FAO, Rome.  
Green, K, E Bagaye, R Blum, L Woolf, and C Jessee. 2019.  USAID/Rwanda Youth Assessment.  United 
States Agency for International Development, Wash ington DC.   
IUCN. 2021. Gender Analysis Report for TREPA Project Proposal on“Transforming Eastern Province 
Through Adaptation” (TREPA). International Union for Conservation of Nature.  
Kiptot E, Franzel S. 2012. Gender and agroforestry in Africa: a review of women’s participation.  
Agroforestry Systems 84:35–58. 
Kiyani P, Andoh J, Lee Y, Lee DK. 2017. Benefits and challenges of agroforestry adoption: a case of 
Musebeya sector, Nyamagabe District in southern province of Rwanda. Forest Science and Technology 
13:174–180. Taylor & Francis.  
Mukabera J (2016) Womens Sta tus and Gender Relations in Post -Genocide Rwanda: Focusing on the 
Local and Everyday Life Level. Seoul National University  
Mushonga B, Hategekimana L, Habarugira G, Kandiwa E, Samkange A, Ernest Segwagwe BV. 2019. 
Characterization of the Beekeeping Value Chain: Challenges, Perceptions, Limitations, and 
Opportunities for Beekeepers in Kayonza District, Rwanda. Advances in Agric ulture 2019 :5982931. 
Hindawi.


---
*Page 641*
---

31 
 Mpakaniye JP. 2016. The contribution of microcredit advanced to women on poverty reduction in rural 
areas  of Rwanda. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2811980 .  
National Institute of Statistics Rwanda (NISR). 2018. EICV5 Integrated Household Living Conditions  
Parry BR, Gordon E. 2020. The shadow pandemic: Inequitable gendered impacts of COVID ‐19 in 
South Africa. Gender Work Organ.  28:795–806. 
Survey Thematic Report GENDER -2016/2017. General technical report. Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Planning, Kigali, Rwanda.  
Rafaeli T, Hutchinson G. 2020. The Secondary Impacts of COVID -19 on Women and Girls in Sub - 
Saharan Africa. Education Development Trust.  
Randell, S. K. (2007). Gender Equality in Education in Rwanda: What is happening to our Girls? South 
African Association of Women Graduates Conference on “Drop -Outs from School and Tertiary Studies: 
What Is Happening to Our Girls?” Cape Town.  
Republ ic of Rwanda. 2000. Rwanda Vision 2020. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. 
Available from https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/handle/2152/5071/4164.pdf . 
Republic  of Rwanda.  2021. Rwanda  demographic  and health  survey  2019 -2020, 
Final Report. https:// www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2019. The State of Gender Equality in Rwanda from Transition to Transformation.  
Gender Monitoring Office.  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. Gender Profile in the Energy Sector. Gender Monitoring Office. Republic of  
Rwanda  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. 2018 Education Statistics. https:// www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2018. EICV5 Integrated household living conditions survey 2016/2017. 
https://www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic  of Rwanda.  2016.  Demographic  and health  survey  RDHS,  Western  Province. 
https://www.statistics.gov.rw/  
Republic of Rwanda. 2020. Vision 2050. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. Available from 
https://www.nirda.gov .rw/uploads/tx_dce/Vision_English_Version_2050_ -31_Dec_2020.pdf . 
Republic of Rwanda. 2010. National Gender Policy.Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Republic 
of Rwanda.  
Republic of Rwanda. 2010. Strategic plan for the implementation of the National Gender Policy. 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, Republic of Rwanda  
Republic of Rwanda. 2009. The state of gender equality in Rwanda: from transition to transformation.  
Gender Monitoring Office, Government of the Republic of Rwanda  
RWAMREC. 2010. Masculinity and Gender Based Violence in Rwanda. Rwanda MenEngage Network. 
Available from https://promundoglobal.org/wp -content/uploads/2015/01/Masculinity -and- Gender -
Based -Violence -in-Rwanda -IMAGES.pdf.  
Tsinda A, Abbott P, Pedley S, Charle s K, Adogo J, Okurut K, and Chenoweth J. 2013. Challenges to


---
*Page 642*
---

32 
 Achieving Sustainable Sanitation in Informal Settlements of Kigali, Rwanda. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health 10: 6939 -6954.  
UNDP. 2018. Gender Equality Strategy: UNDP Rwanda (2019 -2022). Unite d Nations Rwanda. 
https://www1.undp.org/content/dam/rwanda/docs/demgov/Gender%20Equality%20Strategy.p  df.  
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner. 2017. UN Human Rights Report. Office of the High 
Commissioner on Human Rights, G eneva, Switzerland.  
United Nations Rwanda. 2021. How the UN is supporting The Sustainable Development Goals in 
Rwanda. Available from https://rwanda.un.org/en/sdgs . 
University of California, Berkeley – Haas School of Business Consultants for the Wildlife Conservation 
Society, Berkeley, California.  
USAID. 2021. LEARN Project Gender and Social Inclusion Analysis. USAID, Rwanda 
USAID.  2019. Gender and social inclusion analysis report. USAID, Rwanda  
USAID. 2017. Integrating Gender Equality and Female Empowerment in USAID’s Program Cycle: ADS 
Chapter 205. USAID, Washington, D.C.  
USAID. 2015. Gender analysis for USAID/Rwanda Feed the Future (FtF) Project. USAID, Rwanda  
USAID. 2015. WCS Central Africa Ge nder Assessment. Central African Regional Program for the 
Environment, (CARPE III), USAID  
Uwineza P, Pearson E, Powley E (2009) Sustaining women’s gains in Rwanda: The influence of 
indigenous culture and post -genocide politics. Institute for Inclusive Security, Washington, DC  
Vanhees, Katrijn. 2014. Property rights for women in Rwanda: access t o land for women living in de 
facto  unions. Universiteit Gent, Academiejaar: 1 -108. 
Wanyana D, Wong R, Hakizimana D. 2020. Rapid assessment on the utilization of maternal and child 
health services during COVID -19 in Rwanda. Public Health Action 11: 12-21. 
Wildlife Conservation Society and Forest of Hope. 2018. A quick needs assessment in modern 
beekeeping around Gishwati -Mukura National Park, Rwanda. WCS . 
Wallace, C., Haerpfer, C., & Abbott, P. (2008). Women in Rwandan Politics and Society. International 
Journal of Sociology, 38(4), 111 –125. https://doi.org/10.2753/IJS0020 -7659380406   
World   Economic  Forum.  2021.  Global  Gender  Gap Report
 2021.  Available  from http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf.


---
*Page 643*
---

33 
 ● GENDER, YOUTH AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN  
The goal of the programme is to increase climate resilience of vulnerable rural communities in the CND, 
reduce CO2 emissions, build capacity for integrated spatial planning and increase the extent and 
integrity of forest ecosystems in the CND. The programm e has three components directly targeting 
vulnerabilities within climate impact chains. Component (1) Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into 
Integrated Land Use Planning and Management will lead to enhanced adaptive capacity of both 
ecosystems and rural pop ulations, by strengthening coordination among sectors and integrating climate 
resilience considerations into planning and development. Component (2) Landscape Management and 
Restoration will implement high priority actions to enhance the resilience of vuln erable communities by 
increasing the extent and integrity of forest ecosystems and landscapes and by reducing demand for 
wood fuel. In addition, component (2) is designed to reduce the time women spend collecting and 
preparing fuelwood, and simultaneously to empower women to provide input to local -level decision 
making (see also Component (1)). As a co -benefit, greenhouse gas emissions will be reduced through 
restoration of natural forests, agroforestry, reduced fuelwood demand and fuel efficient cookstoves  
under components (1 and 2) are expected. Component (3) will focus on Enhancing climate adaptation 
through resilient livelihoods . 
Women, youth and marginalized groups, inclu ding women -headed households  in the CND are key 
stakeholders in the success of this  project, and are the primary target beneficiaries of the project. The 
project will be implemented across various sectors along the CND, particularly focusing on communities 
around Nyungwe National Park and Gishwati -Mukura National Park --critical for Rwand a yet highly 
vulnerable forests due to high population and increasing demography who depend upon fuelwood, and 
actions taken by poor households that illegally use forests to improve income streams.  
 
1.19 Methods  
This Action Plan operationalizes the findings from the Gender Assessment, the ESIA, and youth -based 
information collected during the feasibility studies and stakeholder engagement during the Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) phase. The Assessment used fiv e standard lenses (USAID 2017[1]) to conduct 
the analysis:  
1. Institutions, Laws and Policies  that influence the context in which men and women act and make 
decisions.  
2. Beliefs, Perceptions, and Cultural Norms  that shape how men and women, youth and elders 
are able (or expected) to practice activities, particularly those to be developed by this GCF  project.  
3. Gender Roles, Responsibilities, and Time Use  in reproductive, productive, and community work.  
4. Access to and Control over Assets and Resources  are different between young and old, men 
and women.  
5. Patterns of Power and Decision -making  focused on how individuals are able to be represented 
and be in decision -making positions.  
Based upon this framework of five lenses, the Gender Analysis  identified and analyzed the gender  risks 
and impacts of the program and climate change through four main steps:  
Scoping: The GYA included a scoping process to review relevant literature and data for the project 
area, including local reports and data, co nsult with government and other partners, and conduct field 
visits to understand the project, identify and characterize the project area, and identify stakeholders,


---
*Page 644*
---

34 
 including program -affected parties and other interested parties, who may have different con cerns and 
priorities about project and climate change impacts, mitigation mechanisms and benefits.  
Legislative and policy review: The GYA conducted a review of (1) Rwanda’s applicable policy 
framework, national laws and regulations and institutional capabi lities relating to gender and youth, (2) 
variations in country conditions and program context across the affected area, (3) relevant gender and 
youth studies, (4) Rwanda’s obligations and commitments under relevant international agreements and 
treaties, (5 ) applicable requirements under GCF standards and (6) internationally accepted best 
practices.  
Stakeholder consultation and analysis: Based on the identification of stakeholders identified in the 
scoping exercise, the GYA conducted initial consultations with stakeholders to gather information on 
concerns and priorities about the project and climate change, analyze the outcomes of the con sultations 
and develop a strategy for continuing stakeholder engagement.  
Baseline analysis: Drawing on the scoping exercise, the GYA assembled and analyzed existing 
information. The information was analyzed in light of the stakeholder consultation and anal ysis and 
legislative and policy review, to identify information gaps and ways in which these may be filled.  
This information was then used to guide the Gender Youth Social Inclusion Action Plan. The details of 
the stakeholders consulted, including key info rmant interviews (18), focus group discussions (24), and 
district workshops (4) can be found in Annex 7. A literature review is available in the Gender Assessment 
(above) and ESIA (Annex 6).  
 
1.20 Gender Issues  
There are three key gender -based themes that influenced the design of the Gender Action Plan:  
a. Change negative gender and social norms . The most profound barrier for this project is rural 
norms about the roles of men and women. Whilst the Government of Rwan da has made many advances 
and has implemented many policies (see Section 3 of the Gender Assessment) to achieve gender 
equality , particularly in national -level representation and inclusion, patriarchal privilege and decision -
making remains embedded in rura l society (IUCN, 2021). The consequences of this for this project is 
far-reaching. Men are generally seen as the head of household with the decision -making powers over 
all assets, resulting in male appropriation of household and farm -based assets (IUCN, 20 21; Kiyani et 
al., 2017). Though female headed households face the same issues and challenges as male headed 
households, they are disproportionately impacted because of prevalent gender inequality issues (GMO 
2017). Men in the CND are positioned to be sign ificantly more involved in programs that result in 
monetary benefits, such as fern clearing, casual labor, and plantation projects. Although under Rwanda 
law, sons and daughters receive equal inheritance rights (Law/nº 22/99 of 12/11/1999) the PPF focus 
groups highlighted that due to cultural practices, parents favor sons in land inheritance, leaving young 
women in a position where they depend on marrying a man to gain access to farmland; without a formal 
marriage, these women have no land tenure. Broadly, these gender and social norms leave most women 
with little decision -making power and no real control over assets. The threat of sexual and gender based 
violence (SGBV) at the household level where women try to assert independence and achievement is 
high. F or this project, the implications are that trees planted by women become men’s property; money 
gained in employment (tree planting, nursery maintenance) or through farmland production (fruit trees, 
honey, etc) are ultimately controlled by men; and women sh ouldn’t participate in activities without a


---
*Page 645*
---

35 
 husband’s permission. Although this seems bleak, this situation is not universal. The 24 CND community 
focus groups held in the PPF highlighted that many households decide together on how money should 
be spent; l and tenure is broadly seen as joint ownership; and men realize the impact of dwindling 
fuelwood resources on women and girls. Gender equity is not yet universal and rural culture has a long 
trajectory to achieving it.  
As a result, this program will focus heavily on social and behavior change communications (SBCC) as 
a means to positively change perceptions towards  gender equity. Community members, including 
community leaders and women and men community influencers  spec ifically will be targeted for 
sensitization  on gender equit y  in order to shift their attitudes and to build a conducive environment for 
women and HMPO to be able to participate in project activities. Women  have been engaged in the 
development of this proj ect to ensure time constraints, work burden and reproductive responsibilities do 
not impede their ability to engage in the various activities designed by the project. Women will be 
regularly consulted throughout project implementation to ensure they are ab le to actively participate in 
project activities and activities take place at times which are convenient for them and at locations that 
are safe and contextually appropriate. At project start, once communities are selected for 
implementation, barriers face d by women and HMPO to participate in project activities will be reviewed 
and solutions to overcome barriers incorporated into programming through an additional screening 
process outlined in Annex 6. The project ESS Coordinator and Gender Officer will prov ide support to 
ensure all project staff understand barriers faced by women and HMPO and programming works to 
address barriers to ensure their active participation in activities. The project will also get support from 
NGOs that help men on masculinity and a ddressing SGVB which will include targeted outreach to 
mobilize their participation in household and parental responsibilities to ease women’s responsibilities 
and sensitization on the importance of fair access and control of resources, including income. T he 
engagement of community leaders and women and men community influencers to further promote equal 
and fair control of resources between men and women will further mitigate the risk of men taking over 
control of incomes earned and targeted for women. Last ly, the project will clearly explain participant 
selection, intended benefits and how participants can help monitor benefits and risks and reduce risks if 
necessary, including reducing the risk of men taking over control of incomes targeted for women.  The 
program will  have a safe, accessible Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for all project stakeholders, 
particularly women, to access to pursue redress as needed. The project will also collaborate with existing 
Isange One Stop Centers in the project area in GBV prevention and immediate assistance to victims. All 
project staff will be trained and project beneficiaries informed on the purpose and use of the GRM, 
including reporting gender -based violence. The project will ensure confidentiality of the informatio n and 
identity of the complainant. The grievance process will include options for victims to remain anonymous 
which will add a layer of protection for individuals who may be subject to gender -based violence. 
Throughout project implementation, project staff  will disseminate information to beneficiaries on how 
they can use the GRM and solicit feedback on how the mechanism can be improved if needed.  
 
b. Provide access to skills building, leadership and programmatic inclusion . Because of 
existing gender norms, th ere is much to do to build technical skills of rural women to be able to participate 
in the project. In addition to that, finding women leaders and building their leadership skills to be at the 
forefront of rural gender equity is crucial for addressing the  root c auses of women’s exclusion in land 
use planning and decision -making . This project however will not just focus on rural women. Ensuring


---
*Page 646*
---

36 
 that women play a strong role at all levels of climate programming in the country is important. Thus 
developing pr ofessional networks and internships to provide opportunities to strengthen leadership and 
technical skills will be incorporated into the program.  
 
c. Facilitate women’s financial autonomy . In order to support rural women to capture financial 
benefits of this project, this project will incorporate three activities: financial skills building, support in 
joining cooperatives; and facilitating access to entrepreneurship through financial/entrepr eneurship 
training, access to village savings/loans and small grants, and mentoring.  The project will ensure all 
trainings are gender -responsive and inclusive. Gender considerations will be integrated into training 
curriculum, content and delivery methods.  Flexible training schedules and convenient venues will be 
selected to accommodate women's needs. Staff in charge of gender aspects will ensure gender 
mainstreaming and ensure the project addresses barriers to women's participation. Training will also 
use p articipatory approaches to create an inclusive learning environment and incorporate components 
on women's empowerment and leadership development, promoting gender equality and active 
participation . By facilitating independent access to financial services, women’s income can be managed 
independently until shifting norms and household situations reach gender equity for households in  
adapting to climate change . Within the program, microenterprise, access to finance, beekeeping, and 
agroforestry/cookstove value  chain support were chosen as key activities  because they  are feasible 
livelihoods within the target rural households and help strengthen resiliency of the rural economy. Further 
information on women in the value chains targeted by the project, including g ender characteristics, 
composition of workforce and ownership etc. is detailed in the project Feasibility Study where possible 
and will be refined during project implementation.  
 
1.21 Youth Analysis and Key Issues  
Rwanda is a young country; 82% of the population is under the age of 40 and 51.5% are 19 or under 
(NISR, EICV5 2018, see Table 5). The sex ratio for youth, classified as people from 14 -35 years old, is 
92 males for every 100 females. The literacy rate for youth is quite high; averaging 91% in urban areas 
and 82% in rural areas (ibid). Numeracy rates are linked to wealth, with poorer families having lower 
capacity (72.4% vs 92.7%). Larger urban -rural discrepancies are found in computer literacy (28.5% vs 
7%) and mobile phone ownership (70% vs 41%).   
Table 5: Youth population in Rwanda by district. (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)


---
*Page 647*
---

37 
 Table 6.  Youth Usual Economic Activity by Sex and Province.  Source: (NISR EICV5 2018).  
 
 
Employment figures for rural youth indicate that 54.7% are engaged in agriculture, and 32.9% in elementary 
activities. The rest are in services (7.8%), and very few  in managerial, professional etc jobs. According to a 
recent analysis, youth “envision self -sufficiency achieved through economic independence and the ability to 
provide for and support their families, and they see this path as most available to them throu gh self -
employment (USAID 2019)”.  The Youth Assessment highlighted key priority areas that youth identified for 
achieving their goals:  
 
● Livelihoods and skills development for productive self -employment activities  
● Education and skills for entering into the formal work sector  
● Reproductive autonomy and health to avoid early pregnancy which is a key hurdle towards economic 
self-sufficiency  
Poverty amongst youth has remained stable between EICV4 and EICV5, with about 30% of all youth below 
the poverty level, and 11.3% in extreme poverty. There are substantial gender differences, with young women 
increasingly vulnerable as they age (see Figures 7  and 8 with data from NISR’s EICV 5, 2018). Thus, 
programming ensuring attention on both young men and young women is vital for rural climate resiliency.


---
*Page 648*
---

38 
  
Figure 8: Percentage of youth below the poverty line by age (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)  
 
 
Figure 9:  Percentage of youth in extreme poverty line in Rwanda by age. (Source: NISR EICV5 2018)  
 
Translating this information into a climate adaptation program that supports  young men and women in the 
CND, three key topics influenced the action plan:  
a. Diversified  opportunities. With over 51.9% of the Rwandan population under the age of  
b. 15 and 18% between the ages of 15 -24, youth make up a significant percentage of the 
population. There is already a scarcity of arable land, with many households owning less  than what is 
needed for their subsistence. With the Rwandan population expected to increase from 12 million in 2019 
to 20 million in 2042. The future for the upcoming generation of rural youth is worrisome --agricultural


---
*Page 649*
---

39 
 lands will continue to grow scarcer  and demand for resources and land increase. The youth interviewed 
are very cognizant of these constraints, and many are keen to diversify their livelihoods yet they are 
most interested in short -term gains. This GCF program intends to seek out vulnerab le youth in critical 
areas of the CND to support entrepreneurship and diversified  opportunities to reduce pressure on highly 
marginal lands.  
c. Access to skills building . Many youth attend schools, but training in practical agroforestry, 
financial management, and forestry is lacking. This program intends to target youth for diversifying their 
skill sets and strengthening their resilience to adapt to climate change.  
d. Youth leadership and Programmatic Inclusion . Many youths  voiced their concerns over not 
being included in decision -making processes and programming, resulting in key stakeholders not being 
engaged in civil society. In order to engage the new generation of rural f armers and consumers, this 
project will identify and work with youth leaders in the CND to use SBCC to engage youth to benefit and 
support long -term tree initiatives. With youth involved in decision - making processes, innovative ideas 
to involve youth with  best practice on government lands and to get youth to appropriate long -term 
thinking through tree planting as future investments.  
 
1.22 Internal program considerations  
In addition to programmatic activities with women and youth, this program will also have an internal 
focus to ensure best practices. These include:  
a. Avoid perpetuation of gender inequalities and women’s exclusion in the agro/forestry sector. 
SBCC will be us ed heavily to shift norms towards inclusivity and skills building to facilitate women and 
youth to join the sectors.  In addition, women need to be engaged in the decision -making  bodies of the 
project itself, including a Steering Committee, which will be a t least 50% women, and the Project 
Management Unit with targets to achieve 50% women by the end of the program as mentoring and 
training increase capacity .  The Gender Monitoring Office will be a part of the Steering Committee and 
along with the The National Women’s Council and The Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion were 
consulted during proposal development and will continue to be involved at project implementation stage 
at the national and local level. There will be comprehensive consultation and feedback processes with 
these stakeholders through meetings and workshops to ensure perpetuating gender inequalities is 
avoided.  
b. Build partnerships . This GC F project provides a unique opportunity to engage civil society at 
national and local levels. The team will work with men’s, women’s, and youth organizations to build their 
capacity and facilitate their engagement with project beneficiaries and local gover nment actors.  
c. Gender and Diversity training . Training will be an important component of a large, 5 -year 
program. Building online training modules that can be viewed across the CND, and using new platforms 
like WhatsApp  to communicate with urban and rural p roject staff will ensure that static, one -off training  
is avoided.  
d. Staffing . Diversity and inclusion are important for the project, and hiring practices at all levels 
of the program will be reflected in hiring policies. The program management unit will hir e a full-time 
dedicated gender expert and a full-time dedicated  youth focal point (both AE staff)  and associated costs 
are included in the project budget .  These two staff will participate in all management meetings to support 
inclusion goals across the pr oject, and will lead and oversee the implementation of the Gender, Youth, 
and Social Inclusion Action Plan.  Another key role of these two positions will be to engage civil society


---
*Page 650*
---

40 
 partners, particularly women’s, men’s, and youth groups to build capacity and increase the sustainability 
of achievements during this five -year project.  Along with these positions, RFA staff will include a 
Community Mobilization Specialist and a Community Engagement Specialist who will be in charge of 
and support project gender  mainstreaming. Their responsibilities include reviewing site specific barriers 
faced by women to participate in project activities, ensuring these barriers are addressed in order to 
support full participation of women, ensuring gender equity in all projec t activities and where needed 
help women access the Grievance Redress Mechanisms to pursue redress and connect women with 
Isange One Stop Centers in the project area to prevent gender -based  violence and provide immediate 
assistance to victims.   
e. M&E. Many stakeholder meetings highlighted the lack of community engagement as a key 
reason for project failures in the past. This project will incorporate suggestions from our stakeholder 
engagement meetings to ensure best practice is followe d. This includes not only deeper local 
government engagement but also using a rights -based approach to ensure that communities are at the 
heart of planning our interventions. Targets for youth and gender are incorporated into the Gender and 
Youth Action Pl an below and are set to ensure women and youth are equally targeted where possible 
and encouraged to actively participate. Exceptions include situations where group composition, such as 
government agents or community leaders, are outside the project’s cont rol or the activity solely targets 
men, such as masculinity  sessions held with men to improve gender equity in program participation and 
benefits or assisted natural regeneration activities inside the park far from villages that will take male 
participan ts several weeks away from their homes. Overall targets for key activities (i.e., G4. 4.1.1.5, 
G4. 4.1.1.6) have not been set as the target will depend on the number of villages/sites where project 
activities take place, however disaggregated targets per v illage/site have been set. A project baseline 
will be conducted and baselines for all targets will be determined at project onset.


---
*Page 651*
---

41 
 
 
 
 1.23 Gender and Youth Action Plan  
 
Component 1: Mainstreaming Climate Adaptation into Integrated Land Use Planning  
Impact 1: Climate adaptation programming is successfully implemented because it is  
fundamentally informed by rural women and youth stakeholders  
Indicator: Equal participation by gender groups in contributing to expected outcomes  
Gender/Youth Outcome 1: Climate adaptation programs in LUPs reflect and address the priorities of women and youth  
Indicator: % of men, women and youth participating in LUP processes who feel LUPs incorporate their needs as they relate to c limate programmin g 
Activity  Gender/Youth Outputs  Indicators  Targets  Timeline  Responsi
ble Costs  
G1. 1.1.1.7  Conduct climate 
literacy seminars for local 
government and civil society 
organizations, aimed at increasing 
women and youth participation  Local institutions are 
trained to build capacity 
of rural people, 
specifically women and 
youth, to participa te in 
climate adaptation 
processes  # of CSOs 
and 
government 
agencies 
trained  60 people (50% male, 50% 
female) from  CSOs/Local 
institutions trained in Y1 and 
Y3 to increase participation of 
women/ youth/ marginalized in 
stakeholder consultations & 
activitie s Y1,3 PMU/RFA  $10,187   
  
G1. 1.1.1.8 Provide financial and 
logistical support to trained 
organizations in grassroots 
mobilization to increase women 
and youth participation in climate 
adaptation planning  Trained institutions hold 
meetings to train women, 
youth and marginalized 
people on forests and 
mobilize them to 
participate in planning 
processes  # of meetings 
held by 
trained 
organizations 
with local 
communities 
on climate 
adaptation 
programming  At least 10 grassroots 
meetings per district are held 
in Y1 and Y3 in the CND  Y1,3 PMU/RF A/
Local 
CSOs 
(TBD)  $12,262


---
*Page 652*
---

42 G1. 1.1.2.4 Develop and rollout a 
series of trainings (virtual sessions 
and online modules) on gender 
sensitivity and mainstreaming 
women and youth into planning  Program Staff and 
government officials  
understand gender 
barriers, understand how 
to mainstream g ender 
equality principles into 
planning  and are strong 
facilitators to support 
women, youth and 
marginalized participation 
in meetings  # of people 
trained 
(disaggregat
ed by 
gender)  
# project staff 
trained in 
social 
inclusion  - 65 government agents 
trained  per year .  
- 100% project staff trained  Y1-5 PMU + 
Local 
Women's 
NGO 
(TBD)  $40,523   
 
Component 2: Forest Landscape Management and Restoration  
Gender/Youth Impact 2: Sustainable gains in restoration and landscape management are made  
because women and youth are enabled and motivated to adopt best practice  
Impact Indicator: Targeted women and youth report an improved enabling environment for their participation in forest management and restoration  
Gender/Youth Outcome 2: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capacity to engage in forest management and 
restoration  
Outcome Indicator: Equal participation by gender groups in forest lan dscape management and restoration  
G2. 2.2.2.15 & 3.1.1.11 Develop 
and implement strategy (including 
social marketing) to ensure that 
women and youth benefit from 
forest restoration projects   
Women and youth have 
the capacity, motivation, 
and opportunity to 
participate and benefit 
equitably in  restoration  
programs. Programs will 
actively seek out direct 
participation  of and 
benefits for women and 
youth through paid labor 
and direct involvement.  % Women 
beneficiaries  
% Youth 
beneficiaries  50% of beneficiaries are 
women  
50% of beneficiaries are 
youth2 
 
 Y1 
Strategy 
Y2-5 
Implemen
tation  PMU, 
Women/Yo
uth NGOs 
(TBD)  $37,735  
Component 3: Enhancing climate adaptation through resilient livelihoods  
 
2 The total number of beneficiaries will be determined at project onset


---
*Page 653*
---

43 
 
 
 
 Gender/Youth Impact 3: Women, marginalized and youth are empowered to actively participate in green jobs  
Impact indicator: Target groups perception of economic empowerment  
Gender/Youth Outcome 3: Women, youth and marginalized households have improved capa city to engage in green jobs  
Outcome Indicator: Number of new women, youth and marginalized households that have engaged in green jobs  
G3. 3.2.1.2 Develop and 
implement strategies to ensure 
that women,youth, and other 
marginalized groups benefit from 
rural livelihoods and financial 
services  
 Women and youth have 
the capacity, motivation, 
and opportunity to 
participate and benefit 
equitably i n rural 
livelihoods and financial 
services  % Women 
beneficiaries  
% Youth 
beneficiaries  50% of beneficiaries are 
women  
50% of beneficiaries are 
youth3 
 
 Y1 & Y2  RFA & 
CORDAID  $53,053  
G3. 3.2.3.2 Organize 
Microenterprise training and 
develop and implement green 
grants programs targeting landless 
youth and poor, as well as women 
who are unable to access direct 
benefits from land -based project 
activities.  Landless poor, youth, 
and women have 
enterprise skills and 
grants to engage in 
green value chains  # of 
enterprises 
formed, 
beneficiaries 
disaggregate
d by gender 
and social 
class  5,600 beneficiaries of which at 
least 50% are women  
500 off -farm jobs created  
in production quality  
control  
 Y2,3 & 4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $66,398  
G3. 3.3.2.2 Provide 
organizational/technical/financial 
capacity building to women, youth, 
and CSOs (such as cooperatives 
or VSLA) with focus on financial 
literacy and provide long -term 
coaching to beneficiaries  
 Women and youth 
groups have the 
organizational, technical 
and financial skills to 
receive support from 
project  # 
CSOs/VSLAs 
trained  
# beneficiaries 
receiving 
coaching  300 CSOs/VSLAs  
6,900 of which 40% youth  
50% women  Y2,3 & 4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $30,040  
 
3 The total number of beneficiaries will be determined at project onset


---
*Page 654*
---

44 G3.3.3.2.3. Support women, youth, 
other marginalized groups 
strengthen savings and loan 
groups and register for MFI 
accounts  
 Men, women and youth 
have access to thriving 
financial services  # people with 
new 
bank/MFI  
accounts  50% women  Y2,3,4  RFA & 
CORDAID  $13,713  
 
 
 
 
 
Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation  
Gender/Youth Impact 4: Women and youth benefit from an adaptively managed program  
Impact indicator : Reported attitudes, confidence, and a sense  of empowerment towards engaging in climate programming  
Gender/Youth Outcome 4: Disaggregated and specialized mo nitoring generates data showing whether and how women, youth and 
marginalized people are benefiting from adaptive management systems  
Outcome indicator: Gender and youth disaggregated participation data  
G4. 4.1.1.4: Develop an 
overarching gender and youth 
program unit within the GCF 
Project to ensure the project uses 
adaptive management to ensure 
strong inclusion of women, youth, 
and marginalized households such 
that equitable benefits are shared 
across the communities.  Gender/Youth program 
unit provides oversight 
and support to ensure 
gender/ youth targets are 
met N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $3,380  
G4. 4.1.1.5: With the local 
government, project partners, and 
Youth CSO leaders, identify key 
male and female youth leaders in 
each project village to be project 
champions  Key youth leaders are 
identified and engaged  Youth 
leaders 
identified  2 Youth leaders ( 50% male, 
50% female) per targeted 
village. 4 
 
 
 Y1 PMU, 
Youth 
NGO 
(TBD)  $88,68 3  
 
4 The number of targeted villages will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of youth leaders to b e reached. 50% male and 50% female youth leaders will be targeted per 
village.


---
*Page 655*
---

45 
 
 
 
 G4. 4.1.1.6: With local 
government, project partners and 
women’s civil society, identify key 
women leaders amongst project 
beneficiaries to be project 
champions  Key women leaders are 
identified and engaged  Women 
leaders 
identified  2 women leaders per village  5 
 
 Y1 PMU, 
Women's 
NGO 
(TBD)  $87,903  
G4. 4.1.1.7: Engage Youth & 
Women’s NGOs  to build 
leadership and coaching skills of 
identified project champions and 
facilitate their project involvement 
in order to advance project goals  
of greater participation amongst 
marginalized groups amid greater 
community -wide support for their 
participation  Leaders are equipped 
with skills and financial 
resources to build 
empowerment and 
facilitate women and 
youth  
engagement in the 
project  # of wo men 
and youth 
trained in 
coaching and 
leadership 
skills  
 
 200 (50% women, 25% male 
youth leaders, 25% female 
youth l eaders) women and 
youth leaders trained as 
trainers  Y1-2 PMU  $6,660  
G.4. 4.1.1.8: Overarching social 
behavior change communications 
strategy and materials are 
developed to overcome barriers 
and enhance motivations for 
women, youth and marginalized 
people to participate in program 
activities  Gender sensitive and 
responsive 
comm unications 
programming supports 
new norms for social 
inclusion in project 
activities  # programs/ 
materials 
delivered in 
communities  At least 10 materials 
developed and distributed 
annually  Y1-5 PMU  $97,552  
 
5 The number of targeted villages will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of women leaders to b e reached. 100% of women leaders will be female


---
*Page 656*
---

46 G4. 4.1.1.9: Informational 
campaigns on equity (land rights, 
access to resources, and decision -
making) and programmatic 
opportunities to showcase the 
benefits of everyone (women, 
young men/women, marginalized) 
participating in programming to 
improve lives  Gender sensitive and 
responsive c ampaigns 
and informational 
material on inclusion of  
different social categories 
is developed and 
disseminated  # of people 
reached by 
campaigns  At least 200,000 (50% female, 
50% male)  
people reached by campaigns 
over 5 years  Y1-5 PMU  $17,030  
G4. 4.1.1.10 Engage men's NGO 
to roll out programming for men as 
allies in women's economic 
empowerment and sexual/gender 
based violence reduction 
programming  Men in target areas 
participate in masculinity 
sessions to improve 
gender equity in program 
particip ation and benefits  # men 
participating 
in training 
sessions  At least 200 men participate in 
masculinity sessions each 
year from Y2 -5 Y2-5 PMU  
Men's 
NGO  $115,57
4 
G4. 4.1.2.2 Identify and train men 
and women (adults and youth) to 
implement key M/E tools in their 
communities  Women and youth are 
active participants in M/E 
at central, sectoral, and 
community level  # Women 
and Youth 
trained on 
M/E tools  At least 5 women, 5  men and 
5 youth (15 people total) per 
district  
are trained6 
 
 Y1-5 PMU  $3,380  
G4. 4.1.3.2 Engage youth leaders 
in designing and monitoring targets 
for youth engagement, 
participation, and outcomes  Youth targets are 
identified and 
incorporated into M/E 
system  N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $ 16,533  
G4. 4.1.3.3 Engage women 
leaders in designing and 
monitoring targets for women 
engagement, participation, and 
outcomes  Women targets are 
identified and 
incorporated into M/E 
system  N/A N/A Y1-5 PMU  $ 
16,533  
 
6 The number of targeted districts will be determined at project onset and will determine the total number of women, men and youth to be trained.  The target for the number of ind ividuals trained overall is 
50% female, 50% male.


---
*Page 657*
---

47 G4 .4.1.3.4: Monitor program using 
Gender Checklist to ensure gender 
is integrated in programming, HR, 
policy, and activity performance  Project has a strong 
gender monitoring 
program  -Project
gender
checklist
developed
-Annual
checklist
scoresProject scor es on gender 
checklist increases  
yearly  Y1-5 PMU  $ 16,533  
G4. 4.2.2.1 Project partners 
(government and NGOs) are 
trained on gender -sensitive 
approaches  Project staff have skills to 
monitor inclusion of youth 
and women into 
programming  # staff trained  100% of M/E focal points from 
participating 
organizations/entities are 
trained  Y1-5 PMU  $25,780 
Project Gender and Youth staff time is incorporated into ea ch activity cost  
Total Estimated Cost for Implementation of GAP:  $ 759,452  
__________