=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20230619181418+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.1.20174
/ModDate: D:20230619210019+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.1.20174
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

Meeting of the Board  
10 – 13 July 2023  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 12  GCF/B.36/ 02/Add.03  
19 June 2023  
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum III 
Funding proposal package f or FP 208  
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a)A funding proposal titled "Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois-R ivières region  
of Haiti through Integrated Flood Management";
b)No-o bjection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal  
point(s);
c)Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)Secretariat’s assessment;
e)Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's  
assessment; and
g)Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.36/02 /Add.03 
Page b 
3 
109  
110  
114  
135  
149  Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal  point(s)  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment  
Gender documentation  151


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme title:  Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois -Rivières region of 
Haiti through Integrated Flood Management  
Country(ies):  Haiti 
Accredited Entity:  United Nations Development Programme, UNDP  
Date of first submission:  2021/07/23  
Date of current submission 2023/06/04 
Version number  V.14


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0  
  
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 1 
  PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Pl ease note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets  
below . For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of  GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co -financers’ contribution respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation  total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Energy generation and access  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Low-emission transport  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Forestry and land use  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  20 % 50 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  20 % 50 % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  60 % Enter number  % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)   A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  Total beneficiaries:  733,872   
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
292,600 people  Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
441,272 people  
Approximately 
3 % of total 
population2  Approximately 
4% of the total 
population  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  31,290,561.48 USD  
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  22,427,206.48  USD  
 
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the  
GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity ) to implement the project or programme 
descri bed in the funding proposal.  31,


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 2 
 A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be 
consistent with A.8.  
 ☒  Grant  22,427,206.48   
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  8 years  A.12. Total 
lifespan  25 Years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity 
obtained/will obtain its own 
approval to implement the 
project/ programme, if 
available.  
 
7/23/2021  
 A.14. ESS 
category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been 
used to prepare 
this FP?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The Executing  Entity for the project is Haiti’s Ministry of Environment  (MoE). The 
Ministry is also the office designated as the NDA on behalf of the Government of 
Haiti to the GCF.  
A.21. Executive summary  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
1. As a Small Island Developing State (SIDS) and the only Least Developed Country (LDC) in the Western 
Hemisphere, Haiti is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change. This vulnerability is 
compounded by high levels of poverty  and lon gstanding macroeconomic challenges experienced in the country 
— with approximately 59% of Haitians living under the national poverty line of US$2.41 per day and 
approximately 24% living under the national extreme poverty line of US$1.23 per day.  
 
2. Haiti is particularly affected by the climate change impacts of increasing frequency and intensity of floods, 
tropical storms and hurricanes. Between 1975 and 2012, such climate change -related  events resulted in 
 
2 Population estimated at 11,242,856  people  per World Bank projections  (based upon 2003 Census and taking into account 
population growth rates) . Please note that 2003 is the latest official Census conducted by the Government of  Haiti, hence 
population growth rates have been considered for the project  
3 Refer to the Policy of  Co-financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 3 
 damages and losses equivalent to 2% of the c ountry’s GDP on average per year. In 2004, one storm — 
Hurricane Jeanne — caused severe flooding in northern Haiti. The flooding caused by this storm resulted in 
approximately US$41 million in damages, more than 2,800 deaths and the need to remove approxim ately 
592,000 m3 of mud that clogged the drainage networks and infrastructure across the country. Since 2012, the 
impacts of climate change have continued to negatively affect the population of Haiti. For example, the Category 
5 storm — Hurricane Matthew — that struck Hai ti in 2016 caused widespread damages and economic losses 
and negatively affected more than 2 million people (2 0% of the country’s population) primarily located in the 
poorest regions of the county. Specifically, Hurricane Matthew resulted in the deaths of 546 people, forced more 
than 175,500 people to seek refuge in shelters, disrupted schooling for more than 450,000 children, and led to 
more than 1.4 million people requiring immediate humanitarian assistance. The storm also inflicted economic 
damages and l osses estimated at more than 22% of the country’s GDP in that year (2016), including the losses 
of up to 90% of crops and livestock in some areas of the country. In addition, it caused a sharp increase in the 
number of cholera cases experienced throughout Haiti.  The intense rainfall associated with extreme climate 
events such as Hurricane Matthew also leads to severe flooding, which exacerbates these associated negative 
impacts. Such high -impact flooding has been a regular occurrence in Haiti in recent deca des. During the period 
1993 –2012, for example, Haiti experienced 31 floods, causing the deaths of approximately 2,870 people and 
adversely affecting approximately 9 million people through livelihood losses and personal damages. Of these 
flood events, 10 we re directly attributed to hurricanes and a further 16 attributed to extreme rainfall events.  
 
3. Projections under the RCP8.5 scenario simulate that climatic conditions contributing to flooding incidence are 
expected to become more prevalent in Haiti. Such co nditions include more concentrated, intense rainfall as well 
as warming temperatures, which contribute to major storm development and exacerbate flood impacts. 
Furthermore, it is anticipated that a modest increase in the frequency of hurricanes and tropica l storms affecting 
Haiti will be experienced in the future. A such watershed management actions have been prioritized within 
Haiti’s National Adaptation Plans, prioritizing the Northwest and the Aribonite regions where Haiti’s Trois -
Rivieres (TR) watershed  is located.  The (TR) watershed is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change -induced flooding and hence has been identified as the project’s targer area (see section 10.1 of the FS 
on its prioritization).  
 
4. Although the TR watershed is not the largest watershed in the country, its population — located in six cities and 
three departments — is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. TR watershed is prone to frequent 
flooding in the municipalities it crosses, with adverse effects pa rticularly on poor communities who do not have 
sufficient resources to adequately respond. The rural areas of Trois -Rivières — such as Marmelade, Plaisance, 
Pilate, Gros -Morne, Bassin Bleu, Chansolme, and Port -de-Paix — are home to 80% of Haiti's populatio n of 
extremely poor people. These areas have an extreme poverty rate of 40%, which is almost twice the national 
average of 23.9%, and much higher than any other area (for comparison, Port -au-Prince has an extreme poverty 
rate of 4.9%). In addition to the h igh rate of poverty, which inhibit communities from adapting and responding 
to climate impacts, the impacts of extreme climate events are being compounded by ecosystem degradation 
caused by unsustainable agricultural practices such as the increasing area u nder crop cultivation, and 
particularly the practice of leaving soil bare and exposed to extreme weather for most of the year.  
 
5. Current agricultural practices, such as the increasing prevalence of annual crop cultivation, leave the soil bare 
and exposed t o extreme weather for most of the year. During intense rainfall and storm events, the limited 
ground cover leads to increased surface runoff and consequently exacerbates soil erosion in the watershed. 
This erosion degrades soils, reducing agricultural prod uctivity and necessitating the need for the expansion of 
agricultural land. The negative feedback loop created is further compounded by extensive deforestation in the 
mountainous parts of the watershed. This deforestation is primarily linked to charcoal pr oduction, with many 
farmers in the TR watershed resorting to charcoal production as an alternative livelihood in response to low 
yields, crop failure or unexpected expenses — particularly in extremely wet or dry years. As a result, most of 
the native fores ts have been harvested, with minimal effort towards reforestation activities. Given that the 
demand for charcoal in Haiti is high and is unlikely to decrease in the foreseeable future, charcoal production 
will likely continue to drive deforestation in the absence of alternative livelihood options.  
 
6. Unsustainable land -use practices have radically changed the TR watershed’s natural landscape, where the 
large -scale removal of tree cover for farming and charcoal production has decreased infiltration capacity o f the 
soil and contributed to increased surface runoff during heavy rainfall events. This, in turn, has considerably 
increased flood frequency and intensity in the TR watershed, where floods wash away fertile soils, cause 
sedimentation of riverbeds and blo ck drainage infrastructure. Given the near -complete absence of 
embankments and levees in the watershed, this cycle intensifies future flooding, leading to further destruction 
of crops, farmland and agricultural infrastructure, as well as the loss of livest ock. Moreover, the  erosion of


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 4 
 riverbanks and sedimentation build -up in rivers caused by flooding decreases water quality in the watershed 
considerably, leading to an increased risk of water - and vector -borne diseases.  
 
7. At present, the Government of Haiti (GoH) has limited technical and financial capacity to fully address the 
impacts of climate change -induced flooding on the population of the TR watershed through domestic financing. 
This is highlighted by the fact that mo re than half of Haiti’s national budget is accounted for by foreign aid. The 
existing high levels of public debt, combined with the urgent need to address poverty in the country, further 
constrains the GoH’s capacity to invest in climate change adaptation.  Consequently, the GoH is requesting 
GCF grant finance to initiate a paradigm shift towards climate -resilient flood management across seven target 
communes in the TR watershed (Port -de-Paix, Chansolme, Bassin Bleu, Plaisance, Pilate, Marmelade, Gros 
Morne) . GCF finance will be combined with co -financing from Heifer International Haiti to transform the GoH’s 
approach to addressing climate change -induced flood impacts on the watershed and population living nearby. 
This approach will involve shifting the curre nt uncoordinated decision -making processes on flood management 
at the national and local levels towards an integrated approach to land and water resources management in the 
watershed. The proposed transformation of land and water resources management will be achieved by: i) 
implementing agroforestry systems and reforesting degraded landscapes at priority intervention sites in the TR 
watershed; ii) enhancing technical and institutional capacity for productive climate -resilient  land management 
at the national  and local levels; and iii) establishing the required governance framework for integrated water 
resources management (IWRM) to support the climate -resilient land management systems and facilitate 
sustainable use and management of water resources over the l ong term. This transformative approach the 
combined transformative effect of project interventions will incentivise sustainable land and water resources 
management in Haiti, while simultaneously promoting a shift towards the adoption and implementation of a 
climate -resilient, integrated approach to flood management that can be readily scaled up and replicated 
nationally, and across the Caribbean region.  
 
8. Overall, the project will confer direct and indirect adaptation benefits to approximately 292,600 and and 441,272  
vulnerable people in Haiti, respectively. B y implementing 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems and rehabilitating 
7,700 ha of forests in priority areas in the TR watershed to address the impacts of climate change -induced 
flooding, the project will result in a more than 50% reduction in the number of h ouseholds affected by 100 -year 
flood events by restoring the ecosystems’ capacity for water infiltration hence reducing land degradation. This 
reduction will be from 1,342 households at risk of flooding under the baseline scenario down to approximately 
640 households with project interventions . Similarly, agroforestry and reforestation interventions under this 
project are expected to result in a 35% reduction in the number of households at risk to 20 -year flood events in 
the TR watershed while providing the  benefit of mitigating an estimated 3,636,750 tCO2 -e during the project’s 
total 25 -year lifespan.


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
  
4 UN Office of the High Representative for The Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Deve loping 
States. Available at: http://unohrlls.org/about -ldcs/about -ldcs/  
5 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). Available at: https://www.gfdrr.org/en/haiti.  
6 which cont ribute approximately 56% of the country’s GDP  
7 World Bank data. 2018.  
8 Further information on the country’s financial challenges are presented in Section B.5 of the Funding Proposal, and specific details on 
these challenges can be found at the following reference: International Monetary Fund. 2019. Haiti. IMF Country Report number 20/121.  
9 Haiti Overview: World Bank. Available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/haiti/overview.  
10 GermanWatch, Global Climate Risk Index 2016. Available at: https://germanwatch.org/fr/download/13503.pdf .  
11 Slope is  expressed as a percentage, whereby the percentage indicates the vertical distance divided by the horizontal dista nce of a land 
area.  
12 Kulkarni C: The Implications of Composting Toilets for Nitrogen Flows in Haiti. Final Report. 2009, Providence: Brown Univers ity Centre 
for Environmental Studies.  
13 Jolly CM, Shannon DA, Bannister M, Flaurentin G, Dale JZ, Binns A, Lindo P: Income efficiency of soil conservation techniques  in Haiti. 
Proceeding of the 26th West Indies Agricultural Economics Conference: July 2007; St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago. Ed ited by: Neela 
Badrie. 2007, 156 -163.: Caribbean Agro -Economic Society.   PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
Context  
9. Haiti forms part of the Caribbean island Hispaniola, sharing a border with the Dominican Republic to the east. 
Hispaniola is the second -largest island in the Greater Antilles, and at 27,750 km2, Haiti is the third -largest country 
in the Caribbean. As a Small Island Developing State (SIDS) and the  only Least Developed Country (LDC) in the 
Western Hemisphere4, Haiti is exposed to multiple natural hazards, including hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, 
landslides and droughts5. Many of the country’s primary economic activities6 (including agricultural production and 
industry), as well as more than 96% of the country’s population of 11.1 million people7), are situated in areas that 
are at risk of being impacted by two or more of the hazards mentioned above. The vulnerability of the population is 
compounded by high levels of poverty and longstanding macroeconomic challenges experienced in the country8 — 
with approximately 59% of Haitians living under the national poverty line of US$2.41 per day and approximately 
24% living under the national extreme poverty line of US$1.23 per day9.  
 
10. The existing exposure and vulnerability to natural hazards are being exacerbated by the impacts of climate change, 
with Haiti ranking first on the Global Climate Risk Index and third on the Long -Term Climate Risk Index10. Moreover, 
climate change impacts  — particularly regarding floods, hurricanes and tropical storms — have considerable 
implications for health and livelihoods, as well as the local economy. The Government of Haiti (GoH) has prioritise d 
addressing the baseline socio -economic challenges facing the nation as well as funding disaster recovery, which 
has resulted in limited financial resources being available for long -term solutions to enhance climate resilience in 
the country.   
 
Baseline scenario  
11. Haiti is very mountainous, with more than 50% of the island at a steep slope of 40%11 or more. While cities are 
mostly located in the coastal plains, much of the most productive land is located along steep mountainsides. As a 
result, agricultural production mainly occurs in these mountainous areas. Soil conditions in the country are 
intrinsically fragile , comprised of newly formed shallow soils that can support forests and grasslands but that are 
also susceptible to erosion and leaching of water -soluble nutrients. The location of arable land, combined with the 
fragile soil conditions in the country, increases erosion along the mountainous slopes of Haiti.  For example, in 1999, 
soil erosion in Haiti was estimated at a total of 36 million tonnes, or 1,319 tonnes per km2/year.12,13  This erosion, 
combined with the steep topography of the country, has severe consequences for some of the  country’s most 
populous cities which are situated in valleys along the coast.  When it rains, the steep hills in the upper reaches of 
the valleys  channel rainwater towards urban areas. Given the widespread degradation of  the watersheds and the 
associated surface runoff and erosion, the resulting floodwaters contain substantial sediment loads which are 
deposited downstream. These sediments block already limited drainage infrastructure in the urban areas, which, 
coupled wit h the intensity of rainfall events, creates an environment conducive to intense flooding.   
 
12. The conditions mentioned above are particularly evident in the Trois -Rivières (TR) watershed — one of the largest 
and most productive watersheds in the country. The  TR watershed, which includes the Aribonite, Nord (hereafter 
“North”) and Nord Ouest (hereafter “Northwest”) Departments, is the third-largest  in the country, covering 896 km2. 
Originating in the Massif du Nord mountain range and Artibonite Departments, the TR watershed has steep 
topography, with its highest elevation at 1,167 m above sea level and its lowest elevation at the watershed’s 
discharge site into the Atlantic Ocean. The TR watershed is particularly important to the country in that it provides 
critical ecosystem goods and services (including aquifer recharge), as well as contributing to food security through


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
  
14 through investment in agroforestry systems, such as planting fruit trees, which have proven long -term economic benefits in the country  
15 Priority watersheds: Trois -Rivières (code 3);  Bassin du Limb é (5); Cap Ha ïtien (6); Trou du Nord (8a); Jassa (8c); La Quinte (9); Saint 
Marc (12a); Montrouis (12b); Cabaret (12c); Cul de Sac (13); Fond Verrettes (14); Rivi ère Froide (15a); Momance (15b);  Belle Anse (16b); 
Marigot (16c); Gde. Rivi ère de Jacmel (17); Cavaillon (20); Les Cayes (21); Grande Anse (24); Gde. Rivi ère de Nippes (27); Petit Goave 
(28b). Smith Scot E. and Hersey Daniel. 2008. Analysis of Watershed Vulnerability to Flooding in Haiti. 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.388.1772&rep=rep1&type=pdf . 
16 By analyzing the data from coast.NOAA.gov/hurricanes and www.wunderground.c om/hurricane/archive for category 3 to 5 hurricanes 
originating in the Atlantic basin.  
17 Over the period 1959¬ –1989, the following numbers of hurricanes occurred:  
Category 5: 10  
Category 4: 24  
Category 3: 26  
For the period 1990 –220, the following occurred:  
Category 5: 17  
Category 4: 44  
Category 3: 36  
18  Dartmouth Flood Observatory. 2005. 2004 global register of major flood  
 events. Available at: http://www.dartmouth.edu/approximate ly floods/Archives/2004sum.htm   
19 World Bank. 2011. Vulnerability, Risk Reduction, and Adaptation to Climate Change: Haiti. Available at: 
http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportalb/doc/GFDRRCountryProfiles/wb_gfdrr_climate_change_country_profile_for_HTI.pdf   
20 USAID. 2017. Climate Risk Profile: Haiti. Available at: 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2017_Cadmus_Cl imate -Risk-Profile_Haiti.pdf  
21 Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical. 2013. Prediction of the impact of climate change on coffee and mango growing areas in 
Haiti. Available at: http://dapa.ciat.cgiar.org/wp -content/uploads/2014/03/CC_impact_coffee -mango_Haiti_CRS -CIAT_final.pdf  
22 The World Bank. 2018. Resilient Produc tive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908).  
23 which are directly attributed to hurricanes and tropical storms.  its high potential for agricultural production and opportunit ies for economic development14,15. These factors have 
led to the watershed becoming one of the most densely populated parts of Haiti, with an estimated population of 
approximately 628,800 people — most of whom depend on agriculture for their livelihoods. W hile the TR watershed 
has numerous opportunities for livelihood security and economic growth, the watershed is also among the most 
vulnerable to the impacts of flooding caused by intense, concentrated rainfall and storms.  
 
Climate Rationale  
13. As a Caribbean  SIDS and LDC, Haiti is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change, including 
increases in the frequency and intensity of flooding, tropical storms and hurricanes. The impact of climate change -
induced floodin g, in particular, is al ready adversely affecting Haiti’s population  that is already highly exposed . These 
impacts are particularly notable for the agricultural sector, which is highly vulnerable to flooding and which makes 
a considerable contribution to GDP (approximately 21.5%) and employment (approximately 40% of the country’s 
population is dependent  on crops, livestock, and fisheries for income and livelihoods) in the country.  
 
14.   Limited data is available on the historical extent and frequency of floods in Haiti. However, given the nature of 
watersheds in Haiti – including the targeted TR watershed – major hurricane events generally result in extensive 
flooding.  Over the last 30 years (1990 -2020), the number of categories 3, 4 and 5 hurricanes have increased 
significantly compared to the previous 30 years (period 1959 -1989)1617. This illustrates an increase in the frequency 
of extreme events in the Atlantic basin and therefore the corresponding increasing trend in flooding in Haiti over 
the last 30 years.   
 
15. Impacts from flooding after storms and hurricanes have already been exper ienced by much of Haiti’s population. In 
the aftermath of Hurricane Jeanne in September 2004, for example, hillside erosion caused by flooding led to 
widespread destruction of crops as gravel was deposited onto the farmers’ fields. As a result, approximate ly 80% 
of the land area in Gonaives was flooded for three days, along with approximately 30% of land in Port -de-Paix18. 
The deposited gravel also made cultivation difficult for all affected areas in the aftermath of the storm.  Thousands 
of people died or went missing during the resulting floods.  Under future climate change conditions, it is expected 
that both small -scale subsistence farming and larger, commercial agricultural operations that contribute 
considerably to Haiti’s overall GDP are likely to be i ncreasingly impacted by climate change -induced flooding19,20,21..  
 
16. Such adverse impacts of climate change on the livelihoods of vulnerable communities are already being 
experienced frequently in Haiti. During the period 1993 –2012, for example, Haiti experienced 31 floods22, 10 of 
which were directly attributed to hurricanes and a further 16 attributed to extreme rainfall events since 200023. 
Combined, these flood events caused the deaths of approximately 2,870 people and adversely affected 
approximate ly 9 million people through livelihood losses and personal damages. In 2004, for example, Hurricane 
Jeanne  caused flooding in the northern part of Haiti that resulted in more than 2,800 deaths, approximately US$41 
million in damages  and the need to remove approximately 592,000 m3 of mud that clogged drainage networks and


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
  
24 Gaspard G. 2013. Flood Loss Estimate Model: Recasting Flood Disaster Assessment and Mitigation for Haiti; The Case of Gonaive s. 
Available at: https://pdfs.semanti cscholar.org/b32b/d0ccdce15f58b07a70f5b1bd5d570baf7f79.pdf . 
25 World Bank. 2017. Rapidly Assessing the Impact of Hurricane Matthew in Haiti. Available at: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2017/10/20/rapidly -assessing -the-impact -of-hurricane -matthew -in-haiti#:a pproximately 
:text=The%20hurricane%20resulted%20in%20flooding,and%20bridges%20were%20washed%20away .  
26 Cholera is a diarrheal disease, and the spread thereof is directly related to limited access to adequate water, sanita tion, hygiene and 
health (WASH) facilities.  
27 Etienne CF. 2019. Cholera in Haiti: Gone but not forgotten. Available at: https://reliefweb.int/report/haiti/cholera -haiti-gone -not-forgotten . 
Accessed 15/06/2020.  
28 Eisenberg, M. 2013 : Examining rainfall and cholera dynamics in Haiti using statistical and dynamic modeling approaches . Epidemic s. Vol 
5 Issue 4. p 197 - 204. Available at  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1755436513000431   
29 according to four diffe rent studies and assessments (including Oxfam’s).  
30 Further details on the projected changes in storm intensity and frequency are presented in Section 3 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  infrastructure across the country24.  The impacts of Hurricane Jeanne exacerbated the effects of torrential rains 
experienced earlier in May of the same year, which caused the death or disa ppearance of more than 4,000 people 
in Haiti.  
 
17. In 2008, four tropical storms – including two hurricane level storms – hit Haiti in a period of less have 30 days, with 
significant impacts on the TR watershed. These storms included: i) Tropical Storm Fay, A ugust 15 -16; ii) Hurricane 
Gustav, August 25 -28; iii) Tropical Storm Hanna, September 1 to 4; and iv) Hurricane Ike, September 5 to 8). The 
combined impact of these four successive storms was immense, with 7.8% of the population, or nearly 800,000 
people d irectly affected  including  40,000 people living in temporary shelters  2 months after the last storm . 
Approximately 159,950 hectares of agricultural land was impacted, of which ~104,310 ha was considered 
damaged, with the department of Artibonite most affected. These damages were exacerbated by the lasting 
impacts of the 2007 hurricane season, which resulted in breaches of waterways that  facilitated the entry of water 
into the cities of the departments of Artibonite, Centre and South. The cost damages f rom the storms, combined 
with the resultant loss of agricultural production, has been estimated at UD$125,600,000.   In 2016,  Matthew, 
Category 5 storm caused  intense flooding across the country and resulted in economic damages and losses 
estimated at mor e than 22% of the country’s GDP in that year, including the losses of up to 90% of crops and 
livestock in some areas of the country, and caused a sharp increase in the number of cholera cases25. There  have 
been more than 820,000 cases of cholera26 recorded in Haiti since 2010. Given that approximately 35% of the 
population lack access to safe drinking water, and approximately 65% have limited to no access to sanitation 
services27, the population of Haiti is extremely vulnerable to these diseases  and their spread which is aggravated 
by intense rainfall and ensuing  flooding conditions28. 
 
18. The impacts of intense rainfall, both from tropical storms and torrential rainfall, have had numerous knock -on effects 
on the country’s ecosystems by compounding the already high rate of soil erosion and degradation, and contributing 
to a general decline in soil health. At least 90% of Haiti’s soils are considered severely degraded due to 
deforestation and inappropriate cultivation, causing an increase in run -off, a decline in soil water infiltration, and 
therefore the surface and groundwater needed to support agriculture . The declining soil quality caused by intense 
rainfall and the loss of forest systems — in combination with increasing average temper atures — are consequently 
contributing to a reduction in soil moisture, thereby exacerbating the impacts of climate change on food security by 
increasing desertification potential. In the absence of soil conservation structures or protective vegetative cov er on 
cropped land and grazed fallow land, the impacts of increasingly intense rainfall will continue to decrease soil health  
and increase the rate of desertification. Given that over 60% of the country has hillsides, of which more than 20% 
of slopes are d egraded, the conservation of soils on these slopes are directly linked to the food security of Haiti’s 
population.  
 
19. While most of Haiti is at risk to the impacts of climate change -induced flooding, the country’s TR watershed has 
been identified as particul arly high-risk29. This area has seen an increase d occurrence in extreme rainfall events 
since 1981 . Further details on the projected changes in storm frequency and intensity are contained in Section 3 
of Annex 2: Feasibility Study, with summaries of the projected changes in temperature and rainfall patterns under 
the RCP4.5 and 8.5 scenarios, presented b elow.  
 
Climate change risks  
20. Flooding in Haiti is closely linked with intense, concentrated seasonal rainfall (April –June and August –October), 
storm events and warm  temperatures. The high intensity of rainfall during an extreme storm event results in a 
particularly notable flood risk. Projections under the RCP8.5 scenario simulate that these climatic conditions that 
contribute to flooding, and hurricane development a re expected to become more prevalent in Haiti  (FS pg  40 and 
Section 3.3). Furthermore, it is anticipated that a modest increase in the frequency of hurricanes and tropical storms 
affecting Haiti will be experienced in the future30.  While detailed data on historical flood impacts and trends is not


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
  
31 Campbell JD, MA Taylor, TS Stephenson, RA Watson & FS Whyte. 2011: Future climate of the Caribbean from a regional climate mo del. 
Int. J. Climatol . 31: 1866 –1878.  
32 Haiti. First National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  
 
34 This terminology pertains to the theoretical return period for an event, which is the inverse of the average frequency of occ urrence. For 
example, a 100 -year event has a 1% chance of occurring while a 20 -year event has a 5% chance of oc curring.  
35 Minear JT & Water Science International LLC. No date. Summary Report of Hydrodynamic Model Results: Assessment of Past and 
Future Flood Potential, Trois -Rivieres Watershed, Haiti.  available for the TR watershed alone,  and no formal record and quantification of damages could be found for this 
watershed, flooding is known, anecdotally, to have considerable impacts on communities. The best pro xy that is 
available, given the sparse historic data available for Haiti, is to consider historical satellite  data observations as 
well the modelled impacts for different flooding return periods under the baseline scenario (without climate change). 
Under a 100 -year flooding scenario, 1,342 households in the target watershed are at risk of flooding. Under 20 -
year flooding scenario, 463 hous eholds in the target watershed are at risk of flooding.   
 
Temperature  
21. The annual mean daytime temperatures for the Caribbean region show an increase of 0.19ºC per decade during 
the period 1961 –201031. This is smaller than the increase in mean night -time temperatures of 0.28ºC per decade 
during the same period, with the resultant change being a decrease in the mean annual daily temperature range.   
Under the RCP4.5 scenario, maximum increases in temperature of 1,02°C and 1,87°C are expected for 2 025 and 
2055, respectively, and maximum increases of 1,18°C for 2025 and 2,57°C are expected for 2055 under the 
RCP8.5 scenario32. Additionally, an analysis of temperature trends for Haiti for the period 1901 –2013 reveals that 
minimum temperatures increase d at a slightly higher  rate (approximately 0.12ºC per decade) than maximum 
temperatures (approximately 0.10ºC per decade), which is consistent with the decrease in daily temperature range 
observed in the Caribbean region. Under the RCP8.5 scenario for the middle and end of century time periods, daily 
maximum temperatures are projected to increase by 1.5 °C and 3.3 °C, respectively. Furthermore, under this 
scenario, the temperature profile will shift towards warmer temperatures, and the extreme warm events wil l become 
more extreme, with current extreme temperatures likely to become the new normal  (See FS Section 3.1) .  
 
22. Reliable satellite observations  (Reynolds et al. 2002)  also demonstrate a trend towards increased sea surface 
temperature (SST) with the ocean surrounding Haiti warming significantly . The observed trend in SST averaged 
over 75°W –72°W, 17°N –21°N was 0.17°C per decade, for a total warming of 0.70°C over the period 1982 –2021.   
 
Rainfall  
23. Haiti’s First National Communication to the United Nations Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) also reports 
that, under the RCP8.5 scenario, the period 2030 –2040 is expected to be up to 6% drier in Haiti, the period 2050 –
2060 up to 17% drier, and the end -of-century time period expected to be 20% drier. Under the RCP4.5 and 6.0 
scenarios, Haiti is expected to be between 9 and 12% drier, respectively, for the end -of-century time period.33 
 
24. Historical satellite observat ions from 1981 to the present  have  demonstrated an increase in annual rainfall  in the 
TR region  by 152mm (15%),  a trend that is statistica lly significant at the 90% confidence level which is at odds with 
these future projections . A projected shift in the preci pitation character  is also  observed, with a projected decrease 
in frequency of lowrainfall amounts (approximately 10 –20 mm per day), and  a noted increase in the occurrence of 
more extreme rainfall events (+30 mm per day) of approximately 10 –17% indicating  that daily rainfall extremes are 
becoming more extreme  (See FS  Section 2.4.2) .  
 
Hydrological changes  
25. Compared with baseline (1991 –2010) flood flow simulations, future projections using four climate models (CCSM4, 
CMCC, CNRM, HadGEM4) indicate a decrease in mid -century (2041 –2060) daily maximum flood flow followed by 
a significant increase in daily maximum flood flow in the late -century (2081 –2100). These projections were analysed 
under the RCP8.5 scenario. The future projections of 100 -year flow events and 20 -year flow events34 mimic the 
projected changes for daily maximum flow , also exhibiting a mid -century decrease and late -century increase. 
Similar changes in flood extent are also expected, with river discharge, depth and flood extent projections also 
indicating decreasing trends through the mid -century, before increasing in t he late century. The exception to this is 
the forecasted maximum for 20 -year flows, where projections indicate an increase from the historical baseline into 
the mid - and late -century35. Furthermore, for the 100 -year flow event, the following changes in the  maximum extent 
of flooding in the TR watershed are projected: i) a decrease of 17% from hist100 to mid100; and ii) an increase by 
12% from mid100 to late100. For the 20 -year flow event, the maximum extent of flooding is projected to: i) increase


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
  
36 Hist100, mid100 and late100 are the historical, mid -century and  late-century 100 -year ensemble maximum flow, respectively. Hist20, 
mid20 and late20 are the historical, mid -century and late -century 20 -year ensemble maximum flow, respectively.  
37 Minear JT & Water Science International LLC. No date. Summary Report of Hyd rodynamic Model Results: Assessment of Past and 
Future Flood Potential, Trois -Rivieres Watershed, Haiti.  
38 Ibid. 
39 Further details on the methodology for the hydrological modelling undertaken in support of the proposed project are included in Sections 
2.4 and 3.4 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
40 World Bank. 2017. Charcoal in Haiti. A National Assessment of Charcoal Production and Consumption Trends. World Bank, Washing ton. 
Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/697221548446232632/pdf/134058 -CharcoalHaitiWeb.pdf .  
41 OXFAM, Welt Hunger Life, NATHAT, and Cap -Haitien.  
42 GBV Sub -Sector Nigeria. 2017. Briefing Note: Integrating Gender in Cholera Prevention and Control Interventions in North East Nigeria . 
Available at: https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/briefing_note -gender_in_cholera_response.pdf . Accessed 15/06/2020.  by 7% fro m hist20 to mid20; and ii) increase by 7% from mid20 to late2036,37. Further details on projected 
hydrological changes expected in Haiti and the TR watershed, in particular, are presented in Section 3 .5 of Annex 
2: Feasibility Study.  
 
26.  Given the overall st eepness of the gradient of the landscape in the TR watershed, even small flows are enough to 
mobilise large volumes of sediment. However, in the flood flow model results summarised above, the bed and 
banks of the river are assumed to be immobile. The above  results are therefore likely to be conservative, as a small 
volume of sediment added from tributaries to the mainstream river would be sufficient to reduce local channel 
capacities and subsequently increase flood risk38,39. 
 
Climate change impacts and vulnerability   
27. The impacts of climate change -induced flooding in the TR watershed are exacerbated by the negative feedback 
loop of increasingly intense soil erosion that has been created in the watershed. C urrent agricultural practices, such 
as the increas ing prevalence of annual crop cultivation, leave the soil bare and exposed to extreme weather for 
most of the year. During intense rainfall and storm events that cause flooding, the limited ground cover leads to 
increased surface runoff and consequently ex acerbates soil erosion in the watershed.  This erosion is compounded 
by extensive deforestation in the mountainous parts of the watershed, primarily linked to charcoal production. The 
demand for charcoal in Haiti is high and is unlikely to decrease in the f oreseeable future, with many farmers in the 
TR watershed resorting to charcoal production as an alternative livelihood in response to low yields, crop failure or 
unexpected expenses (particularly in extremely wet or dry years).  Given this high demand, charcoal production 
will likely continue to drive deforestation in the absence of alternative livelihood options. Most of the native forests 
on communal lands have already  been harvested, with minimal effort towards reforestation activities40. Thes e 
practices have radically changed the TR watershed’s natural landscape, where the large -scale removal of tree 
cover has decreased infiltration capacity of the soil and contributed to increased surface runoff during heavy rainfall 
events. This, in turn, ha s considerably increased flood frequency and intensity in the TR watershed, with flooding 
washing away fertile soils and causing sedimentation of riverbeds and blocking drainage infrastructure. Given the 
near-complete absence of embankments and levees in t he watershed, this cycle then intensifies the next round of 
flooding, leading to the destruction of crops, farmland, and agricultural infrastructure, as well as the loss of livestock 
and human lives41. Vulnerable communities that depend on agriculture for their livelihoods will be particularly 
affected by the increased flooding, exacerbating the advers e economic, environmental and social conditions 
already being experienced in the area.  
 
28. While frequent and intense flooding, soil erosion and sedimentation o f rivers have considerable adverse impacts 
on the landscape and agriculture in the TR watershed, they also have severe consequences for water resources 
and human health. The erosion of riverbanks and sedimentation build -up in rivers caused by flooding decr eases 
water quality in the watershed considerably, with multiple impacts on freshwater and marine biodiversity as well as 
increasing the risk of waterborne diseases  in surrounding communities. Women and girls are particularly at risk as 
their household dut ies — including cooking and cleaning — involve the highest level of exposure to potentially 
contaminated food and water42. The adverse health risks of diarrheal diseases are exacerbated by flooding, which 
further extends the spread of water pollutants, dis rupts water supply and increases the potential of exposure to 
contaminated water. Flooding also causes blockages in drainage channels with sediment and debris which results 
in flood waters lingering for longer periods of time. This exacerbates the risk of increased spread of water - and 
vector -borne diseases. The TR watershed is particularly vulnerable to such diseases given the area’s exposure to 
flooding. For example, approximately 19,100 diarrhoea cases were reported in the watershed in 2018, accounting 
for approximately 35% of all cases of diarrhoea in the country at that time.  
 
29. Without urgent intervention in the management of land and water resources, the vulnerable population of the TR 
region in Haiti will continue to become increasingly at risk to flo oding and the associated negative impacts on the 
environment and the population’s livelihoods. An integrated approach to flood management under future climate


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
  
43 A comprehensive list of baseline projects, programmes and initiatives as well as d etails of their focus and alignment with the proposed 
project is presented in Section 6 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
44 Supporting documentation and project monitoring reports are available at: https: //www.iadb.org/en/project/HA -L1097 . change conditions is consequently required to adequately address the diverse impacts of climate c hange -induced 
flooding on the TR watershed in Haiti. An integrated approach to flood management must take into account the 
environmental vulnerability with in the region and the role that ecosystems, thr ough sustainable  land mangement 
can play as an integral adaptation solution  that allows for community appropriation and will result in  enhancing the  
capacity of the watershed to manage flood conditions and resotre the infiltration capacity of the watershed.   
 
Baseline pr ojects, programmes and initiatives  
30. Considerable baseline investments are being made through public expenditure and donor -funded initiatives to 
increase the resilience of Haiti’s watersheds to climate change impacts, particularly flooding. Lessons learned a nd 
best practices from these investments ,  have been incorporated into the design of the proposed project to replicate 
successful adaptation and flood management techniques and ensure that there is complementarity between the 
project and existing actions. The proposed project interventions are designed to complement several of the most 
relevant baseline investments. An analysis of each of these projects was conducted to ensure that the proposed 
project will not duplicate or adversely affect these ongoing in itiatives  (refer to Section 6 in Annex 2 for a full list) . 
Instead, GCF resources will be used to build on and complement existing efforts to achieve maximum adaptation 
impact in the TR watershed. The most relevant baseline investments, including a descrip tion of how the proposed 
project will complement these investments, are presented below43.   
 
31. USAID has committed to providing US$40 million for the Haiti Reforestation Project (2018 –2022)  to reduce the 
threat of deforestation and increase tree cover in and around targeted areas in the northern parts of the country. 
The USAID project is aligned with the mutual goals of the GoH and USAID of restoring the provision of ecosystem 
goods and serv ices in targeted forest areas in Haiti to enhance food security of surrounding communities. Specific 
interventions under the USAID project include: i) addressing the threat of deforestation in Haiti through reducing 
charcoal use by 80,000 metric tonnes in five priority watersheds; ii) increasing tree cover in selected areas, with 
the aim of planting a total of 5 million trees by project closure; iii) developing a total of 15,000 hectares under 
agroforestry systems to improve the resilience of those people e mployed in key economic sectors (e.g. agriculture) 
to economic shocks caused by climate and non -climate hazards; and iv) improving environmental governance and 
coordination in the country. The proposed GCF project will build on this ongoing baseline initia tive by promoting an 
integrated approach to land and water resources management in the TR watershed and demonstrating the benefits 
of ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) solutions such as land rehabilitation and agroforestry as effective flood 
management stra tegies. By promoting the adoption of these interventions as appropriate adaptation measures not 
only for reducing the impacts of climate change -induced flooding, but for contributing to food security and health in 
vulnerable Haitian communities, the projec t will catalyse the uptake of these measures across the TR region and 
throughout the country. The project proposal has also taken into account the project’s evaluation into its design by 
ensuring that project interventions are folded into national and subn ational government plans to ensure not only 
local but also national appropriation and long term sustainability. The project will also look to incorporate community 
best practices in reforestation and agroforestry to enhance a sense of local ownership in th e techniques that will 
be promoted by the project to reduce the perception of a top down approach in project solutions.  
 
32. The Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (2016 –2021) is a US$42 million programme financed by the Inter -
American Development Bank (I DB). The overarching objective of the programme is to improve climate -resilient 
watershed management by the agricultural sector in Haiti’s Artibonite Department44. Specific interventions under 
the project include: i) increasing climate resilience and disas ter risk management in the agricultural sector; ii) 
improving water and sediment conservation in selected gullies of priority watersheds; iii) reducing the risk of rural 
economic losses as a result of flooding in targeted watersheds; and iv) protecting the  institutional knowledge 
generated and housed within the country’s Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine, which is a central 
institution responsible for innovation and capacity development in Haiti’s agricultural sector as well as in natural 
resource s management and rural engineering. These interventions provide valuable lessons on climate -resilient, 
sustainable land management approaches for the agricultural sector, focusing primarily on implementing EbA 
approaches for disaster risk reduction. Howeve r, the interventions do not form part of an integrated and adaptive 
framework that can be used to inform climate -responsive planning at the watershed level. The proposed GCF 
project will address this gap by implementing an integrated approach to managing f looding in Haiti’s TR watershed. 
Such an approach comprises: i) enhancing climate -resilient flood management in the watershed will be enhanced 
by establishing agroforestry systems and restoring degraded landscapes at priority intervention sites; ii) 
streng thening the institutional and technical capacity of decision -makers involved in agriculture at national and local 
levels to facilitate the uptake of productive land -use management techniques; iii)  implementing a social protection 
system to support climate -vulnerable households affected by chronic food insecurity to recover their nutritional and


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
  
45 MARNDR is the French acronym for this ministry.  This acronym has been included at all mentions of the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 
Resources and Rural Development throughout this Funding Proposal.  
46 Documentation on project  including monitoring reports i s available at https://www.iadb.org/en/project/HA -G1038 .  financial autonomy immediately after being impacted by climate change -related events such as flooding; and iv) 
establishing the required governance framework for in tegrated water resources management (IWRM) in Haiti to 
support the climate -resilient land management systems and facilitate sustainable use and management of water 
resources over the long term.  
 
33. The World Bank -funded Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) (2018 –2024)  is a US$26 million project 
that focuses on climate -resilient agriculture and landscape management in Haiti. This project has two main 
objectives, namely to: i) improve the adoption of climate -resilient agricultural and  landscape management practices 
in selected sub -catchments in the country; and ii) enable the GoH to respond promptly and effectively to extreme 
climate events such as floods, hurricanes and tropical storms. These objectives will be achieved through four 
interlinked components, focusing on: i) strengthening the institutional and organisational capacity for sustainable, 
climate -resilient agricultural and land -use management interventions at the landscape level; ii) strengthening 
climate -resilient agricultura l production and practices in the project areas; iii) project coordination and undertaking 
regular monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project interventions; and iv) establishing contingency processes and 
enhancing emergency responses. The proposed GCF proj ect will complement and build on these four components 
by strengthening the capacity of farmers and community members in the TR watershed to implement climate -
resilient agricultural and land -use practices. This will include: i) promoting a shift from unsus tainable charcoal 
production to agroforestry systems as an alternative livelihood strategy; ii) improving the knowledge of these 
targeted user groups for implementing an integrated approach to land and water resources management; and iii) 
demonstrating the  considerable food security (e.g. reduced agricultural losses as a result of implementing climate -
resilient farming techniques) and health benefits (e.g. reduced spread of water - and vector -borne diseases because 
of the improved water quality resulting fro m reduced erosion and river sedimentation) associated with adopting 
such an integrated approach.     
 
34. The Inter -American Development Bank (IDB), Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), 
International Fund For Agricultural Development (IFAD) an d the GoH (through the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 
Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR45) in the country) have partnered to design and implement Haiti’s 
Technological Innovation for Agriculture and Agroforestry Program (PITAG) (2018 –2022) , valued at US$77 
million46. This programme focuses on enhancing small agricultural producers’ revenues and food security in the 
country. Interventions under the programme aim to increase  on-farm productivity and improve the sustainable use 
of natural resources by implementing climate -resilient agricultural and agroforestry technologies that have long -
term livelihood benefits. The proposed GCF project will build on this programme by implementing an integrated, 
climate -resilient approach to land a nd water resources management in Haiti. Specifically, agroforestry and 
reforestation activities under the PITAG programme will be scaled up and replicated at different sites under the 
proposed project to maximise the restoration of degraded ecosystems in t he country and serve as an adaptation 
response to climate change -induced flooding in the TR watershed. Results from the PITAG programme’s terminal 
evaluation, particularly those pertaining to the implementation of agroforestry on steep slopes, combined wit h 
lessons generated under the programme, will be used to inform the implementation of agroforestry systems under 
the proposed project. Lessons learned and best practices for implementing sustainable land management in Haiti 
generated under the PITAG progra mme will be used to inform the implementation of the adaptation interventions 
under the proposed GCF project to maximise the adaptation impact of these interventions and demonstrate the 
associated benefits to a wider beneficiary group. This will be extreme ly valuable for ensuring that these systems 
deliver maximum adaptation benefits to the communities living adjacent to project sites. The implementation of EbA 
interventions under the proposed project will be complemented by strengthening the capacity of na tional and local 
decision -makers, as well as local communities, involved in agricultural production in the TR watershed to implement 
productive climate -resilient land management practices. These capacity -building activities will be supported by the 
establi shment of a finance mechanism for farmers in the TR watershed. Given that access to finance for climate -
resilient agricultural inputs was not a focus of the PITAG programme, this intervention will bridge the gap of access 
to finance for these inputs and co ntribute to further safeguarding vulnerable people involved in agriculture against 
the impacts of climate change, particularly flooding. As a result of these interventions, decision -makers at the 
national and local levels will be better equipped to manage flood impacts under future conditions of climate change. 
Furthermore, local community members who depend on agriculture for their livelihoods will have enhanced 
technical and institutional capacity to implement productive land -use practices that are sustai nable over the long 
term.  
 
35. The GCF Readiness Project Integrating climate change risks into national development planning processes in Haiti 
(NAP)  aims to strengthen institutional and technical capacities for the iterative development of a National


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
  
47 The Water Act acts as regulatory policy towards water integrated management that may take the form of a National Regulatory D ecree.  
48 GermanWatch, Global Climate Risk Index 2016. Available at: https://germanwatch.org/fr/download/13503.pdf . 
49 Further details on the baseline and projected chang es in temperature, rainfall and flood profiles are presented in Section B.1 of this 
Funding Proposal.  Adaptation Plan (NAP) to effectively integrate climate change adaptation (CCA) into national and sub -national 
coordination, planning and budgeting processes. The project intends to achieve this objective through three 
outputs, namely:  i) strengthening coor dination mechanisms for multi -sectoral adaptation planning and 
implementation at different levels; ii) ensuring the NAP is compiled with a strong evidence base for adaptation 
planning and subsequently integrating priorities into the Strategic Development P lan (PSDH) and Disaster Risk 
Reduction Plan and Strategy (PNGRD); and iii) establishing a financing framework for CCA in the medium - to long -
term.  The proposed GCF project complement this initiative by enhancing institutional capacity  for sustainable lan d 
management, as well as strengthening institutional capacity for the implementation of the Water Act47 and 
developing an  integrated, climate -resilient water management governance framework.  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
Problem statement  
36. Haiti is already experiencing the impacts of extreme climate events, which contribute to its ranking as the most 
vulnerable country in the world to climate change, according to the 2016 Global Climate Risk Index48. Climate 
change is causing an increase in temperatures and creating more favourable conditions for increased frequency 
and intensity of hurricanes in the Caribbean region. Moreover, climate change is resulting in a decrease in total 
annual rainfall in Haiti, compounded by a shortening of the wet season and a resulting increase in concentration 
and intensity. These changing climatic conditions are contributing to an increase in the frequency  and intensity of 
flooding in the country, particularly in the Trois -Rivières (TR) watershed . The impacts of this climate change -
induced flooding are exacerbated in the watershed by the steep topography, degraded landscapes caused by 
unsustainable agricult ural practices and deforestation because of large -scale tree clearing for charcoal production. 
During heavy rainfall and flood events, these degraded areas experience increased surface runoff, compounded 
by decreased infiltration capacity of the soil becau se of reduced vegetation cover. These factors, combined with 
the steep topography of the TR watershed and near -complete absence of embankments along the river, increase 
the flow of water into the low -lying plains, increasing the flood risk  of the populatio n living near ther river’s edge . 
Furthermore, increased water flow intensifies erosion of the watershed and results in sediment deposits on the 
riverbed and drainage infrastructure, further exacerbating the impacts of flooding. The resultant pollution of 
freshwater resources also increases the risk of water - and vector -borne diseases (e.g. cholera) spreading 
throughout local communities. Without the implementation of adaptation measures in the TR watershed, these 
impacts of flooding on land and water resour ces, as well as the health and livelihoods of the population living in the 
watershed, will continue to become increasingly severe as rainfall patterns shift to become more concentrated and 
intense under future climate change conditions49.  
  
Preferred adap tation solution  
37. For Haiti to adapt to the impacts of climate change -induced flooding on the TR watershed, it is necessary to 
implement an integrated approach to flood management to adequately address the diverse impacts of climate 
change -induced flooding on the watershed and population living within it. This approach will be implemented under 
the project and in particular focus on: i) improving land -use planning and management at national and local levels; 
ii) implementing Ecosystem -based Adaptation (EbA) solutions in the form of restoration and agroforestry activities 
to address soil erosion caused by flooding, reduce health risks associated with water - and vector -borne diseases, 
and provide alternative climate -resilient livelihood options to target communities; and iii) e nhancing the capacity of 
national - and local -level actors responsible for decision -making around the use of water resources to implement 
climate -resilient integrated water resources management (IWRM) in Haiti. This approach is required to shift 
decision -making on flood management away from the existing uncoordinated and compartmentalised approach, 
towards an integrated approach that is underpinned by the uptake and implementation of climate -resilient land -use 
practices, strong governance, as well as the sus tainable use and management of land and water resources.  
 
38. Specifically, sustainable flood mitigation solutions are required to reduce the peak surface runoff and flooding extent 
in the watershed, while simultaneously securing the livelihoods of vulnerable communities. Solutions need to take 
into account long term s sustainability and local capacity for their maintenance as well as their own capacity to 
deliver on flooding benefits (see Annex 2 Section 4). Within the context of the TR watershed, Ecosystem -based 
Adaptation (EbA) solutions — in the form of reforestati on and agroforestry activities — are the preferred option 
because of their cost -effectiveness, flood -reduction potential, and provision of valuable ecosystem goods and 
services to climate -vulnerable communities living in the watershed. Hydrological and eco nomic studies 
commissioned by UNDP to support the development of the project indicate that actions related to forest


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
  
50 Although the establishment of a Water Act has been identified as one of the Ministry of Environment's priorities in its 2019 -2022 Triennial 
Plan.  
51 Or ‘cadastre’, an official register of the ownership, extent, and value of real property in a given area, used as a basis of taxa tion. management including the implementing agroforestry systems and forest r ehabilitation will reduce the impacts of 
climate change -induced floo ding through a 40% reduction in peak runoff  in the watershed .   
 
39. The establishment of agroforestry systems will also provide an alternative livelihood option to unsustainable 
charcoal production, further contributing to environmental sustainability in the TR watershed. These interventions 
should be supported by the creation of an enabling environment in Haiti for the adoption of sustainable, climate -
resilient land -use practices  with multiple benefits including food and water security . The technical and institutional 
capacity of national - and local -level representatives involved in agriculture, in particular, should be enhanced for 
productive climate -resilient land management. This capacity -building should be supported by the establish ment of 
a governance framework that promotes integrated water resources management (IWRM) to facilitate a shift towards 
the sustainable use and management of water resources over the long term.  
Barriers to the adaptation solution  
40. Several barriers  to the p referred adaptation solution have been identified for Haiti. These are summarised below 
and explained in detail in Section 8 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study. The barriers fall  broadly in the themes of technical 
and institutional barriers (Barriers 1, 2 and 3 ), financial barriers (Barrier 4) and social/psychological barriers 
(Barriers 5 and 6).  
 
Barrier 1. Limited technologies, resources and knowledge for climate -resilient flood management  
41. Communities in Haiti, particularly farmers, are not informed about curr ent and projected climate change impacts, 
particularly flooding, on agricultural production, other land -use practices and water resources. There is also limited 
technical knowledge amongst communities on how to adapt to these changes and increase climate r esilience, 
particularly  using EbA solutions. The limited understanding of communities and farmers of the impacts of climate 
change and how to address them (e.g. through adopting climate -resilient agricultural practices) increases their 
vulnerability over t he long term. This vulnerability is compounded by existing limitations in practical and technical 
experience to establish and manage local, financially sustainable small -scale tree propagation operations that 
serve reforestation and agroforestry needs. Com munity members generally prefer to migrate to urban areas or 
engage in alternative rural occupations, as these options are perceived to offer more financial stability than tree 
propagation operations and agroforestry.  
 
Barrier 2. Absence of integrated, cl imate -sensitive water and land management policy and governance frameworks  
42. Currently, there are no integrated, climate -sensitive water or sustainable land management policies and governance 
frameworks in Haiti. The country lacks overarching water management legislation50, a formal cadaster51, a standard 
practice for land tenure arrangements, or relevant strategies to promote sustainable landscape management. 
Absence of a regulatory framework and enforcement of sanctions and property rights also rei nforces an open -
access interpretation of community assets, which is compounded by social barriers (see Barriers 5 and 6) such as 
the lack of private incentives for reforestation. In terms of governance, there are no administrative structures at the 
catchme nt or sub -catchment levels, and there are currently no local water resources user associations or other 
community committees that have the skill and capacity for IWRM. This lack of vertical coordination and oversight 
is evident in line ministries providing  weak or minimal support to local communities, which leads to limited support 
for farmer associations to implement changes in conservation or to manage water resources. Constraints in these 
policy and governance frameworks — as well as the limited integrat ion of lessons learned — has produced three 
major concerns, namely: i) existing legal instruments that do not consider the projected threats from climate change; 
ii) lack of land use planning implementation and enforcement has led to deforestation and degr adation; and iii) a 
lack of coordination in planning, implementation and accountability caused by undefined roles and responsibilities 
of institutions dealing with water management  
 
Barrier 3. Limited coordination and capacity to implement/execute   
43. Implem enting/executing entities, government and non -governmental stakeholders in Haiti have limited opportunity 
and incentive to coordinate efforts to address climate risks. This leads to: i) projects by different organisations often 
being designed independently , without consideration of how they affect each other or address the broader 
resilience of the country; and ii) limited coordination among donors or between GoH ministries during project 
implementation. Local authorities and stakeholders at the forefront o f managing climate change impacts are also 
not equipped and trained to incorporate climate change considerations into decision -making or to design and 
implement climate -resilient water management. This is evident in the lack of catchment and sub -catchment 
administration structures and capacity to oversee participatory, equitable and adaptation -focused decision -making 
on water and land use, which further amplifies households prioritising private gains over catchment -wide benefits.


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
  
52 In this context, “limited bridging of household reserves” refers to the absence of emergency savings or other financial sup port for farmers 
so that, if crops fail because of climate change impacts and/or other disasters, they would be able to support their liveliho ods immediately 
after these events until they are able to start generating their own income again.  
53 World Bank (2019). Agricultural Financing in Haiti:Diagnosis and Recommendations. Available at 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33178  
54 A discount rate is the interest rate used to determine the present value of future cash flows in a discounted cash flow analysis. This helps 
determine if the future cash flows from an investment will be worth more than the capital investment in the present. Within t his context, the 
high discount rate of households is as a result of their general financial insecuri ty, which is a barrier to applying for, and receiving, financial 
support (for example, in the form of bank loans).   
Barrier 4. Limited access to credit, savings and financial instruments or incentives among farmers  
44. There are financial barriers to farmers wanting to implement sustainable land management practices in Haiti. These 
include a lack of access to capital  to invest in start -up costs, maintenance materials and tools, as well as limited 
“bridging” household reserves to cope with crises52. Alternative sources of funding and credit53 are not available or 
are difficult to access, which leads to short planning horizons. These planning  horizons drive short -term relief 
activities, such as the production of charcoal at unsustainable rates to meet pressing short -term financial needs  
without recognizing its potential impact on valuable ecosystem that are providing flood management benefits .  
45. For agroforestry and climate -resilient agricultural practices to be sustainable, incentives for farmers to implement 
these systems are needed to enable farmers to overcome this short -termism and to allow time for these systems 
to produce returns. Alternati ve financial mechanisms  that are appropriate for the agroforestry and allow for long 
term continui ty (are sustainable)  and increased scale of action is also required to go beyond a pilot mentality to 
allow for transformative change.  These mechanisms must t ake into account community practices and risk analysis 
to address exising systemic barriers to provide much needed capital for the success of these systems.  
 
Barrier 5. Limited incentives for communities to change land management and farming practices or contribute to 
communal resilience building  
46. Limited understanding of climate change impacts compounds prevailing circumstances, — such as poverty — that 
emphasise the prevalence of household or individual short -term decision -making over long -term communal 
resilience and well -being. Households (which have a high discount rate54) make decisions in their own immediate 
interest, without necessarily considering the impact of those decisions on the sub -catchment and the long -term 
impacts on their own wel lbeing. Additionally, charcoal production is entrenched in communities as the major source 
of energy for cooking, having significant economic importance and few available alternatives to households. There 
is also no experience or incentive among water user s to consider sub -catchment scale water management in their 
household decision -making. Finally, the familiarity of established, unsustainable farming practices is a barrier to 
better alternatives as households are reluctant to change to new crops or practi ces without the development of 
local markets and social safety nets.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Barrier 6. Absence of inclusive and p articipatory community consultation mechanisms for climate change -induced flood 
management planning and decision -making  
47. The absence of participatory and inclusive planning, which is a fundamental principle of an integrated flood 
management approach for cl imate resilience, means that communities are not currently incentivised to take up 
adaptation interventions in Haiti. Underlying factors for this include technical and financial capacity constraints at 
the municipal level. These have historically limited t he ability of public officials to effectively engage with appropriate 
communities and stakeholders during decision -making on land and water resource management. Given the strong 
influence of social factors such as gender inequality on vulnerability to floo d impacts, it is necessary to promote 
inclusive decision -making processes to ensure buy -in and effectiveness in interventions. Past interventions have 
been criticised for failing to take gender and other considerations into account by focusing on general a gricultural 
incomes and outputs, access to which is shaped by prevailing systems of privilege.  
 
Project approach to overcoming the barriers to adaptation  
48. The project will overcome the abovementioned barriers to build the climate resilience of Haiti’s TR w atershed  by 
implementing a sustainable land and water management approach  in the TR watershed  as an adaptive measure  
to the impacts of  climate induced  flooding . These  will be implemented through community based governance and 
planning mechanisms  and will be  linked to tangible benefits to adresss immediate food insecurity while providing 
flood protection to those most vulnerable. Sustainable land management as implemented by the project will result 
in enhanced food and water security in the TR area hence creating the incentives to sustain sustainab le productive 
practices underpinning the ecosystem based interventions . The project ’s strong focus on communication, 
monitoring and capacity building will allow for these linkages to become evident to project benificiaries  hence 
creating a shift in their a pproach to unsustainable business as usual practices . Barriers to sustainability will be 
addressed by the project in linking sustainable land management to enhanced productive capacity and markets  as 
well as by mobilizing community based financing for continued investement.  More importantly project investemen ts


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 will create a practical evidence base for the communities  as well as the governance structures required to promote 
their continuity and upscale project actions  into more ambitious  adaptation measures . 
 
49. The project’s theory of change can be evidenced through its various interrelated Outputs. For example , Output 1 
will enhance the resilience in the TR watershed to the impacts of climate change -induced flooding through a 
combination of on -the-ground ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) interventions (agroforestry and reforestation 
activities) at strategic sites in communal sections within the target communes, while establishing the local 
governance structures required to implement and manage climate -resilient land -use practices, and building the 
capacity of community groups for climate -responsive planning . Doing so wil l not only reduce climate change -
induced flooding in the TR watershed but also address the problem of unsustainable charcoal production through 
that is exacerbating degradation pressures in the watershed  while aggravating flooding vulnerability to adjacent  
communities . This will be done through the identification of species that are focused on addressing community 
needs such as sustainable charcoal (through species that allow for sustainable charcoal through correct pruning 
measures) as well as food and liv elihood security (fruit species). Output 2 will in turn further support the EbA 
Interventions through  sustainable  land management  in agricultural systems while creating a social safety net that 
encourages agricultural development  and desensitizes  the need for unsustainable charcoal production with in the 
ecosystem  that in turn reduces its protective cover to manage flooding . It will also develop the financial mechanism 
through credit associations to ensure that these investments can be maint ained and replicated even beyond the 
project’s implementation  scope. Finally, Output 3 will ensure the sustainability of these measures by creat ing the 
local (catchment and sub -catchment ) and national structural capacities for Integrated Water Management in the 
form of improved land use management for water security  and management  while linking improved water 
management to public health outcomes .  
 
50. In this sense, b arrier 1 will be addressed by investing directly in implementing an integrated approach to climate -
resilient flood management in Haiti. This approach will involve: i) strengthening governance for and national - and 
local-level decision -makers’ and communiti es’ capacity to implement Integrated Land Management (ILM) and 
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) in Haiti, using a participatory approach; ii) restoring 7,700 ha of 
degraded forest and implementing 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems in the waters hed to reduce the impacts of 
climate change -induced flooding on ecosystems and communities; and iii) implementing a social protection system, 
coupled with enhanced technical capacity and access to finance of national and local representatives to facilitate  
the adoption of climate -resilient sustainable land -use practices and livelihoods.   
 
51. Under the climate -resilient Integrated Land and Water Resources Management (ILWRM) approach proposed by 
the project, community groups (including farmer and women’s associ ations) will be encouraged to participate in the 
development of  community land -use plans for each of the 33 communal sections within the seven target communes 
in the TR watershed. The development and implementation of these community land -use plans will b e supported 
by the establishment of the necessary national governance framework for climate -resilient IWRM. This will involve 
strengthening national capacities for the implementation of the Water Act and developing an inclusive and equitable 
water manageme nt governance framework for the TR catchment, namely the Catchment Integrated Water 
Resources Management Committee (CIWRMC ). Furthermore, lessons generated through the implementation of 
all project interventions will be shared through the relevant committe es and associations — at the catchment and 
sub-catchment levels — to inform adaptative management of these interventions under future climate change 
conditions. Combined, these key activities will overcome Barriers 2 and 3, with the participatory decision -making 
around land and water resources management contributing to addressing Barrier 6.  
 
52. Barrier 4 will be addressed through a combination of long - and short -term interventions to address the immediate 
impacts of a flood event in Haiti,  including food sec urity and health , as well as facilitate access to finance to support 
the uptake of climate change adaptation solutions in response to the projected increasing impacts of climate change 
in Haiti. Specifically, the technical capacity and access to finance of  national and local representatives involved in 
agriculture in the TR watershed will be enhanced to facilitate their adoption of climate -resilient sustainable land -
use practices and provide an alternative livelihood option to unsustainable charcoal product ion in the watershed. 
This will be supported by providing immediate financial relief to vulnerable households in the TR watershed to 
enable these households to sustain themselves immediately after a flooding event . These efforts will be 
underpinned by the Agricultural Village Savings and Credit Associations ( VSCA ) that will be created through the 
project to finance ongoing productive investments (by harnessing savings). The VSCA  will act as an appropriate 
financial mechanism for community farmers  to allow for the long term sustainability of the project’s approach  to 
sustainable land management.  
 
53. Barrier 5 will be addressed by creating incentives in the TR watershed for the adoption of sustainable land and 
water resources management techniques that are resilient to climate change -induced flooding. This will be


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 achieved under each element of the ILWRM approach proposed under the project by: i) demonstrating the wide 
variety of adaptation benefits and alternative livelihood options associated with the proposed EbA solutions such 
as reforestation and agroforestry (Out put 1); ii) optimising the agricultural value chain and increasing the knowledge 
of vulnerable communities of the benefits of implementing climate -resilient agricultural techniques ( Output 2 ); and 
iii) creating an enabling policy environment and strengthen ing governance in Haiti at the national and local levels 
for integrated, climate -resilient land and water resources management ( Output 3 ).  
 
 
Figure 1. Project  Theory of Change diagram.  
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
Fill in the  GCF results area  table below to map each project/programme outcome  identified in section B.2(a)  to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.   
Outcome  
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area 
(ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generati
on and 
access  
 MRA 2  
Low-
emission 
transport  
 MRA 3  
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food and 
water security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment   ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
  1. Enhanced 
resilience of 
ecosystems 
and reduced 
flood risk for 
communities 
in the Trois -
Rivières 
watershed  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
2. Improved 
livelihoods of 
beneficiaries 
from the 
sustainable 
management 
of critical 
water towers  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
3. Improved 
governance at 
national, 
catchment 
and sub -
catchment for 
climate -
resilient water 
management  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
If any co -benefits have been identif ied in section B .2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below  to map each co -benefit  to the 
corresponding category as defined  in the FP guidance note.  
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environment
al Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1: 
Enhanced 
carbon 
sequestration 
in catchment 
areas  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Co-benefit  2: 
Reduced 
incidence of 
water -borne 
disease  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 3: 
Community 
empowerment 
and ownership 
over critical 
water 
resources  ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
Project objective


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
  
55 entitled Project for improved food and nutrition security and access to social protection in the Trois Rivières watershed (also referr ed to as 
the “Pasan -Apros project”)  
56 “Water towers” refers to mountainous areas in Haiti where water for agricultural production and drinking is obtained.   
57 Restoration of arboreal land cover  will be achieved through both agroforestry and reforestation. By promoting agroforestry in areas closer 
to households , beneficiaries will be able to integrate tree cover into their plots and obtain financial benefits from it. In areas further f rom 
households (i.e. water towers) the agricultural compone nt of agroforestry will not be implemented , with  only trees be ing planted  in these 
areas . Reforestation will consist of reforesting the perimeters upstream of water points (using forest species present in the interv ention 
zone) and also planting forest spe cies in degraded mountainous slopes.  
58 Further details on the selected priority intervention sites are presented in Section10 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
59 Thompson, I.D. et al. 2011. “Forest Biodiversity and the Delivery of Ecosystem Goods and Services : Translating Science into Policy”, 
BioScience , 61 (12).  
60 It should be noted that the project will not promote additional animal husbandry or breeding, but will instead focus on ensur ing that 
existing livestock are managed sustainably using the principles  of silvopastoralism.  
61 FAO. 2015. Forestry: Agroforestry definition. Available at: http://www.fao.org/forestry/agroforestry/80338/en/  54. The proposed project will contribute to GCF’s paradigm shift objective of increased climate -resilient sustainable 
development by enhancing the resilience of Haiti’s Trois -Rivières (TR) watershed  to the impacts of climate change -
induced flooding. This shift will be achieved by implementing a transformative approach to the way in which the 
GoH addresses flood impacts. Specifically, direct investments from the GCF combined with co -financing from the  
Heifer International  Haiti-funded proposal55 will be used to: i) implement agroforestry systems and rehabilitate 
‘water towers’56 through reforestation57 of degraded landscapes at priority intervention sites58; ii) enhance technical 
and institutional capa city for productive climate -resilient land management at the national and local levels; and iii) 
establish the required governance framework for integrated water resources management (IWRM) to support the 
climate -resilient land management systems and facil itate sustainable use and management of water resources 
over the long term. The combined effect of project interventions will result in the adoption and implementation of a 
climate -resilient, integrated approach to flood management that can be readily scal ed up and replicated nationally 
and across the Caribbean region. Proposed project outputs and activities are described in detail below with 
summaries of the project activities presented in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal.  
 
Output 1. Ecosystem -based f lood management solutions implemented in 25,440 hectares of  the Trois -Rivières 
watershed  
 
55. At present, climate change -induced flooding is exacerbated by degraded landscapes and forests because of large -
scale tree clearing for agricultural and charcoal production. During heavy rainfall events and flooding, the limited 
surface cover combined with the near -complete absence of embankments along the river intensifies soil erosion 
and river sedimentation. Implementing agroforestry systems and rehabilitating degraded forests in the TR 
watershed will address these problems by significantly reducing peak runoff and flooding extent in the area. These 
flood -reduction benefits will be realised through increasing  vegetative cover in the watershed, which will attenuate 
flow by considerably reducing surface runoff and increasing the infiltration capacity of the soil. Reductions in water 
flow will reduce the risk of damage to public infrastructure and private property (e.g. homes and agricultural 
equipment), which will likely result in a decline in the observed annual damages and economic losses caused by 
flooding  in Haiti. Furthermore, the implementation of these EbA interventions will have numerous environmental 
and social benefits for vulnerable households living in the target communes in the TR watershed. Rehabilitating 
degraded forests and establishing agrofor estry systems will improve natural filtration of overland flows, removing 
water pollutants and, consequently, contribute towards avoiding sedimentation of key freshwater sources in the TR 
watershed. This will lead to improved water quality of these sources  which, in turn, will contribute to reducing the 
spread of water - and vector -borne diseases (e.g. cholera), therefore safeguarding the health of communities living 
near to the priority intervention sites. The EbA interventions will also increase the ecosys tem goods and services 
they provide (e.g. an improved quality and quantity of water supply, increased prevalence of agricultural pollinators 
and enhanced soil fertility59), which will contribute positively to improving these communities’ livelihoods.  
 
56. Further livelihood benefits will be realised through the implementation of agroforestry systems in the target 
communes, including: i) Agri silvicultural  systems — which are a combination of crops and trees, such as alley 
cropping; ii)  silvopastoral systems — which combine forestry and grazing of domesticated animals60; and iii) 
agrosilvopastoral systems that combine trees, crops and animals61. At present, most of the vulnerable communities 
living in the TR watershed depend on agriculture to sustain their livel ihoods, with an observed increase in 
unsustainable charcoal production in years where the impacts of climate change have had particularly severe 
effects on agricultural yields and other livelihood options. Under this project output, vulnerable communities will be 
encouraged to adopt alternative livelihood options (such as beekeeping and mushroom cultivation). It is feasible 
for these livelihood options to be implemented alongside or independently of agroforestry services to catalyse a 
shift away from unsust ainable charcoal production towards land use practices that will continue to provide long -
term benefits under future climate change conditions.


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
  
62 Aubert, La Pointe, Paulin Lacorne, Beaudin  (Port de Paix); Chansolme, Source Beauvoir (chansolme), Haut 
des Monstiques, Carreay Datty, La Plate (Bassing Bleu), Pendu, L’Acul, Savane Carre, Moulin, Ravine Gros -
Morne, Ri viere Blanche, Riviere Mancelle, Boucan Richard (Gros -Morne) , Platana (Marmelade), Riviere 
Laporte, Ravine Trompette, Joly, Piment, Ballon, Dubourgs, Margot, Beaudin (Pilate), Colline Gobert, Haut 
Martineau, Champagne, Bassin, Mapou, La Trouble, La Ville ( Plaissance)  57. The implementation of agroforestry systems and reforestation of arboreal land cover on degraded mountainous 
slopes to manage flooding in Haiti’s TR watershed will be supported under this project output by strengthening the 
technical and institutional capacity of community groups, including farmer and women’s associations, for climate -
resilient land -use planning. S pecifically, this will include developing community land -use plans for use within 33 
communal sections situated within the 7 target communes in the watershed. The development of these plans will   
facilitate the identification of climate change impacts, pa rticularly flooding, on the TR watershed and the design of 
appropriate actions for addressing these impacts. Such actions include the implementation of EbA interventions  
such  as flood reduction measures and the promotion of sustainable, climate -resilient land -use practices and 
techniques (e.g. agroforestry) to reduce the risk of increased land degradation under future climate change 
conditions. These plans will then be used to  inform training on climate -resilient land -use management that will be 
delivered by the Responsible Parties to communities and farmer and women’s associations in all seven communes. 
The training will focus on the practical application of climate -resilient land-use management and agricultural 
techniques and improving communities’ understanding of the linkages between land  use and hydrology of the TR 
watershed, particularly the implications of unsustainable land -use practices on the frequency and intensity of  
flooding in the watershed. The local and central authorities of the and MARNDR  will be fully involved in the 
development of the community land use plans and accompanying trainings. These ministries already have systems 
in place for sharing information and  organizational structures exist at the local level that will ensure the sustainability 
of these activities beyond the project lifetime. Exchange visits within the framework of other projects implemented 
by the and MARNDR  will also be carried out to ensure  information -sharing and coordination between the proposed 
project and ongoing national initiatives. Furthermore, lessons learned will be systematised under Output 2 of the 
project to be scaled up and replicated nationally and regionally.  
 
58. To support this  training, awareness -raising campaigns will be designed and implemented in each of the seven target 
communes in the watershed. These campaigns will focus on: i) increasing the knowledge of people living in the TR 
watershed on sustainable land -use practices  and promoting the uptake of these practices; ii) encouraging 
community members to participate in the development of community land -use plans; and iii) raising awareness 
among people living in the target communes on the impacts of climate change -induced fl ooding and effective 
adaptation and landscape management solutions for addressing these impacts. These capacity -building initiatives 
combined with the implementation of EbA interventions will contribute towards a shift in the TR watershed towards 
the adopt ion of sustainable land -use management techniques and practices that are resilient to climate change -
induced flooding.  
 
59. Project activities that will be implemented under Output 1 are summarised below. Further details on these activities, 
including on the associated sub -activities and deliverables, are presented in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal 
and Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.      
 
Activity 1.1. Strengthen the capacity of community groups, including farmer and women’s associations, for climate -
resilient land -use planning in seven target communes in the Trois -Rivières watershed  
60. Under this activity, 33 communal sections62 within the 7 target communes in the TR watershed (Port -de-Paix, 
Chansolme, Bassin Bleu, Plaisance, Pilate, Marmelade, Gros Morne) will be validate d through the following criteria 
vulnerability of the areas and populations, level of environmental degradati on (including forest cover), proximity of 
the areas to the river and potential impact of flooding and their agricultural potential.  Community members and 
farmer and women’s associations within these 33 communal sections will be trained  by the project’s Re sponsible 
Parties on climate -resilient land -use management  that will result in the development of 33 community land use 
plans that will guide on the ground interventions for community land use management .  
 
61. The 33 community land use plans  (Sub activity 1.1.1)  will be shaped through community engagement in a 
consu ltative process  and will focus on identifying the impacts of climate change, particularly flooding, on the TR 
watershed and designing appropriate actions for addressing these impacts. Such actions include the 
implementation of EbA solutions to reduce flood  risk in the watershed as well as the promotion of sustainable, 
climate -resilient land -use practices and techniques (e.g. agroforestry) to reduce the risk of increased land 
degradation under future climate change conditions. The 33 land use plans developed will in turn  the training that 
will be provided by Responsible Parties  that will be provided in each specific area  to the various land users  (sub 
activity 1.1.2).


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
  
63 The total forest area in the watershed is 278 km², representing 31% the total watershed area, and the total urban area is 125 .6 km², 
representing 14% of the total watershed area. Additionally, the total non -forest area (which will be targeted  for rehabilitation with 
agroforestry or reforestation under this project activity) is 493.4 km², representing 55% of the watershed.   
62.  Hence, f armers in the target areas will also receive training by the Responsible Parties on the development of 
sustainable agroforestry business models that will contribute to both improving livelihood security and enhancing 
the use of sustainable land -use practices in the TR watershed   (sub activity 1.1.2) . The focu ses of the trainings will 
be on:    
• the expected  impacts of climate change, particularly flooding, in Haiti and the associated consequences of 
these impacts on the population’s livelihoods;  
• linkages between land -use and hydrology of the TR watershed, particularly the implications of unsustainable 
land-use practices on the frequency and intensity of flooding in the watershed;  
• promoting sustainable, climate -resilient agricultural practices such as slope stabilisation, riparian protection, 
and contour line farming, as well as the importance of protecting f orest areas, as viable options for improving 
hydrological function of the watershed and reducing flood impacts;  
• the role of the community in sustainable charcoal production and reforestation, as a strategy for increasing 
climate resilience in the watershe d; and  
• practical aspects of agroforestry as a climate -resilient livelihood alternative.  
 
63. The above approach will  creat e buy-in from beneficiary groups for the sustainable implementation of climate -
resilient land -use practices such as agroforestry and securing commitment from beneficiary communities to 
maintain the adaptation interventions that will be implemented under Act ivity 1.2 during and after the project period.  
This approach will be enhanced by  capacity -building initiatives  and awareness -raising campaigns  (sub activity 
1.1.3)  that will be designed and implemented  throughout the project’s seven target communes  (going beyond just 
the 33 communal sections)  through city hall meetings and community radio broadcasts . These campaigns will focus 
on: i) increasing the knowledge of people living in  in and in direct proximity to the TR watershed on sustainable 
land-use p ractices and promoting the uptake of these practices; ii) encouraging community members to participate 
in the development of community land -use plans; and iii) raising awareness among people living in the target 
communes on the impacts of climate change -induced flooding and effective adaptation and landscape 
management solutions for addressing these impacts.  
 
Activity 1 .2. Implement ecosystem -based flood management solutions in the Trois -Rivières watershed  
64. This project activity will focus on reducing the impacts of climate change -induced flooding in the TR catchment and 
Port-de-Paix, specifically targeting degraded communal land that has been deforested in the past  and that has 
resulted in increased flooding risk  particularly for people living  near the  Trois -Rivières river (calculated  at an 
estimated 292,600 people) . An ecosystem based adaptation approach  (EBA)  will be taken by this activity through 
the implementation  of 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems and the rehabilitation of 7,700h a of forest areas  across 
targeted areas63 within the 33 communal sections  identified  and validated through Activity 1.1.  that will result in 
reducing the impacts of climate induced  flooding  by reducing peak runoff during extreme events.  
 
65. Hydrological and economic studies commissioned by UNDP to support the development of the project indicate that 
implementing 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems and rehabilitating 7,700 ha of forests in priori ty areas in the 
watershed will considerably reduce the impacts of climate change -induced flooding. Specifically, implementing 
these EbA interventions will result in a 40% reduction in peak runoff, with rehabilitation interventions, in particular, 
expected to reduce floodplain extents in the target areas by 20% and 26% under the 20 -year and 100 -year flood 
scenarios, respectively. The EbA interventions are projected to result in a more than 50% reduction in the number 
of households affected by 100 -year flood events (declining from 1,342 households at risk of flooding under the 
baseline scenario to 638 households with project interventions). Similarly, agroforestry and reforestation 
interventions under this project activity are expected to result in a 35% reduc tion in the number of households at 
risk to 20 -year flood events in the TR watershed. This is representative of a decline from 463 under the baseline 
scenario to 300 houses at the end of the century under a 20 -year flooding scenario. Further details on the  modelling, 
calculations and methodologies used to determine these flood reduction benefits are presented in Sections 4.2 of 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
 
66. Specifically u nder Activity 1.2, the establishment of 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems  (sub activity 1.2.1)  and the 
rehabilitation of 7,700  ha of forest  (sub activity 1.2.2)  will be implemented and ) will include establishing nurseries, 
planting seedlings (e.g. for fruit production and reforestation) and providing ongoing technical assistanc e to end 
users  including on the establishment and monitoring of nurseries, on the planning of seedlings, use of technical 
packages for agroforestry and monitoring of the agroforestry systems . To account for the growing times of many


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
  
64 These engagements will not be undertaken using a cash -for-work approach, but rather encourage targeted groups to particip ate in the 
establishment of agroforestry systems and enhance the uptake of these systems as viable alternatives to unsustainable land us es (e.g. 
unsustainable charcoal production).    agroforestry species, t he spaces between the agroforestry species will be filled with perennial food crops (e.g. 
plantains, sugar cane, cassava, pigeon peas and pineapple), in combination with annual crops (e.g. sweet potato, 
yams, and other annuals)  (Tables 3 and 4).  The imple mentation of agroforestry systems has a particularly high 
adaptation impact potential because of the provision of ecosystem goods and services beyond the target 
intervention areas (e.g. improved quality and quantity of water, more productive and stable soi ls, and crop 
pollination) combined with the creation of alternative livelihood options to unsustainable land uses (e.g. unregulated 
charcoal production , through the growing of species and shrubs that allow for regeneration through the use of 
correct prunin g practices ). 
 
67. All agroforestry activities will also involve extensive engagements64 — through workshops — with farmer and 
women’s associations to encourage a progressive and gender -responsive transition towards sustainable 
agroforestry businesses that are sustainable over the long term.  In addittion the project will look to collect local  and 
traditional best pracites to enhance local ownership and appropriation. This incudes the use of jadden lakowu  and 
ban manje practices as adapted to local conditions and cliamtes.  
 
68. The rehabilitation of water towers through reforestation (sub activity 1.2.2) will also be undertaken in a participatory 
way and include: i) community engagement; ii) the provision of ongoing technical assistance for reforestation 
activities; iii) the development of long -term sustainable management plans for reforested areas at the sub -
catchment level; and iv) encouraging the involvement of public institutions in the development and implementation 
of sustainable land management and reforestation strategies. Technical assistance and the development tof 
management plan will be p romoted through engagement workshops with community leaders, farmers and women’s 
associations (sub activity 1.2.3)  
 
Table 1. Perennial species suited for cultivation within the TR catchment.  
Perrennial species for the implementation of agroforestry systems in the TR catchment  
 Scientific name  Type of 
plant  
Food  
Shadow  
Fodder  
Fuel 
Medicinal  
Income  
Timber  
Hedge  
Erosion control  
Soil improver  
Native (N), Currently 
Grown (G), or Newly 
Introduced (I) in 
Haiti 
Fruit production  
Avocado  
(Avocatier)  Persea 
americana  Tree X     X     G 
Cocoa  
(Cacaoyer)  Theobroma 
cacao  Tree X  X X X X    X G 
Custard -apple  
(Cachiman)  Annona 
reticulata  Tree X    X X     G 
Coffee  
Caféier  Coffea arabica  Shrub  X     X     G 
Kassod tree  
(Cassia)  Senna siamea  Tree   X X X  X X X X G 
Jamaica cherry  
(Cerise)  Muntingia 
calabura  Tree X    X X    X N 
Grapefruit  
(Chadequier)  Citrus maxima  Shrub  X    X X     G 
Lemon  
(Citronier)  Citrus limon  Shrub  X    X X     G 
Coconut tree  
(Cocotier)   Tree X     X     G 
Soursop  
(Corossol)  Annona 
muricata  Tree X    X X X    N 
Breadfruit  
(Lamveritable (arbre à 
pain))  Artocarpus 
altilis  Tree X X X X X X    X G


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
  
65 Available at: http://www.worldagroforestry.org  Leucaena  
(Lisina)  Leucaena 
leucocephala  Shrub    X X   X  X X G 
Mango  
(Manguier)  Mangifera 
indica  Tree X     X     G 
Orange  
(Orange doux/sure)  Citrus sinensis  Shrub  X     X     G 
Forest  
American   
mahogany  
(Acajou)  Swietenia 
mahagoni  Tree   X   X X X X     N 
Mesquite  
(Bayawonn)  Prosopis 
juliflora  Shrub     X X X   X   X X G 
Moringa tree  
(Benzolive)  Moringa 
oleifera   Tree X   X X X   X   X X G 
Cedar  
(Cèdre)  Cedrella 
odorata  Tree       X X X X     N 
Oak 
(Chene)  Quercus  petra
ea Tree   X       X X     G 
Bitterwood  
(Frene)  Simaruba 
glauca  Tree     X X     N 
Guaiac  
(Gaiac)  Guaiacum 
officinalle  Tree  X   X X X    N 
West Indian Laurel  
(Laurier)  Ocotea 
leucoxylon  
 Tree      X X    G 
Hispaniolan  pine 
(Pin)  Pinus 
occidentalis  Tree  X  X  X X    G 
Ice-cream bean  
(Poix doux ou Sucrin)  Inga edulis  Shrub   X X X      X G 
Saman or Rain tree  
(Saman)  Albizia  saman  Tree  X X X X   X   X G 
 
Table 2. Examples of agroforestry systems with perennial  species presented above deployed in, and suited for, the TR catchment.  
Before perennial species reach full tree/shrub size, the spaces between them can be filled with perennial food crops (e.g. plantains, 
sugar cane, cassava, pigeon peas and pineapple), i n combination with annual crops (e.g. sweet potato, yams, and other annuals).  
Example 1  
Stage 
(year)  Species  Ecosystem goods and services65 
1 Ice-cream bean  • Ice-cream bean seeds germinate at a rapid rate.  
• As they contain nitrogen -fixing properties, ice -cream beans are planted in 
improved fallows.  
• Ice-cream bean litter is high in nitrogen, lignins and polyphenols, which 
resultantly improves soil quality. Although the litter decomposes slowly, it 
provides for long -term accumulation of organ ic nitrogen and serves as effective 
weed control.  
2 West Indian Laurels 
and/or Saman  trees  • West Indian Laurels and Saman  trees provide fodder for livestock and shade for 
coffee and cacao plantations.  
3 Cacao and Coffee  • Cacao and coffee beans are sold to generate an income.  
Example 2  
1 Moringa tree  
 • Moringa trees grow at a rapid rate.  
• Given their nutritional content and drought -resistance, moringa trees are an 
appropriate food source for ensuring food security.  
• Moringa trees are suited to environments which experience strong winds and 
droughts and resultantly provide soil erosion control.  
• The seed cake, which is a by -product of oil extraction, can be used as soil 
conditioner or fertiliser.  
• Moringa leaves are a good source of protein, Vitamins A, B and C and minerals 
such as calcium and iron. In addition, the leaves make a useful mulch.


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 2 Soursop  
 • Soursop is native to Haiti and is a source of food for humans.  
• While small and early -bearing, soursop trees are planted as intercrops between 
larger fruit trees (such as mango, avocado and santol) and later uprooted when 
the fruit tree requires more space.  
3 Mango or avocado  • Mangoes and avocados are sold to generate income.  
Example 3  
1 Bitterwood  • Bitterwood is native in Haiti.  
• The press cake produced from the milling operation is used as an organic 
fertiliser, particularly in coffee plantations and sugarcane, cotton and maize 
fields.  
• In addition to their rapid and linear growth, bitterwood trees are adaptable to 
shallow soils, making them a suitable species for agroforestry.  
2 Saman  and /or 
American  mahogany  • Saman  trees provide shade as well as a cool microclimate for plants that grow 
beneath their canopies.  
• The seed pods contain a sweet -flavoured pulp which is often consumed by 
children. The pulp can also be used in making fruit beverages.  
• Saman  tree pods have a crude protein content of 12 –18% (dry matter) with 41% 
digestibility for goats. The pods are also suitable fodder for cattle and horses.  
• The trees are suitable for sustainable non -destructive wood harvesting methods, 
such as pollarding.  
• Saman  wood produces 5,200 –5,600 kcal/kg of biomass fuel when burned and 
regrows rapidly after lopping or pollarding, making it a valuable source of high -
quality firewood and charcoal.  
• The Saman  tree is highly prized for carvings, furniture and panelling because of 
the light a nd dark pattern the sapwood and the heartwood create.  
3 Cacao and Coffee  • Cacao and coffee beans are sold to generate an income.  
Example 4   
1 Leucaena  • Leucaena leaves have a high nutritive value (high palatability, digestibility, intake 
and crude protein content) and is suitable fodder.   
• As it is in bloom almost throughout the year, Leucaena provides constant forage 
to honeybees.  
• It is a suitable firew ood species.  
• Leucaena has a forceful taproot system which helps break -up compacted subsoil 
layers, improving the penetration of moisture into the soil and subsequently 
decreasing surface runoff.  
• Leucaena is used as a shade tree on cocoa, coffee and tea pl antations. It often 
serves as a shelterbelt, providing shade and wind protection for a variety of 
crops, particularly during early growth.  
• The tree has high nitrogen -fixing potential (100 –300 kg N/ha a year) related to 
its abundant root nodulation.  
• Leuca ena was one of the first species to be used to produce green manure in 
alley-cropping systems. The leaves, even with moderate yields, contain enough 
nitrogen to sustain a maize crop.  
2 Cedar  
 • Cedar flowers are a source of nectar for honey production.  
• Cedar trees are suitable for firewood.  
• Cedar wood is lightweight and comparatively soft. It is suitable timber for 
furniture, decorative veneer, musical instruments, wooden novelties and doors.  
• As the trees have many low branches and a spreading crown, they provide shade 
and serve as windbreakers in courtyard gardens and cocoa and coffee 
plantations.  
• Cedar trees can be planted as ornamentals along roads and in parks. They are 
planted for this pur pose in, for example, peninsular Malaysia, Papua New Guinea 
and Singapore.  
• Cedar trees are highly susceptible to Hypsipyla  infestations and as a result, it is 
recommended that the trees are planted in mixed plantations, for example with 
Leucaena leucocephala . 
3 Cacao and Coffee  • Cacao and coffee beans are sold to generate an income.  
 
69. The implementation of  agroforestry activities will be primarily focused for farmers with agricultural plots that are 
suitable for farming and have a certain level of degradation.  The implementation of  reforestation activities (including 
EBA activities), will be  focused for  farmers/landowners with land that has an accelerated level of degradation and


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 is not suitable for agricultural practices (high slopes, inac cessibility). In both cases, the properties of the public 
domain of the State will also be considered.  
 
Priority intervention areas  for agroforestry and reforestation interventions  
70. The priority areas for the implementation of agroforestry and reforestation interventions in the TR watershed were 
defined using a multicriteria model that considered three variables. These were the slope of the terrain, distance 
from river channels and a maximum natural vegetation cover of 50%. Data from the ALOS DSM model — a global 
digital surface model with a 30 -metre spatial resolution pixel, generated from the Panchromatic Remote -Sensing 
Instrument for Stereo Mapping (PRISM) on the ALOS satellite — was used to run the multicriteria model. Once the 
polygons identified as priority areas were established, the multicriteria model was then built to classify the optimal 
land use of each polygon into two intervention options, agroforestry or reforestation. Th e key variables used to 
classify polygons were density of houses/buildings and proximity to rivers and/or water sources. Finally, an 
assessment of available agricultural land was undertaken, informed by engagements with farmers to determine the 
expected pa rticipation levels in the implementation of agroforestry systems under the project. Since not all 
agricultural land where agroforestry will be introduced is classed as a priority area for reforestation, the actual area 
reforested (through the introduction of both agroforestry and reforestation) under the project will be larger than the 
prioritised areas. This will extend beneficiary farmers within the TR catchment beyond target communities whose 
land falls within priority zones. Based on an assessment of al l these factors, 77 km2 of land will be prioritised for 
reforestation and a total of 177.4 km2 for agroforestry, considering participation rates. Of this 177.4 km2 for 
agroforestry, 75.2 km2 is classified as a priority area for agroforestry systems, and a further 102.2 km2 is classified 
as a non -priority area. Further details on the site selection process undertaken for the proposed project are 
presented in Section 10 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
71. The locations of priority sites for reforestation and agro forestry interventions are presented in Figure 2Figure 3a and 
3b below.


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Map showing the northern part of Haiti where the project  intervention sites are located.  Source:  NATHAT 2


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
  
 
 
A 
B
A 
Figure 3a and b.  Priority areas for reforestation (blue polygons) and priority areas for agroforestry (red polygons) 
interventions for various areas within the TR catchment, demonstrating the results from the classification method. a) 
Department Artibonite, Gros Morne Com mune, Boucan Richard Section; and b) Bassin Bleu Commune, Nord Ouest 
Department, La Plate Section.  Source: Project Feasibility Study (Multicriteria model analysis developed for the project through Google Earth)


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
  
66 Gad Manjé  translates to “a band of food”, hedgerows that comprise perennial crops (e.g. plantains and cassava), in combination with 
annual crops (e.g. sweet potato and yam). The hedgerows provide structural  integrity to stabilise soils to prevent erosion, whilst the crops 
provide a source of food security and income generation.  Output 2.   Climate -resilient agricultural practices, optimised value chains and social safety nets established to 
promote SLM and reduce degradation in the Trois -Rivières watershed  
 
72. Output 2  will be fully co -financed by Heifer. The key objectives of the Heifer support are to: i) strengthen food 
security governance; ii) encourage sustainable development in the agricultural sector; iii) safeg uard natural 
resources in the TR watershed; and iv) promote access to a sustainable social safety net that encourages local 
agricultural development. While most of the Heifer -funded interventions can be implemented in the absence of the 
proposed GCF projec t, its impact will be minimised without the key adaptation interventions that are to be 
implemented under Output 1 of the proposed project. Therefore, the co -finance has been made available 
conditional on the approval of the GCF project. Likewise, the prop osed project is dependent on the co -financed 
interventions to complete the integrated approach to climate -resilient flood management in Haiti ( Output 1) and 
maximise the paradigm shift potential of the project. This will be achieved by facilitating a trans formative shift in 
Haiti’s agricultural sector from unsustainable practices (e.g. the cultivation of annual crop types and clearing of 
forests for charcoal production) towards sustainable options that are resilient to the impacts of climate change -
induced flooding.  
 
73. To facilitate this shift, a suite of complementary interventions will be implemented to promote the adoption and 
implementation of sustainable land -use practices in Haiti. This will be achieved by: i) strengthening the technical 
and institutional capacity of people involved in agriculture at the commune, inter -commune and department levels 
for implementing productive climate -resilient agricultural practices (such as agroforestry systems with alley 
cropping and contour bunds, as well as local Gad Manjé66 systems); ii) enhancing smallholder farmers’ access to 
financial resources to facilitate the uptake and implementation of climate -resilient agricultural practices over the 
long term; and iii) establishing a social protection system for chronically food insecu re houeholds in  vulnerable 
areas affected  by climate change impacts, particularly flooding.  
 
74. Together, interventions under this output will stabilise access to markets for farmers and producers, incentivising 
the uptake of climate -resilient, sustainable l and-use practices. By diversifying agricultural produce and agroforestry 
system varieties to prevent seasonal production peaks and providing technical support to farmers to adapt supply 
to demand while providing inputs that will facilitate their processing  and their climate resiliency. This, in turn, will 
contribute to regulating price volatility of agricultural produce, attracting further investment into sustainable products 
and making the adoption of alternative livelihood options more feasible for the vu lnerable people living in the TR 
watershed. As a result of these interventions, the project will enable vulnerable farmers and households living in 
the watershed to to invest in climate resilient productive practices through a sustainable land management 
perspective in keeping with the EBA interventions and land planning established through Output 1 . This will in turn 
reduce the adverse social and economic impacts associated with these events and promote livelihood security 
amongst these people.  
 
75. These in terventions will further complement the activities that will be implemented under the GCF -funded project 
currently under development, entitled Increasing resilience of vulnerable farmers in Southern Haiti  being 
implemented with the support of th e Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) on the South Department  of Haiti. 
While t he geographic scope of each project will prevent from in overlap of any on -the-ground interventions the 
outcomes of these projects related to institutional capacity building at nat ional level will be strongly complementary  
securing an integrated approach to land and water resources management that will contribute  to a paradigm in 
Haiti towards climate -resilient sustainable development.  
 
Activity 2.1 . Strengthen institutional capacity at the commune, inter -commune and department levels in Haiti’s Trois -
Rivières watershed for productive and sustainable land -use management  
76. Under this activity, a capacity needs assessment will be conducted for the agricul tural sector in the 7 targeted  
communes to identify the technical and institutional requirements for transitioning the sector from unsustainable 
land-use practices towards a sustainable landscape management (SLM) approach to land and water resources 
manage ment that is climate resilient  (Sub activity 2.1.1) . Capacity will be assessed in the seven target communes 
in the TR watershed , as part of this assessment the project will consult with farmers associations at a commune 
and sub commune level.  From the capa city needs assessments, opportunities will be identified, and plans made 
to enhance the management of natural resources and promote the uptake of climate -resilient agricultural practices 
to increase productivity.


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 77. To facilitate the uptake of these new sustainable practices , governance mechanisms and frameworks for SLM will 
be developed in the TR watershed through the establishment of communal development councils  (Sub activity 
2.1.2) . These councils  will represent all agricultural sector stakeholders, including smallholder farmers  in the seven 
communes both during and after the project implementation with their primary function being to enhance the 
management of natural resources in combination with  improving the climate -resilience of agricultural practices and 
enhancing sustainable productivity. Members to these councils will be appointed by Ministry of Agriculture in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Environment and the local authorities.  Multi-sectoral governance structures will 
also be established to oversee and manage the implementation of interventions designed to address the priority 
areas identified through the capacity needs assessment developed under Sub activity 2.1.1 .  
 
78. Support for the go vernance structures developed under Sub Activity 2.1.2  will be provided through strengthening 
the capacity of relevant government entities, including the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR), National Coordination of Fo od Security (NCFS) and Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour 
(MSAL), to implement SLM at the department level  (Sub activity 2.1.3) .  These sectoral entities and ministries have 
a primary role to play in the implementation of sustainable land management hen ce training and information 
workshops to members of these ministries will allow for increased ownership and sensisitization of their role and 
mandates for sustainable land management. Training and information workshops under this subactivity will focus 
on the content of management plans, implementation strategies, and the role and implications of departmental 
stakeholders. This will enable the adoption of SLM practices to be guided in a manner that is compatible with the 
effective functioning of the entire w atershed and that contributes to enhancing flood management across the TR 
watershed.  
 
Activity 2.2. Enhance the technical capacity and access to finance of national and local representatives involved in 
agriculture in the Trois -Rivières watershed for adop ting climate -resilient sustainable land -use practices  
79. This project activity will increase the capacity of farmers in the 7 target communes to implement climate -resilient 
agricultural techniques and land -use practices, using the findings from the capacity needs assessments conducted 
as part of  Activity  2.1. This will be achieved through implementing targeted adaptation interventions in Haiti’s  TR 
watershed to optimise the agricultural value chain and promote the use of climate -resilient agricultural techniques 
across the sector  (Sub activity 2.2.1) . Such interventions will include enhancing the transportation of agricultural 
produce (e.g. by de veloping agricultural tracks), as well infrastructure upgrades to address decreasing water 
security caused by the impacts of climate change -induced flooding. Infrastructural upgrades will also be undertaken 
in the form of increasing the storage capacity an d quality of post -harvest facilities, as well as establishing local 
processing facilities for agricultural produce to optimise agricultural production in the watershed . These investments 
will be communal in nature and will be prioritized with the support o f local farmers association to benefit all 
members.   
 
80. Techncial capacity provided will also be include the delivering of technical skills training on climate -resilient 
agricultural techniques and SLM to farmers.  This will be done through a farmer field sc hool approach where 
approximately 30 farmers will work in  groups (estimated 180 groups along the 33 subcommunes) to put in practice 
the training provided.These members will then form their own group and provide training to 10 of their neighbors.  
Capacity  building  will involve: i) enhancing their ability to effectively manage and organise irrigation and other 
associations; ii) facilitating participatory access to agricultural inputs, farming equipment, maintenance facilities; 
and iii) upskilling of mainten ance staff. These interventions will be supported by the provision of climate -resilient 
agricultural inputs (e.g. climate -resilient seed varieties) to vulnerable households that depend on subsistence 
agriculture for their livelihoods  (Sub activity 2.2.2) .  
 
81. Strengthening t he above  key elements of the agricultural value chain in Haiti’s TR watershed will not only enhance 
the climate resilience of agricultural production in the country, but also contribute to increased food security in the 
watershed . Sustainability of these investeme nts will be supported by looking to improve the  acess to finance  to 
producers  in a manner that is appropriate for communities in line with the sustainable productive management 
capacities that are being created. Hence this activity will also develop s ocial feasibility assessments, including risk 
assessments  and financial mapping analysis  (Sub activity 2.2.3) to inform the establishment and  enhancement of 
Agricultural Village Savings and Credit Associations (VSCA) that will be led by the communities and sup ported 
through technical expertise by the project  as part of  Activity 2.3. Within the framework of the proposed project, 
VSCAs are levers for households benefiting from the social safety net to develop small economic activities with the 
credits or the am ount of "remunerated" savings obtained at the end of the year, in order to increase their income 
in a sustainable way  and establish a means to enhance sustainable productive investments and enhancing local 
markets .


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
  
67 Averaging 133 farmer households per commune (7) based on an estimated prioritization taken from Haiti’s PROCSIMAST (Programme 
de Renforcement Opérationnel du Ciblage et Système d’Information du Ministère des Affaires Sociales et du Travail) which is a n official 
master list of vulnerable people by community provided by the Ministry of Social Affairs.  From this list the  following people will be selected: 
Women head of household in charge of kids and other elderly and/or disabled with no income or low income (living under povert y level); 60 
+ years of age; Disabled and Residing permanently in the community. This will allo w the programme to focus on the most vulnerable and 
with least adaptive capacity.    
68 The Water Act acts as regulatory policy towards water integrated management that may take the form of a National Regulatory D ecree.   Activity 2.3. Implement a social protec tion system to support vulnerable households at risk to food insecurity because 
of climate change  
82. This project activity will support households affected by chronic food insecurity to recover their nutritional and 
financial autonomy being those most vulnera ble to  climate change -induced flooding  and resorting to unsustainable 
land management practices . Subsistence farmers living near floodplains along the TR watershed are particularly 
vulnerable to these events, which often result in the near-complete destruction of their agricultural yields grown to 
support their livelihoods. When this happens, most of these farmers take up unsustainable charcoal production as 
a last resort to support their livelihoods, which in turn results in increased degradation of the landscape, 
exacerbating soil erosion and sedimentation of the TR watershed and its tributaries. While Activit ies 1.2 and  2.1 
provide a long -term solution to addressing these negative impacts, this activity will provide the required immed iate 
relief to vulnerable people affected by these events, concomitantly reducing further pressure on the environment 
by providing an alternative option to resorting to unsustainable charcoal production.  
 
83. Specifically, Activity 2.3 will facilitate the dev elopment of a social safety net whereby food coupon s will be provided 
to vulnerable households affected by food insecurity. The food coupons will be designed for the project and will be 
provided by Heifer. To determine eligible households for these coupons , vulnerable households in the 33 commun al 
sections will be identified through a site survey and/or assessment, with their details captured in a database for 
future reference  (Sub Activity 2.3.1) . Recipients of thes e coupons  will be able to redeem them in exchange  for local 
produce  (food basket)  at selected local markets  (Sub activity 2.3.2 ). An estimated 93467 farmers  (households)  will 
be selected to participate in the operation of the food coupons mechanism . Participating farmers will receive training 
on inter alia  hygiene, modalities of exchange and personal security  (Sub activity 2.3.3) .  
 
84.  This activity will also support in the the creation of  150 new VSCAs in the TR watershed  (Sub Activity 2.3.4) . VSCAs  
are relevant as they  provide their members with small, flexible financial services of savings, microcredit and micro -
insurance  (see footnote 63 above)  for capital investme nts. Hence, VSCAs will become a means to mobilize local 
financing even after the project is completed.  It is important to note that GCF grants nor cofinancing will be provided 
in the capitalization of the VSCAs rather these will be capatilized by the init ial investment provided by each of the 
VSCA members as a way to ensure full community ownership of the VSCA and grant flexibility in the bylaws that 
are created. The VSCAs will be created  with the support of a network of an estimated 150 village agents (Su b 
activity 2.3.5) who will act as extension officers to the VSCAs and that will be formed by the project. The village 
agents will have as  their primary responsibilities the monitoring of existing VSCAs and creation of new ones. 
Moreover, to optimise select ed farming markets contributing to the implementation of the food coupons mechanism , 
market performance will be monitored regularly, and the relevant adjustments made to the system where required. 
This process will be community -driven, led by the selected network of village agents. Through these actions an exit 
strategy for the fooud coupon mechanism is created that is linked to the establishment of agroforestry systems  
(long term productive means)   as well as in the creation of  community appropriate financial mechanis ms (VSCAs) 
and capacitities (village agents) within the target  areas to mobilize saving for continued capital investment.  
 
Output 3 Strengthened governance and capacity for climate -resilient integrated water resour ces management 
(IWRM)  
 
85. At present, the government is organised along departmental and communal lines. As a result, there is an overlap 
between existing water governance structures, particularly at the catchment and sub -catchment levels. This leads 
to challenges in coordination a nd planning, as well the effective and efficient implementation of an integrated 
approach to water resources management in the TR watershed. While the GoH has made good progress in drafting 
the Water Act68 to address these challenges, there is a need for technical assistance for the ‘last mile’ of its drafting. 
Under Output 3 , the capacity of the GoH will be strengthened to develop and implement the Water Act, which is an 
essential legal foundation for enab ling participatory, integrated water resources management in Haiti’s TR 
watershed. This will involve: i) drafting provisions to Haiti’s Water Act for the adoption of an integrated approach to 
water resources managemen t (Sub activity 3.1.1) ; ii) establishin g Catchment IWRM Committees ( Committes de 
GIRE des Bassins Versants;  CGBVs) within 31 catchments in Haiti  (Sub activity 3.1.2) ; and iii) establishing Sub -
Catchment Water Resource Users Associations ( Associations d'Usagers des Ressources en Eau du Sous -bass in 
versant;  AssURES) within the sub -catchments of the 31 catchments  (Sub activity 3.1.3) . These committees will


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 work with different stakeholders in the 31 catchments and sub -catchments to manage the efficient use of land and 
water resources. Furthermore, t he committees will be responsible for fostering community empowerment and 
ownership over these critical resources under future climate change conditions. Together, these activities will 
ensure that the Water Act is developed and implemented to respond not only to national level priorities, but also to 
the adaptation needs of vulnerable communities living in the TR watershed.  
 
86. To support the implementation of the Water Act and the transition towards an integrated management structure for 
land and water reso urces in the TR watershed, a Catchment  Integrated  Water Resources Management Committee 
(CIWRMC ) will be established  (Sub activity 3.2.1) . This committee will work with representatives from productive 
sectors (e.g. agriculture), land users at sub-catchment level and Sub -Catchment Water Resources User 
Associations (SCWRUAs) to develop, implement and manage an inclusive, integrated water management 
governance framework in the watershed  . This will involve these committees working together to deve lop climate -
resilient IWRM plans  (Sub activity 3.2. 2), which define roles and responsibilities for end users that promote 
sustainable water resources management and an equitable distribution of the available resources at the catchment 
and sub -catchment lev els. The CIWRMC , together with the relevant land users, SCWRUAs, CGBVs and AssURES 
will ensure that the management of water resources in the catchment considers climate change impacts, 
particularly the expected impacts at landscape level  (Sub activity 3.2. 3) as well as on upstream and downstream 
flow dynamics  .  
 
87. Ensuring that all adaptation interventions are monitored throughout the implementation phase is critical for 
facilitating adaptive management and assessing the effectiveness of these interventions in reducing climate 
change -induced flooding in the TR watershed. The implementation of EbA interventions under Output 1, combined 
with the improved governance and capacity of relevant decision -makers and actors involved in land and water 
resources manageme nt (Outputs 2 and 3), is expected to reduce the impact of climate change -induced flooding on 
the TR watershed and communities living nearby, while concomitantly catalysing a shift from segregated land and 
water resources management towards the use of an integrated governance  framework that is resilient to the 
impacts of such flooding. Moreover, these interventions will  generate benefits for the health of vulnerable for 
individuals, households and communities living in the TR watershed, reducing the spread of water - and vector -
borne diseases as contamination of freshwater sources (e.g. rivers) and food is reduced.  
 
88. To ensure that these adaptation benefits continue to be realised by all beneficiary groups throughout the project 
period, continuous health monitoring and impact ev aluations will be undertaken under Activity 3.3 . This Monitoring 
and Evaluation (M&E) will commence at the end of Year 1 and will continue throughout the implementation phase 
until project closure. UNDP will commission an expert to undertake the health mon itoring and impact evaluations 
of the EbA flood management solutions  (Sub activity 3.3.1) . The World Health Organisation (WHO) will provide 
technical support to this expert, as they are currently monitoring cases of water - and vector -borne diseases in Hait i 
and therefore have a pre -defined methodology that would enable comparison studies to be undertaken across 
watersheds. The contracted expert will be responsible for: i) undertaking a baseline assessment of the prevalence 
of water - and vector -borne disease s within the TR watershed  (Sub activity 3.3.2) ; ii) analysing the impact of climate 
change -induced flooding on the spread of these diseases; and iii) assessing and reporting on the health benefits 
of the adaptation interventions implemented under the proje ct, particularly the reduced spread of water - and vector -
borne diseases as a result of implementing EbA interventions under Output 1  (Sub activity 3.3.3) . Finally, lessons 
generated through the implementation of all project interventions will be shared thr ough the relevant committees 
and associations at the catchment and sub -catchment levels to inform adaptative management of these 
interventions under future climate change conditions  (Sub activity 3.3.4) .   
 
89. By strengthening national capacities for the impl ementation of the Water Act, promoting the adoption of an 
integrated, climate -resilient water management governance framework at the catchment and sub -catchment levels 
in the watershed, and monitoring the impact of IWRM plans and EbA interventions ( Output 1) on flooding and water 
resources management in the TR watershed, the interventions under Output 3  will contribute to establishing the 
governance framework required to facilitate the adoption of a climate -resilient integrated water resources 
management (I WRM) in Haiti’s TR watershed. The first step that is required for this process is to strengthen the 
capacity of the GoH to develop and implement the Water Act, which is an essential legal foundation for enabling 
participatory, integrated water resources ma nagement in Haiti’s TR watershed. Once this is done, governance 
around water resources at the local level will then be improved in line with the Water Act to promote the more 
sustainable management of these resources, through establishing the necessary loc al-level regulatory structures. 
Finally, to complete the cycle of understanding and improving water resources management, adequate monitoring 
of these resources — that also considers flooding and its impacts on health — is important to feed back into the 
regular updating of the Water Act and facilitate adaptive management through the local -level regulatory structures.


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 90. Project activities that will be implemented under Output 3  are summarised below. Further details on these activities, 
including on the associated sub -activities and deliverables, are presented in Section E.6 of this Funding Proposal 
and Section 9 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.      
 
Activity 3.1 Strengthen nation al capacities for the implementation of the Water Act  
91. Under this activity, the capacity of the GoH will be strengthened to develop and implement the Water Act, which is 
an essential legal  foundation for enabling participatory, integrated water resources ma nagement in Haiti’s TR 
watershed. At present, the government is organised along departmental and communal lines. As a result, there is 
an overlap between existing water governance structures, particularly at the catchment and sub -catchment levels. 
This lea ds to challenges in coordination and planning, as well the effective and efficient implementation of an 
integrated approach to water resources management in the TR watershed. While the GoH has made good progress 
in drafting the Water Act to address these c hallenges, there is a need for technical assistance for the ‘last mile’ of 
its drafting. Under Activity 3.1, provisions will be drafted to the Water Act to ensure that it promotes an integrated 
approach to water resources management, including considerations for the coordinated development of water, land 
and related resources  (Sub activity 3.1.1) . This will contribute towards: i) maximising economic and social welfare 
in an equitable manner without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosys tems under future climate change 
conditions; and ii) facilitating efficient, integrated adaptation responses to the impacts of climate change in Haiti. 
Provisions to the Water Act will also recommend the establishment of Catchment IWRM Committees ( Committe es 
de GIRE des Bassins Versants, CGBVs) within each of the 31 catchments in the country  (Sub activity 3.1.2) , and 
the establishment of Sub -Catchment Water Resource Users Associations (Associations d'Usagers des Ressources 
en Eau du Sous -bassin versant, or AssURES)  (Sub Activity 3.1.3) . 
 
Activity 3.2. Develop an integrated, climate -resilient water management governance framework targeting the catchment 
and sub -catchment levels in the Trois -Rivières watershed  
92. Given that the TR watershed is one of the most vulnerable watersheds in Haiti to climate change -induced flooding, 
the implementation of an integrated water resources management strategy is a priority action for increasing the 
climate resilience of its popu lation. Under this activity, an inclusive and equitable water management governance 
framework will be developed for the TR catchment, namely the Catchment Integrated Water Resources 
Management Committee (CIWRMC ) (Sub activity 3.2.1) . This committee will will be made up of actors directly or 
indirectly involved in the agricultural and water sector (state institutions  including the MoE and Haiti’s 
Hydrometeorological Unit  (UHM) , local elected officials, farmers, schools (in the integra ted development 
approach ,), representatives of civil society (economic or social organizations, producers'' organizations), 
associations and grassroots groups) and its members will be defined during the consultative workshops.  
 
93. Together they will develop climate -resilient I ntegrater water resource mangment plans for end users at the sub -
catchment and catchment levels that promote sustainable water resources management and equitable distribution 
of the available resources among all users  (Sub activity 3.2.2 ). The gender -responsive IWRM plans will define roles 
and responsibilities of institutions and civil society stakeholders for water resources management (complementary 
to the decentralised management of water resources to be established in the Water Act un der Activity 3.1). It will 
also promote a landscape management approach that will be linked to the implementation of community land -use 
plans developed under Activity 1.1  considering gender dynamics  (Sub activity 3.2.3) . The CIWRMC , will also work 
with the relevant land users and SCWRUAs, to ensure that the management of water resources in the catchment 
considers climate change impacts, particularly the expected impacts at landscape level as well as on upstream and 
downstream flow dyn amics. Training on the climate -resilient IWRM plans will also be delivered to these stakeholder 
groups, focusing on the application of these plans in decision -making  (Sub activity 3.2.4) .  
 
94. The combined result of these actions will be the establishment and  operation of an integrated governance 
framework that will contribute to preserving climate -resilient, sustainable land and water resources management 
beyond the lifetime of the project. During the implementation of Activity 3.2, considered efforts will be  made to 
securing equitable representation, participation and leadership of women.  
 
Activity 3.3. Implement regular monitoring and evaluation of water resources at the catchment and sub -catchment levels 
to support the implementation of integrated water resources management (IWRM) plans  
95. From project inception (Year 1), continuous health monitoring and impact evaluations will be undertaken and will 
continue throughout the implementation phase. The implementation of EbA solutions under Output 1  of the  project 
are expected to significantly reduce the extent of climate change -induced flooding in the TR watershed and reduce 
erosion caused by extreme rainfall events. Such reductions in flood extent are also likely to reduce the spread of 
water - and vector -borne diseases, as contamination of freshwater sources (e.g. rivers) and food is reduced. By 
monitoring the evolution, frequency and location of flood -related illnesses from the start of the project, the impact 
of the project can be assessed once a suffici ent time series of observations is completed. UNDP will commission


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 an expert to undertake the health monitoring and  develop  impact evaluations of the EbA flood management 
solutions  (Sub activity 3.3.1) . The World Health Organisation (WHO) will provide tech nical support to the health 
monitoring expert, as they are currently monitoring cases of water - and vector -borne diseases in Haiti and therefore 
have a pre -defined methodology that would allow comparison studies to be undertaken across watersheds. The 
contracted expert will undertake a baseline assessment of the prevalence of water - and vector -borne diseases 
within the TR watershed and analyse the impact of climate change -induced flooding on the spread of these 
diseases  (Sub activity 3.3.2) . Following this assessment, the expert will report on her/his findings and provide the 
required health impact data to assess the health benefits of the EbA interventions implemented under the project.  
96. Simultaneously, the project will engage an integrate d water resource management expert that  assisted by 
representatives from SCWRUAs  and in consultation with the UHM , will monitor dry season baseflow at four 
locations along the main stem of the Trois -Rivières (TR) river. This will be done to provide a stable  indicator of the 
increased infiltration capacity of the soil because of forest rehabilitation and restoration activities to be implemented 
under Activity 1 .2 of the project (Sub activity 3.3.3) . The monitoring will facilitate an evidence -based assessment of 
these EbA solutions as effective measures for reducing the impacts of climate change -induced flooding in the TR 
watershed and for improving the health of the watershed’s population. Finally, lessons generated through the 
implementation of all project in terventions will be shared through the relevant committees and associations at the 
catchment and sub -catchment levels as well as to relevant national ministries including the UHM to inform 
adaptative management of these interventions under future climate c hange conditions  (Sub activity 3.3.4) .   
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
97. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s Full Support to National Implementation Modality (NIM), 
according to the Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA) between UNDP and the Government of Haiti 
signed on 28 June 1973, the Country Programme Acti on Plan (CPAP), and as policies and procedures outlined in 
the UNDP - POPP - Chapter .  
 
98. The national executing entity - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies, and procedures (POPP), 
including the NIM Guidelines ( POPP NIM ). These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, 
environmental and social safeguards, and other performance standards. The (national) Implementing Partner for 
this project is the Ministry of Environment (MO E).  
99. Implementing partner (IP) is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and evaluation 
of project interventions achieving project outcomes and for the effective use of UNDP resources.   A subsidiary 
agreement (project document) will be established between UNDP and MoE as per Article 3 of the SBAA. All 
references in the SBAA to “Executing Agency” shall be deemed to refer to “Implementing Partner”.  
 
Executing Entity (IP per UNDP terminology)  
100. The Ministry of Envir onment of Haiti (MoE) will act as an Executing Entity  (IP) for the project and as such is 
accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions 
achieving project outcomes and for the effective use of GCF  resources. The MoE as Executing Entity  will desi gnate 
a National Project Director, responsible for the overall direction, strategic guidance and timely delivery of the 
Project . The project, through the National Project Director, will inform the  Technical Secretariat of the National 
Committee on Climate Change of the progress of the project’s implementation to ensure alignment and coordination 
with the GoH’s national climate strategies and policies.  
 
101. The MoE is  a national Ministry for the Government of Haiti . It was created by the Haitian law of January 28, 
1995 with its mission, attributions and intervention modes being defined in decrees of January 26, 2006 (Décret 
portant sur la gestion de l’environnement et de la régulation de la conduite des citoyens) and the decree of August 
16, 2020 (décret organisant le Ministère de l’environnement).  It is the National Ministry responsible for overseeing 
the environment and natural resources for Haiti as mandated by law.  Its attributions includes: (1) to formulate, guide 
and enforce the GoH’s policy on environmental matters; (2) to regulate any public or private action falling within the 
domain of the environment and; (3) to guarantee sovereign  measures conducive to the pr otection of the 
environment, the conservation of biodiversity, the fight against climate change and a better living environment for 
the benefit and well -being of the population.  The MoE acts as the National Designated Authority on behalf of the 
GoH to the  GCF.  
 
102. The MoE delegates its various functions to numerous agencies and institutions related to its management 
area, among these is the  Change Directorate which acts as the lead environmental body in the system. As a 
public institution, it receives an estimated USD 12million annual funding from the GoH's national budget. It has 
expertise in implementing the enabling activities such as national com munications, Bienennial reports . The MoE


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 is currently executing the CBIT project with UNDP oversight. The MoE also collaborates with partners such as 
civil society organizations in the execution of this work .  
 
103. A HACT microassessment has been developed for  the MoE identifying its capacity to mange projects with UNDP 
and partner support. The HACT assessment identified the MoE’s overall risk level as moderate taking into account 
a low risk rating in for partnerships and collaborations, moderate risks in gover nance, project management and 
human resources and a significant risk in monitoring and evaluation and procurement and financial management.  
104. The Government of Haiti has requested UNDP to provide direct project services for this project , including  in the  
procurement  of goods and services  through UNDP processes , providing direct payments to suppliers and 
Responsible Parties,  hiring of project staff,  as well as in the delivery of training services . Under these terms UNDP 
will make payments and provide related  services at the instruction of the MoE who will be responsible for the 
preparation of terms of references and selection criteria. The UNDP and t he Government of Haiti acknowledge and 
agree that those services are not mandatory and will be provided only upon Government request and specified in 
the Letter of Agreement  (LoA) . If requested, the direct project services would follow UNDP policies on the  recovery 
of direct project costs relating to GCF funded projects.  The project has been designed to enable UNDP to be able 
to provide support as the government needs for execution  under its support to NIM Modality that has been reflected 
within the project ’s budget , in addition UNDP is providing co financing support to enhance project management  
and will provide implementation support in the delivery of  activities under Output 3 .  
 
105. UNDP will provide implementation support in the delivery  of activities included within the project’s Output 3. A 
firewall will be implemented to separate the work being provided for the implementation of Output 3 and UNDP’s 
oversight responsibilities in it s role as an AE. A Letter of Agreement (as specified in paragraph 86) will be signed 
between the Government of Haiti and UNDP specifying UNDP’s role in Output 3  
 
Accredited Entity  
106. UNDP provides a three – tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and 
at regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports the Project Board by carrying out objective 
and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate proje ct management 
milestones are managed and completed. Project Assurance must be independent of the Project Management 
function; the Project Board cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager.  
The project assurance rol e is covered by the accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited Entity to 
the GCF, UNDP is required to deliver GCF -specific oversight and quality assurance services including: (i) Day -to-
day oversight supervision, (ii) Oversight of project completion, (iii) Oversight of project reporting.”  
 
107. The justification to engage UNDP support services responds to HACT evaluation assessment of the MoE in 
particular in regards to procurement and financial management processes . UNDP will be the best entity  to engage 
various partners from both public and private sector, either following competitive procurement process or other 
partnership arrangement. Such support services and the cost involved, shall be detailed in a Letter of Agreement  
(LoA)  for UNDP suppo rt services. As the support services will be provided by UNDP, usual UNDP regulations, 
rules and procedures apply.  A procurement and administrative analyst will also be hired to support the project 
operations.  
 
Responsible Parties  
108. Responsible parties will  be overseen by and report to the MoE in its role as Executing Entity. As such they will 
enter upon written agreements with the MoE specifying their role in project implementation including deliverables, 
budgets and workplan. Respo nsible parties will report on the usage of project funds and delivery of the workplan 
to the MoE.  
   
109. Heifer International Haiti  will act as Responsible Party for Output 1. Heifer International  Haiti will also execute 
all activities under Output 2 through its its own co -finance. Once the FAA is signed between UNDP and the GCF 
and upon  indication  by the MoE, a Responsible Party Agreement will be established with  Heifer International Haiti 
on behalf of the Executing Entity  for the provision of services for the execution of these outputs.  
 
110. Heifer  International  Haiti is recognized in Haiti as a non-profit corporation  working in Haiti since 1999 by 
supporting rural communities  through sustainable and integrated crop -livestock projects as a means  of poverty 
reduction.  Heifer International  Haiti has managed more than 20 million  in Haiti in the past 8 years  and has plenty 
of experience working in the northern part of the country with community organizations, farmers organizations, local 
authorities , and government institutions . Its work places an emphasis on community mobilization, resilience, social 
capital development, environmental protection, personal leadership, the p romotion of gender equity, agricultural


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 production and food security, agribusiness development, and the mobilization of young people and women in 
agriculture . It is currently implementing a portfolio in Haiti of over USD12 million.  
 
111. Heifer International Haiti holds offices in the Trois Rivière (TR) Watershed and has demonstrated implementation 
capacity (low -risk rating) as evaluated th rough UNDP’s Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) 
assessments. UNDP’s HACT assessment noted  Heifer’s  high capacity for monitoring (including the use of a QR 
system for project beneficiaries ) and reporting , the presence of sufficient technical staff that receives continuous 
training to address  donor and prog ram needs  and its appropriate financial accounting measures and procedures.  
 
Project Board  
112. The Project Board will ensure that activities under all three outputs of the project comply with the strategies, 
principles and overall approach outlined in this proposal. The Project Board is responsible for making decisions by 
consensus.  Its responsibilities including recommendation for UNDP and Implementing Partner approval of project 
plans, substantive revisions and acceptance of the project progress reports. In order to ensure UNDP’s ultimate 
accountability, Project Board decisions should be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure 
management for development results , the best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective 
international competition. In the case where a consensus cannot be reached, the final decision shall rest with 
UNDP. Project reviews by the Board will take place at least twice a y ear, or as necessary when raised by the 
Project Manager or one of the Board members. The Board must be consulted by the Project Manager for decisions 
where there are substantial changes required to the Annual Workplan as per deviation tolerances set by a d onor 
or UNDP, whichever is lower.  
 
113. The specific roles of the Project Board are to:  
• set strategic direction, reinforce government leadership of the program and coordinate all interventions;  
• provide guidance and agree on possible countermeasures/management actions to address specific risks;  
• authorise the Annual Work Plan (prior to approv al by UNDP);  
• conduct bi -annual meetings to review the Project Progress and provide direction and recommendations to 
ensure that the agreed deliverables are produced satisfactorily according to the approved Annual Work Plan;  
• provide ad -hoc guidance when p roject manager’s is unable to come to a decision;  
• review and approve all activities that are supported by the program based on the program objectives, work plan 
and availability of funding;  
• provide technical advice to create synergy and uniformity betwee n program supported activities and policy;  
• guide and support program delivery at sectoral level;  
• provide support in resource mobilization to support program funding gaps;  
• monitor and evaluate project activities through periodic meetings and occasional s ite visits; and  
• receive reports on all activities supported by the program to serve as an additional basis to assess and monitor 
the program performance and delivery.  
 
114. The composition of the Project Board, along with each participant’s roles and responsib ilities are listed below.  
• The Executive will preside over the Project Board. This role will be fulfilled by the MoE.  
• As the ‘” Development Partner” for the project, UNDP’s role is to represent the interests of the parties, which 
provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project (designing, developing, facilitating, procuring, 
implementing), including providing guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project. Within this role, 
UNDP will have the authority to commit or acquire t he necessary resources to carry out its function to the full 
extent.  
• The Ministry of Environment (MoE)’s role is to ensure that investment decisions at the project level are relevant 
to national policies and ensure continued involvement and strengthening o f national capacities.  
• The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development ( MARNDR ) will fulfil the ‘Main 
Beneficiary’ role for the project. Within this role, the MARNDR  is mandated with representing the interests of 
project beneficiaries to ensure that project outputs serve the needs of the beneficiaries.  
• Representatives  from the beneficiaries will assist to annual Project Board meetings by providing necessary 
informatio n on the execution of activities and act as non -voting observers.  
  
Project Management Unit (PMU)  
115. The Project Manager (PM) will provide strategic orientation to the proposed project and ensure technical and 
operational coordination  of the Project Management Unit (PMU ) that will receive training from UNDP. Specifically, 
the PM will undertake day -to-day management and decision -making for the project. In line with this mandate, the 
PM will be primarily responsible for guiding the imple mentation of adaptation interventions to achieve the targets 
specified in the Logical Framework (Section E of this Funding Proposal) and ensuring that these interventions are


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 implemented to the required standards, within the specified time periods and acco rding to the project budget. The 
PM will be supported by the technical staff under the PMU, including: i) national and international consultants and 
support staff; ii) an Agroforestry Expert who will coordinate activities under Outputs 1 .1 and 2 .1; iii) a Governance 
and Policy Expert who will coordinate activities under Output 3 ; iv) a full -time Gender and Safeguards Specialist, 
who will be responsible for tracking project interventions against the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment and Management P lan (Annex 6) and Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex 8); and v) a full -
time Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Expert, who will be responsible for detailed monitoring of the progress of 
project activities against the targets specified in the Logical Fra mework. The PM’s responsibilities will conclude 
when the project Terminal Evaluation report and other relevant documentation required by the GCF and UNDP 
have been completed and submitted to UNDP for clearance.  While UNDP’s process will be used for the hi ring of 
the PMU, it is important to highlight that the MoE will elaborate the terms of reference for project staff including 
the selection criteria.  
Experience and track record of UNDP as the Accredited Entity and Support services provider:  
116. Within its central role in the UN system, UNDP facilitates a multi -sectoral approach in assisting developing 
countries to respond to the complex challenges associated with climate change. Furthermore, through its focus on 
promoting a long -term, people -centr ed approach to capacity development, UNDP is recognised as an experienced 
agency in institutional development which will add considerable value to the implementation of an integrated 
approach to land and water resources management in Haiti.  
 
117. To date, UNDP has led numerous environmental protection and climate change responses in Haiti through 
inter alia  policy formulation, strategic planning, coordination and information sharing. Through these actions, UNDP 
has built strong relationships with d ecision -makers at all levels and proven its strengths as an impartial provider of 
technical guidance and support to communities in the country. Key resilience projects using an ecosystems -based 
adaptation (EbA) approach that were managed and implemented by  UNDP in Haiti in recent years are listed below.  
 
• Increasing resilience to climate change and anthropic threats through a ridge to reef approach — GEF Trust 
Fund; approximately US$ 9.3 million.  
• The Post -Matthew Recovery Programme — Government of Canada, Korea International Cooperation Agency 
(KOICA), World Food Programme; approximately US$ 15 million.  
• Support for the Preparation and Management of Disasters — Government of Japan; approximately US$ 2.1 
million.  
Natural Disaster Prevention and Territ orial Governance  — United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID), Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs; approximately US$ 1.7 million.  
National Risk and Disaster Management System — Department for International Development (DFID), USAID, 
Euro pean Commission, The World Bank; approximately US$ 10.5 million.  
• Resilience to Disasters in Département Nord  — Government of Japan; approximately US$ 4.6 million.  
 
118. UNDP  in Haiti acts as co chair to various donor and partner groups for Haiti that are releva nt to the project, 
including the Technical and Financial Partner Group for the Environment Sector and the International Community 
Support Group (GACI) for Disaster Risk Management. UNDP will provide general information on the progress of 
the project and le ssons learned to the aforementioned partner groups to allow for enhanced coordination amongst 
partners as well as allowing for building on best practices and lessons learned.  
 
119. The management  arrangements for this project are summarised in the chart below ( Figure 4).


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
  
Figure 4. Institutional arrangements.  
120. GCF funding will be received by the administrative agent (UNDP) as the AE based on a standard letter of 
agreement (FAA) signed between the GCF and UNDP ( Figure 5). As funds will be channelled through UNDP, a 
‘Direct Payments’ option will be utilised, whereby transfers will be made directly from UNDP to the goods and 
service providers  based on annual wo rkplans submitted by the MoE . Heifer International  Haiti 's co -financing 
resources  (see red line on Figure 5) , which are conditional on the approval of this project by the GCF,  will be used 
by Heifer International  Haiti to implement the project interventions outlined in Output 2 .    
 
Figure 5. Simplified infographic of the flow of funds /payments  and contractual arrangements . 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
121. As a Caribbean SIDS and LDC, Haiti is one of the most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change 
and extreme events, particularly flooding, hurricanes and tropical storms.  Climate change -related events are 
already adversely affecting  the country’s economy, with negative impacts extending across several of Haiti’s major 
economic sectors.  Between 1975 and 2012, such events resulted in damages and losses equivalent to 2% of th e 
Project	Organization	Structure
MoE
(National
Director)Project	Board/Steering	Committee
Development	Partners		
UNDPProject	Executive
MoEBeneficiary	
Representatives
MARNDR
Project	Assurance
UNDP
UNDP	Haiti	CO
UNDP	Regional	Technical	Advisor	NCE
UNDP	Principle	Technical	Advisor	NCE	Project	management	unit:
Project	Manager
Agroforestry	Expert
Governance	and	Policy	Expert
Gender	and	Safeguards	
Specialist
Monitoring	and	Evaluation	
Expert
Support	Staff
Output	1
Heifer	InternationalOutput	3
UNDPOutput	2
Heifer	International
GCF
UNDP
MoE(EE)
Heifer
Goods and  services 
providers
Output 1Goods and 
service providers
Output 2Goods and service 
providers 
Output 3Funded Activity Agreement (FAA)
Project Document 
and LOA
Responsible Party Agreement on 
behalf of the MoE
Heifer Co financeUNDP Co finance* Purple Lines Indicate order (from EE to AE) or 
information flows (from AE to EE)
* Green line indicate GCF cash flows (from AE to 
good and service providers)
* Red lineindicate co financing flows
*Blue text indicate legal agreements
1) GCF sends approved funds 
based on disbursement schedule to 
UNDP as AE
2) UNDP Alerts MoE
on received GCF funds3) MoEsends direct payment 
requests to UNDP Haiti for 
payment and/or procurement of 
goods and services, based on 
annual work plans and approved 
budgets. 4) UNDP Haiti, under 
instruction of MoE
provides payment to 
RPs and contractors 
for development of 
services(including 
UNDP, per LOA) and 
provision of goods, for 
the development of 
outputs . 5) Heifer as RP per RP 
agreement with the MOE uses 
project funds for the  delivery of 
Output 1


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
  
69 Gaspard, G. 2013. Flood loss estimate model: Recasting flood disaster assessment and mitigation for Haiti, the case of Gonaives. 
Available at: https://pdfs.semanti cscholar.org/b32b/d0ccdce15f58b07a70f5b1bd5d570baf7f79.pdf . 
70 OXFAM, Welt Hunger Life, NATHAT, and Cap -Haitian.  
71 Further details on Haiti’s fiscal situation are presented in  Section 2.2 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  country’s GDP on average, per year. Since then, the impacts of climate change have continued to negatively affect 
the population of Haiti. For example,  Hurricane Matthew (Category 5) that struck Haiti in 2016 resulted in the deaths 
of 546 people, forced more than 175,500 people to seek refuge in shelters and led to more than 1.4 million people 
requiring immediate humanitarian assistance. The storm also inflicted economic damages and losses estimated at 
more than 22% of the country’s GDP in that year (2016 ), including the losses of up to 90% of crops and livestock 
in some areas of the country, and caused a sharp increase in the number of cholera cases.  The intense rainfall 
associated with these extreme events also leads to severe flooding, which exacerbates  the associated negative 
impacts. For example, in 2004, Hurricane Jeanne  caused severe flooding in northern Haiti, resulting in more than 
2,800 deaths, approximately US$41 million in damages  and required removing approximately 592,000 m3 of mud 
that clogged drainage networks and infrastructure across the country69.  
 
122. The Trois -Rivières (TR) watershed in the north of the country is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change -induced flooding. Given  the near -complete absence of embankments and levees in the watershed, such 
flooding causes severe damage to cr ops and farmland, as well as agricultural infrastructure and equipment. 
Flooding in the region also has severe consequences for both human and livestock health, resulting in an increased 
risk of loss of human lives and livestock70. Climate change projectio ns simulate an increase in rainfall intensity in 
the TR region, which is expected to result in further adverse impacts on the country’s economy as well as on the 
most vulnerable communities and their livelihoods. Addressing the impact of climate change -induced flooding on 
vulnerable communities in the region, requires  adopting an integrated approach to flood management that responds 
to the impacts of climate change. The Government of Haiti (GoH) acknowledges this requirement and is 
consequently requesting U S$25 million in grant financing to facilitate  the adoption of this management approach. 
At present, the GoH does not have the capacity to fully finance integrated climate -resilient flood management 
interventions through domestic finance in both the private  and public sector. This is largely because of the persistent 
occurrence and impact of extreme climate events such as hurricanes and tropical storms on the country, which has 
caused the GoH to channel funding towards reactive disaster response intervention s. Consequently, the amount 
of domestic financing available for implementing climate change adaptation solutions in the country is limited.  
 
123. Currently, foreign aid accounts for more than half of Haiti’s national budget. The International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) estimates that public debt in Haiti will increase from approximately 29% of the country’s GDP in 2016 
(equivalent to US$2.2 billion in the same year) to approximately 38% in 2021 and approximately 49% in 2026. Such 
considerable increases in public debt will place the country at a high risk of debt distress. The majority of Haiti’s 
approximately US$2 billion debt as of 2015/16 is attributed to  external loans on concessional terms. Moreover, 
domestic public debt amounts to approximately US$112 million , mostly in the form of treasury bills held by 
commercial banks, with the account deficit (including international grants) estimated at approximate ly 4% for 
2016/1771. High levels of debt as a financial barrier to adapting to climate change is exacerbated by the need to 
address poverty , with approximately 59% and approximately 24% of the population living below the national and 
extreme poverty lines,  respectively. This is compounded by the negative effects of climate change -induced flooding 
on public health, as inundations facilitate the increased spread of waterborne diseases such as cholera. The 
resultant cost of no -action in addressing these health  risks places further burdens on the country’s already 
constrained healthcare system. Consequently, poverty combined with the impacts of climate change -induced 
flooding and extreme climate events are locking the GoH into a negative cycle of short -term reac tivity, with 
insufficient funding being available for climate -responsive planning in Haiti.  
 
124. Several alternative financing options were considered during project development, as fully financing the project 
through government funds is not possible. This is  because the country’s current public debt burden limits the GoH 
from accessing loans from both regional and international development banks. Given that the GoH does not have 
the financial capacity to finance the project, the government has secured co -financing of US$8.3 million from the 
Heifer International  Haiti to support  the implementation of interventions under Output 2 . While this contribution is 
significant, external support is required to fully finance a transition in Haiti towards implementing and adopting an 
integrated approach to land and water resources management that will reduce the impacts of climate change -
induced flooding on the TR watershed and vulnerable communities living nearby.  
 
125. External support in the form of GCF grant financing will be necessary to catalyse the adoption of such an 
approach to flood management in Haiti’s TR watershed. With the support of GCF funding, the proposed project will 
deliver several adaptation benefits that will contribute to achieving the GCF paradigm shift objective of climate -
resilient sustainable development in the country. Specifically, this will be achieved by: i) implementi ng agroforestry


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
  
72 Detailed information on the identification and selection of sites for the EbA interventions is presented in Section B.3 of th e Funding 
Proposal and Section 10 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  17,740 ha of agroforestry systems and reforesting 7,700 ha in priority sites72 in the TR watershed; ii) enhancing 
national and local technical and institutional capacity for productive climate -resilient land management; and iii) 
strengtheni ng national and sub -catchment governance and capacity for climate -resilient integrated water resources 
management (IWRM). Implementing this suite of adaptation interventions in the TR watershed will reduce the 
impacts of climate change -induced flooding on the vulnerable communities living in the TR watershed and increase 
the resilience of the agricultural sector — a major economic sector in the country — to these impacts. Moreover, 
adaptation benefits conferred by IWRM will be realised in public health impr ovements, as the prevalence of 
waterborne diseases will decrease alongside improved flood management.  
 
126. Without GCF support, the GoH will continue to operate under the existing paradigm of reactive recovery from 
the impacts of climate change. In this scenario, local -level decision -makers in the TR watershed will remain limited 
in their capacity to plan for a nd respond to the impacts of climate change — particularly those related to increasingly 
severe flooding. Moreover , as agriculture will be severely affected by climate change — through damages to crops 
and ecosystems as a result of flooding, as well as pro jected reductions in annual rainfall and increases in maximum 
temperatures contributing to increased droughts — both the country’s livelihoods and economy will be negatively 
impacted. Under future climate change conditions, this will result in inter alia : i) continued declines in agricultural 
productivity and food security; ii) public health concerns, including diarrhoeal diseases; and iii) increased economic 
damages and loss of life.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
127. The proposed project interventions have been designed to deliver maximum adaptation benefits to vulnerable 
communities in Haiti’s Trois Rivieres (TR) watershed beyond the project lifetime. Such benefits include reducing 
flood impacts on vulnerable  communities living in the watershed and improving environmental sustainability under 
future climate change conditions through implementing sustainable land and water resources management 
practices. To secure these benefits, the principles of institutional , technical and financial sustainability have been 
incorporated into the design of all project interventions, as described below.  
 
Participatory approach to climate -resilient sustainable development  
128. The country -driven project has been developed using a participatory and consultative process, enabling all 
relevant stakeholders to contribute to the design of interventions. These interventions are centred around 
enhancing the resilience of the TR watersh ed to the impacts of climate change -induced flooding by implementing 
an integrated approach to land and water resources management. Uptake of such an approach across the 
watershed requires buy -in and commitment from national - and local -level stakeholders t o ensure that the 
adaptation interventions implemented under the project respond directly to the needs of all beneficiary groups and 
continue to deliver adaptation benefits to these groups over the long term.  
 
129. Given that the project promotes an integrated  approach to land and water resources management, participation 
from national and local stakeholders, particularly communities and the most vulnerable groups (e.g. women and 
people with disabilities), is critical for securing project ownership and long -term adaptation benefits in Haiti. As a 
result, all project stakeholders will continue to be engaged in the implementation of relevant interventions 
throughout the implementation phase. This engagement will be supported by awareness -raising campaigns 
(Activit y 1.1), which will be designed and implemented in target communes in the TR watershed to increase local 
knowledge of sustainable land -use practices and promote their adoption. These campaigns will also encourage 
community members to participate in the deve lopment of community land -use plans, fostering ownership of these 
plans to secure the buy -in of stakeholders at the community level, which will ensure the sustainability of on -the-
ground interventions. Community ownership will also be fostered for the impl ementation of agroforestry systems 
and rehabilitation of water towers (Activity 1.2) by promoting community involvement in related activities, such as 
the establishment of nurseries and planting of seedlings. Demonstrating these activities as viable altern ative 
livelihood options under the project will contribute to maintaining their social and environmental sustainability 
beyond the project lifetime.  
 
130. An extensive stakeholder engagement plan (Annex 7) has also been developed to ensure that this participat ory 
approach is continued during implementation. The impact and sustainability of project interventions will be further 
enhanced through the project’s focus on ensuring gender -responsive benefits are provided to project beneficiaries. 
Gender -sensitive targ ets for all project activities have therefore been set in the project’s Gender Action Plan (Annex 
8) to ensure that project interventions are not gender -biased. This will contribute to the ownership of project 
activities by both women and men which, in tur n, will result in gender -sensitive adaptation benefits being conferred 
beyond the project lifetime.


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 Strengthened technical and institutional capacity for sustainable climate -resilient land and water resources 
management  
131. Under the project, the technical an d institutional capacity of relevant stakeholders at national, department and 
commune levels will be strengthened for the implementation of an integrated approach to land and water resources 
management that is centred around sustainability and climate resi lience. This will be achieved by training relevant 
government entities, including the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development ( MARNDR ), 
National Coordination of Food Security (NCFS) and Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour (MSAL),  to implement 
sustainable land management (SLM) at the department level. Doing so, will enable the compatibility of SLM with 
the effective functioning of the entire watershed which, in turn, will contribute to enhancing flood management 
across the TR water shed. By building the capacity of the targeted institutions, the transfer of knowledge and skills 
related to sustainable watershed and flood management will extend beyond the project. This will result in: i) a sound 
understanding of the impacts of climate change -induced flooding on land use, water resources, food security, health 
and governance in Haiti; and ii) strengthened decision -making around the use of land and water resources under 
future conditions of climate change. The local and central authoritie s of the MoE and MARNDR  will be strongly 
involved in the capacity -building interventions under the project to secure the sustainability of these interventions 
beyond project closure. Exchange visits within the framework of other projects implemented by the  MoE and 
MARNDR  will also be carried out to ensure information -sharing and coordination between the proposed project 
and ongoing national initiatives.  
 
132. Such capacity -building activities will also extend beyond government departments and ministries to 
demo nstrate the effectiveness of improved climate -resilient land -use planning and water resources management 
as a viable climate change adaptation option to be implemented in Haiti. Specifically, this will involve training 
community members, and farmers’ and w omen’s associations in 33 communities within the 7 target communes in 
the TR watershed (Activity 1.1). This training will focus on climate -resilient land -use management to enhance 
participant’s awareness of the need for the continued prevention of land deg radation and implementation of 
sustainable agricultural practices. In addition, technical capacity will be strengthened among farmers in the TR 
watershed for the implementation of climate -resilient agricultural practices (Activity 2.2). This activity will include 
the implementation of interventions that will provide households with increased market access in the long term for 
produce grown from agroforestry systems established under Activity 1.2, contributing to project sustainability. Long -
term sustainabil ity of the project will be further reinforced by providing training to these households on the 
development of sustainable agroforestry business models that will contribute to both improving livelihood security 
and enhancing the implementation of sustainabl e land -use practices. These models will be designed to promote a 
progressive and gender -responsive transition from unsustainable agricultural and charcoal production towards the 
development of sustainable agroforestry businesses (Activity 2.2). To support this training, institutional capacity for 
sustainable land -use and management will be developed in the TR watershed. This will be achieved through the 
establishment of an integrated governance framework for SLM under newly established communal development 
councils and multi -sectoral management structures ( Output 2). These councils and management structures will 
represent all agricultural sector stakeholders, including smallholder farmers, both during and after the project 
implementation. Their primary function will be to enhance the management of natural resources in combination 
with improving the climate -resilience of agricultural practices, to increase productivity across agricultural 
subsectors. Consequently, the governance structures will complement  activities aimed at community members’ 
capacity building by providing oversight of the implementation of EbA interventions (agroforestry and reforestation) 
and assisting with the management and maintenance of these interventions.  
 
133. In addition to strengthe ning governance for SLM in the TR watershed, capacity will be built for the climate -
resilient management of water resources in Haiti ( Output 2). This will be achieved by drafting provisions to the Water 
Act (under Activity 3.1) to ensure that the act promot es an integrated approach to water resources management in 
the country. This will establish a legal foundation for optimising the use of these resources without compromising 
the sustainability of vital ecosystems under future climate change conditions, con sequently, securing equitable 
economic and social welfare. The Water Act will also provide a framework for the institutionalisation of integrated 
watershed management to empower regional administrations across Haiti — through establishing Catchment 
Water R esources Management Committees ( CIWRMC s) and Sub -Catchment Water Resource Users Associations 
(SCWRUAs). The primary functions of these committees will be to coordinate planning of water and land use that 
both maximises benefits to local communities and inc reases resilience to climate change. This will facilitate a 
participatory, bottom -up process for the development and implementation of Integrated Water Resources 
Management (IWRM) in Haiti through local governance processes. Long -term sustainability of gov ernance 
frameworks will be further ensured through the generation of lessons and under Activity 3.3 and the dissemination 
of these lessons through the committees and councils established under Outputs 1 and 2. This will inform and 
improve future adaptation efforts as well as adaptive management of the project, thereby enhancing the success 
of climate -resilient sustainable development in Haiti.


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 Strengthening agricultural value chains and unlocking public and private sector investment into sustainab le 
climate -resilient land -use practices  
134. Financial sustainability will be ensured through the GoH’s commitment to prioritise climate change adaptation, 
including in national budgeting. This commitment is evidenced in Activity 3.2 of the project, in particul ar, where the 
CIWRMC s will work with representatives from productive sectors (for example agriculture), land users at the sub -
catchment level and SCWRUAs to develop climate -resilient IWRM plans for end users. These plans will promote 
sustainable water reso urces management and an equitable distribution of available resources among all users. 
The financial sustainability of the project will be further secured by establishing an adaptation finance mechanism 
under Activity 2. 3 through the VSCAs . This mechanism will increase access to finance  (through peer to peer loans)  
for smallholder farmers, providing much needed financial services for continued investment in the maintenance 
and enhancement of the project supported productive measures, t herefore, encouraging a shift in land use away 
from unsustainable farming practices such as charcoal production  by establishing financially sustainable ecosystem 
compatible livelihoods . To support this shift, a social protection system will be created (Activity 2.3)  to support 
households affected by chronic food insecurity, enabling them to recover their nutritional and financial autonomy 
immediately after being impacted by climate change -induced flooding. Specifically, this will involve the 
establishment and operati onalisation of a food coupons mechanism  targeting these vulnerable households. To 
support the efficient and effective implementation of the food coupons mechanism , existing VSCAs will receive 
operational improvements supplemented by the creation of 150 new  VSCAs in the TR watershed. Furthermore, a 
network of village agents will be established, with their primary responsibilities being: i) monitoring existing VSCAs 
and creating new ones; ii) monitoring market performance and implementing adjustments to the s ystem where 
required. The community -driven nature of these interventions will contribute to securing the financial sustainability 
of interventions beyond the project lifetime.  
 
Operation and maintenance (O&M) beyond the project lifetime  
135. Sustainable operati on and management of all adaptation interventions under the project has been secured by 
identifying appropriate government and beneficiaries to oversee specific project activities. The GoH is committed 
to: i) financing all operations, maintenance and insur ance activities required under the project; and ii) supporting 
the governance structures established under Outputs 1 and 2, as well as the community land -use plans developed 
under Activity 1.1 To support the GoH and ensure that adaptation interventions are implemented efficiently and 
effectively under the project the Responsible Parties will be beneficiaries for the project. In this role, these 
institutions will provide specific technical inputs and support to MOE on the implementation of a ll interventions. The 
RP (Heifer International  Haiti) will implement Output s 1 and , 2. UNDP will provide support in the implementation of 
Output 3. The GoH is committed to undertaking the required O&M of these interventions to ensure that they 
continue to confer adaptation benefits to project beneficiaries beyond project closure , this is outlines in the letter 
attached to this FP . O&M will be further secured through incentivising community groups (e.g. farmer associations , 
ROSCAs ) to maintain the project interventions because of livelihood support and alternative income streams 
provided by these interventions.  
 
136. During the implementation of UNDP -supported projects in the field, close attention is paid to institutional 
capacity building to facilitate the sustainability and durability of projects. UNDP, as accredited entity, will work in 
close collaboration with loc al, departmental and national elected officials to ensure maximum effectiveness of the 
project even after its lifetime. In this capacity building, UNDP will first train the institutional managers to facilitate 
the transfer of skills, then we will equip the  different institutions to better implement the project.   
 
137. Two recent examples of projects that implemented similar activities (agroforestry and supply chain) that have 
proven to be sustainable beyond the project implementation are “Increasing resilience of ecosystems and 
vulnerable communities to CC and anthropic threats through a ridge to reef approach to BD conservation and 
watershed management” (funded by the LDCF) and “Strengthening adaptive capacities to address climate change 
threats on sustainable development strategies for coastal communities in Haiti” (funded by the GEF).  
 
138. The table below provides a per hectare  estimate of implementation and O&M costs to be covered by GCF and 
agroforestry beneficiaries. Implementation is considered to be the investments incurred in year 1 and O&M any 
investments thereafter.  
 
 Implementation costs 
(USD/ha)  O&M (USD/ha)  
during implementation  after implementation  
GCF 350.62  348.19    
beneficiaries  702.48  2505.52  2563.10


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL  V.3.0 | PAGE 41


---
*Page 46*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 42 
   
  FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) 
Reques
ted 
GCF 
funding  
(i + ii + 
iii + iv + 
v + vi  + 
vii) Total amount  Currency  
22,427,206.48  
 million USD ($)   
GCF 
financial 
instrume
nt Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior 
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(ii) 
Subordin
ated  
loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) 
Equity  Enter a mount    Enter  % equity 
return  
(iv) 
Guarante
es Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) 
Reimbur
sable 
grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) 
Grants  22,427,206.48  
    
(vii) 
Results -
based 
payment
s Enter a mount     
(b) Co -
financin
g 
informat
ion Total amount  Currency  
Enter a mount  Options  
Name of 
institutio
n Financ
ial 
instru
ment  Amount  Currency  Tenor & grace  Pricing  Seniori
ty 
Heifer 
Internatio
nal Haiti Gra
nt 
 8,303,355  million USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Option
s 
 
UNDP  Gra
nt 
 560,000  million USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Option
s 
 
Click 
here to 
enter 
text. Opti
ons 
 Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Option
s


---
*Page 47*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 43 
   
 Click 
here to 
enter 
text. Opti
ons 
 Enter a mount  Options   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Option
s 
 
(c) T
otal 
finan
cing 
(c) = 
(a)+(
b) Amount  Currency  
31,290,561.48  
 million USD ($)   
(d) Other 
financin
g 
arrange
ments 
and 
contribu
tions 
(max. 
250 
words, 
approxi
mately 
0.5 
page)  This is not applicable for the proposed project.  
C.2. Financing by component  
  
Output  Activity  Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
million 
USD ($)  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
1. 
Ecosystem -
based flood 
management 
solutions 
implemented 
in 25,440 
hectares of  
the Trois -
Rivières 
watershed  1.1.Strengthen 
the capacity of 
community 
groups, including 
farmer and 
women’s 
associations, for 
climate -resilient 
land-use 
planning in 
seven target 
communes in the 
Trois -Rivières 
watershed  1,702,000.00             
1,702,000.0
0 Grants  0  Grants   
1.2 Implement 
ecosystem -
based flood 
management 
solutions in the 
Trois -Rivières 
watershed           
16,396,800.0
0                   
16,396,800.
00 Grants   Grants   
M&E  
300,800.00  100,800.00  Grants  200,000.00  Grants  UNDP


---
*Page 48*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 44 
   
 2. Climate -
resilient 
agricultural 
practices, 
optimised 
value chains 
and social 
safety nets 
established 
to promote 
SLM and 
reduce 
degradation 
in the Trois -
Rivières 
watershed  
 2.1. Strengthen 
institutional 
capacity at the 
commune, inter -
commune and 
department 
levels in Haiti’s 
Trois -Rivières 
watershed for 
productive and 
sustainable land -
use management  1,484,597  0  1,484,597  
 
 Grants  
Heifer 
International  
Haiti 2.2 Enhance the 
technical 
capacity and 
access to finance 
of national and 
local 
representatives 
involved in 
agriculture in the 
Trois -Rivières 
watershed for 
adopting climate -
resilient 
sustainable land -
use practices  5,686,057  0                      
5,686,057  Grants  
2.3 Implement a 
social protection 
system to 
support 
vulnerable 
households at 
risk to food 
insecurity 
because of 
climate change  1,072,701  0                      
1,072,701  
 Grants  
M&E  
60,000    60,000  Grants   
 
3.Strengthene
d governance 
and capacity 
for climate -
resilient 
integrated 
water 
resources 
management 
(IWRM)   3.1 Strengthen 
national 
capacities for the 
implementation 
of the Water Act                   
1,015,140                
1,015,140.0
0 Grants  0   
 3.2 Develop an 
integrated, 
climate -resilient 
water 
management 
governance 
framework 
targeting the 
catchment and 
sub-catchment 
levels in the 
Trois -Rivières 
watershed  1,090,066.96             
1,090,066.9
6 Grants  0


---
*Page 49*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
 3.3 Implement 
regular 
monitoring and 
evaluation of 
water resources 
at the catchment 
and sub -
catchment levels 
to support the 
implementation 
of integrated 
water resources 
management 
(IWRM) plans  650,9 52.08             
650,952.08  Grants  0   
M&E  
517,360.00  517,360.00  Grants     
Project management cost 
(USD)   
1,314,087.44  954,087.44  Grants  360,000  Grants  UNDP  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  31,290,561.4
8 22,427,206.48  8,863,355.00  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Technology transfer  
139. Output 1 of the proposed project will facilitate technology transfer by implementing EbA interventions in 
Haiti’s TR watershed, leading to a reduction of the impacts of climate change -induced flooding. These 
interventions will include establishing 17,740 ha of a groforestry systems and rehabilitating  7,700 ha of water 
towers73 through reforestation at priority sites74 in the watershed (Activity 1 .2). The technologies to be 
implemented under the project are not entirely new to Haiti, having all been implemented in various projects. 
For example, under the project, entitled “Applying ecosystem -based disaster risk reduction” (2016) , 36,300 
mangroves and sea grape trees were planted on shores and in river mouths to reduce the impacts of flooding 
in coastal regions in Haiti. What is novel under the proposed project, is the use of EbA interventions as part 
of an integrated approach to fl ood management in the country. Such an approach will not only demonstrate 
the flood -reduction benefits of EbA interventions but also create the required governance frameworks and 
technical capacities at all levels for climate -resilient, sustainable land an d water resources management in 
Haiti.   
 
Capacity -building interventions  
140. To support the implementation of EbA interventions under Activity 1.2, the technical and institutional 
capacity of decision -makers and local communities will be strengthened under Activity 1.1 as well as Outputs 
1 and 2 of the project. These capacity -building activities will focus on creating the enabling environment for 
the adoption and application of an integrated approach to land and water resources management at all levels 
in Haiti’s TR watershed  including capacity f or carbon monitoring . In particular, capacity -building activities 
under Output 2 include: i) strengthening institutional capacity at the commune, inter -commune and 
department levels in Haiti’s TR watershed for productive and sustainable land -use management  and ii) 
enhancing the technical capacity and access to finance of national and local representatives involved in 
agriculture in the TR watershed for adopting climate -resilient sustainable land -use practices (Activity 2 .2). 
 
141. Under Outputs  2 and 3  of the project, capacity -building initiatives will focus on improving water resources 
management in Haiti’s TR watershed . Specifically, these initiatives include: i) strengthening national 
capacities for the implementation of the Water Act; ii) developing  an integrated, climate -resilient water 
 
73 ‘Water towers’ refers to mountainous areas in Haiti where water  for agricultural production and drinking is obtained.   
74 Further details on the priority intervention sites are presented in Section B.3 of this Funding Proposal and Section 10 of An nex 2: 
Feasibility Study.


---
*Page 50*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 management governance framework targeting the catchment and sub -catchment levels in the TR 
watershed; and iii) implementing regular monitoring and evaluation of water resources at the catchment and 
sub-catchment leve ls to support the implementation of integrated water resources management (IWRM) 
plans. The complementarity between the respective capacity -building activities focused on SLM (Activity 1. 1 
and Output 2 ) and IWRM ( Output 3 ) to enable the integrated, sustainable and climate -resilient management 
of land and water resources highlights the transformative potential of the project in managing climate 
change -induced flooding in the TR watershed. From the project total budget USD 5 ,760,272 has been 
allocated for capacity building including USD 3.9 million in co financing.


---
*Page 51*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
142. The proposed project will contribute to the GCF’s paradigm shift adaptation objective of increased climate -
resilient sustainable development by enhancing the capacity of vulnerable communities in the Trois Rivières (TR) 
region of Haiti to adopt and impleme nt an integrated approach to climate change -induced flood management. To 
accomplish this objective, project  interventions have been designed to achieve three GCF fund -level impacts and 
two fund -level outcomes, as presented below75.  
 
Fund -level Outcomes under IRMF  
143. The proposed project will enhance the sustainability of Haiti’s approach to flood management in the TR region 
by achieving the following fund -level impacts:  
• ARA1.0 — Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and 
regions.  
• ARA2.0 — Improved health, wellbeing, food and water security . 
• ARA4.0 — Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services.  
 
Project Outcomes  
144. The proposed project will be evaluated against the relevant factors specified in the GCF  Integrated Results  
Management Framework. It is anticipated that the proposed project will achieve three  Fund -level enabling 
environment  Outcomes, as described below76. 
• Core indicator 5 Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for low emission climate -resilient development pathways in a country -driven manner . 
• Core Indicator 6: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to technology deployment, disse mination, 
development or transfer and innovation . 
• Core indicator 7: Degree to which GCF Investments contribute to market development/transformation at the 
sectoral, local, or national level  
  
145. The proposed project outputs include activities for enhancing cl imate -responsive planning and development — 
in particular, through the sustainable improvement of land and water resources management in Haiti. First, the 
collaborative development of community land -use plans will provide an integrated framework for sustai nable 
landscape management (SLM) at the local level (Activity 1.1). This will be supported by the establishment of 
communal development councils and the provision of training to appropriate public stakeholders, ensuring the 
effective implementation of SLM (Activity 2.1). Second, climate -resilient IWRM will be integrated into Haiti’s Water 
Act by including provisions for Catchment IWRM Committees and Sub -Catchment Water Resource User 
Associations. These committees and associations will provide a platform for  cross -sectoral, vertical and 
horizontal collaboration between stakeholders (Activity 3.1). This collaboration will be supported by the 
development of climate -resilient IWRM plans as well as providing training to members of the aforementioned 
institutions on the implementation of IWRM in decision -making activities (Activity 3.2). Finally, the implementation 
of consistent monitoring and evaluation of all project activities at the catchment and sub -catchment levels will 
provide an important regulatory functio n in optimising the uptake and effectiveness of climate -resilient flood 
management solutions (Activity 3.3).   
 
146. Implementing 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems and rehabilitating 7,700 ha of forests under Activity 1.2 will 
restore degraded ecosystems and considerably reduce the impacts of climate change -induced flooding in the TR 
watershed. The combined effect of the se EbA interventions will result in a 40% reduction in peak runoff, with 
rehabilitation interventions expected to reduce floodplain extents in the target areas by 20% and 26% under the 
20-year and 100 -year flood scenarios, respectively. By the end of this century, these EbA interventions are 
projected to result in a more than 50% reduction in the number of households affected by 100 -year flood events 
(declining from 1,342 households at risk of flooding under the baseline scenario to 638 households with proj ect 
interventions). Similarly, agroforestry and reforestation interventions under this project activity are expected to 
result in a 35% reduction in the number of households at risk to 20 -year flood events in the TR watershed. This 
 
75 Detailed information on the assumptions and estimates of the impact potential of the proposed project are provided in the project’s results 
framework and economic analysis (Section E of this document and Annex 3, respectively).  
76 A detailed description of the project activities that will be implemen ted under each output to achieve the GCF project outcomes is 
presented in Section B.3 of this Funding Proposal.


---
*Page 52*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
 represents a decline fro m 463 under the baseline scenario to approximately 300 houses at the end of the century 
under a 20 -year flooding scenario.  
 
147. In addition to their significant flood -reduction potential, the EbA interventions will also deliver numerous social 
benefits for vu lnerable households in the target communes in the TR watershed. Rehabilitating degraded forests 
will increase the ecosystem goods and services they provide (e.g. improved quality and quantity of water supply, 
increased prevalence of agricultural pollinator s and enhanced soil fertility77), while new livelihood benefits will be 
generated through the implementation of agroforestry systems in the seven target communes. This will 
incentivise target communities  to shift away from unsustainable practices — such as  unregulated charcoal 
production — towards the adoption and implementation of sustainable, climate -resilient land uses. Moreover, 
these interventions will  generate benefits for the health of vulnerable for individuals, households and communities 
living in the TR watershed, reducing the spread of water - and vector -borne diseases as contamination of 
freshwater sources (e.g. rivers) and food is reduced.  Specifically, agroforestry and reforestation interventions 
will: i) reduce the transmission of communicable  diseases; ii) safeguard agricultural livelihoods; and iii) improve 
basic water quantity and quality, as well as sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services78. Access to WASH, in 
particular, reduces the spread of water - and vector -borne diseases including, inter alia, cholera, diarrhoea and 
typhoid — the World Health Organisation has estimated that improving access to WASH facilities could reduce 
the global burden of disease by approximately 10%79. Finally, the development of rigorous monitoring and 
evaluation of project activities and implementation will allow the iterative adjustment of project implementation 
practices, to ensure the effectiveness of , inter alia , EbA interventions in reducing the spread of water - and vector -
borne diseases.   
 
148. Demons trating the adaptation and livelihood benefits of EbA interventions will be supported by awareness -
raising activities under Output 1 . These activities will strengthen the adaptive capacity of communities by 
increasing their knowledge of, inter alia , the be nefits of climate -resilient agricultural practices and agroforestry as 
well as the alternative livelihood options that these activities provide (Activity 1.1 .). As a result, project 
beneficiaries will have increased technical and institutional capacity to improve their long -term food and income 
security. Moreover, the dissemination of information on sustainable charcoal production and reforestation will 
enhance the energy security of these beneficiaries and enable them to sustainably utilise forest resource s. The 
adaptive capacity of communities will be further strengthened by the: i) provision of climate -resilient agricultural 
inputs to communities (Activity 2. 1); ii) creation of an agricultural finance mechanism (Activity 2.  2.); and iii) 
establishment of a social protection system for food insecure households (Activity 2.3). These activities will 
provide a combination of short - and long -term support to vulnerable  communities in response to climate change -
induced flooding, ensuring that the most vulnerable smallholder farmers are included in the agricultural value 
chain and are able to improve their food and income security.  
 
149. The proposed project will be implemented in the TR watershed area, covering 33 communal sections and 118 
communities within the seven target communes. As a result of direct investments from the GCF and Heifer 
International  Haiti, the project will confer direct and indirect climate change adaptation benefits to approximately 
292,60080 (approximately 152,152 women and 140,448 men) and approximately 441,27281 (approximately 
229,461 women and 211,811 men) vulnerable people in Haiti, respectively. These investments will transform 
Haiti’s approach to land and water resources management and create an enabling environment for the uptake of 
climate -resilient, sustainable flood management practices within the p ublic and private sector. It will then become 
possible to scale up and replicate these practices nationally, as well as across the Caribbean region.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
 
77 Thompson, I.D. et al. 2011. “Forest Biodiversity and the Delivery of Ecosystem Goods and Services: Translating Science into Policy”, 
BioScience , 61 (12).  
78 APFM. 2015. Health and Sanitation Aspects of Flood Management.  
79 Ibid. 
80 Direct beneficiaries include the  total population livin g in proximity to waterways in the target communes.  This was calculated by mapping 
all infrastructure and calculating  their distance to the river . All houses within 30m of the river are considered direct beneficiaries.  
81 Indirect beneficiaries include the total population of the target communes,  minus direct beneficiaries  based on 2003 census data adjusted  
for population growth. See Annex 3 – Economic Analysis for a full description of the adjustment methodology.


---
*Page 53*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 150. The proposed project will catalyse a paradigm shift in Haiti’s approach to flood management in the TR watershed 
by initiating a shift away from uncoordinated decision -making and unsustainable land -use practices towards an 
integrated, climate -resilient appr oach to land and water resources management. Details on how the project will 
contribute to GCF’s Paradigm Shift Objective of climate -resilient sustainable development are presented below.  
 
Potential for scaling up and replication, as well as strengthening Haiti’s institutional and regulatory framework  
151. Under the proposed project, an integrated climate -resilient approach to flood management will be implemented 
to address the severe impacts of climate change -induced flooding on soil erosion, well -being and livelihoods of 
vulnerable communities in Haiti’s TR watershed. This approach is built around the principles of climate -resilient, 
sustainable development and underpinned by three main interventions. First, agroforestry systems will be 
establishe d and degraded forests restored at priority intervention sites across the watershed to: i) reduce peak 
surface runoff and flood extent; and ii) provide alternative livelihood options to the unsustainable land -use practices 
on which most vulnerable communit ies in the TR watershed depend. As a result, these agroforestry systems will 
contribute to reducing the spread of water - and vector -borne diseases such as cholera by improving water quality 
and reducing flood impacts in the watershed. The implementation of  agroforestry systems will be supported by 
establishing the local governance structures required to implement and manage climate -resilient land -use practices 
and providing training to community groups — including farmer and women’s associations — for stren gthened 
climate -responsive planning. Second, complementary interventions focused on enhancing technical and 
institutional capacity at the commune, inter -commune and department levels will be implemented to promote 
productive climate -resilient agricultural practices and sustainable land management. Last, the necessary 
governance framework for integrated water resources management (IWRM) will be established in Haiti to support 
the uptake of climate -resilient land management systems and facilitate sustainable use and management of water 
resources over the long term. Together, project interventions will transform flood management in Haiti by catalysing 
a shift away from uncoordinated, compartmentalised decision -making around flood management, towards an 
integrat ed approach that can be scaled up and replicated nationally and across the Caribbean region.  
 
152. To enhance the adaptation impact of these interventions, Haiti’s governance framework for the sustainable 
management of natural resources will be strengthened. Th is will be done primarily through adapting the draft Water 
Act to include, inter alia , provisions for the adoption of IWRM Committees in departments across the country. As a 
result of these changes, a new strategy will be developed for IWRM in Haiti that a ddresses both the existing 
challenges of a fragmented and uncoordinated system of water management, particularly at a catchment and sub -
catchment level, as well as the current and projected impacts of climate change -induced flooding. Regulation 
around the sustainable use and management of land and water resources will also be strengthened under the 
project through the development of community land -use plans, which will facilitate the implementation of a 
landscape approach to land and water resource manageme nt. This will contribute to the creation of a more coherent 
land and water resources management framework in Haiti that considers climate change.  
 
153. A transition model underpinning the paradigm shift for the agroforestry interventions is depicted in the figure 
below,  demonstrating how the project will support farmers in making the transition to sustainable agroforestry  
possible . This includes the role of social protection and technical support to assist farmers in transitioning through 
the initial  investm ent period .


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
  
The diagram shows that GCF finance is needed to allow farmers to bridge the “valley of death” of the first years of 
investment in agroforestry, when costs are higher than revenues. By providing inputs to farmers, the costs of 
implementing agroforestry become lower, enabling the farmer to shift to this more sustainable land use and guarantee 
income from year 1 (through harvests of annual crops within the agroforestry system).  
 
Knowledge sharing, awareness and the creation of an enabling environment  
154. The absence of a platform for coordination between the multiple stakeholders involved in land and water 
management in Haiti is a barrier to effective flood management and has resulted in fragmented and ineffective 
decision -making as well as the duplication of activities82. In this context, horizontal coordination will be enabled 
through the establishment of IWRM Committees (Activity 3.1), which will promote cross -sectoral decision -making 
between all stakeholders reg arding resource use and allocation. The project will also strengthen vertical 
coordination between local water resource users and public sector officials at both municipal and national levels. 
For example, both community members and public institutions (su ch as municipalities) will be involved in the 
creation of community land -use management plans (Activity 1.1  and 1. 2). This will ensure a rigorous balance of 
bottom -up and top -down integration through participatory processes. The establishment of Sub -Catchment Water 
Resource Users Associations (Activity 3.1) will also promote a freer flow of information and communicati on between 
stakeholders at different levels, thereby promoting vertical coordination on the sustainable management and use 
of land and water resources.   
 
155. To further support the shift away from uncoordinated decision -making and unsustainable land -use pract ices, 
agricultural productivity in the TR watershed will be enhanced. This will be achieved by: i) strengthening the 
technical and institutional capacity of people involved in agriculture at the commune, inter -commune and 
department levels for implementing  productive climate -resilient agricultural practices; ii) enhancing smallholder 
farmers’ access to financial resources to facilitate the long -term implementation of climate -resilient agricultural 
practices; and iii) establishing a social protection system to provide immediate support to vulnerable households 
affected by climate change impacts, particularly flooding. Furthermore, public sector stakeholders will receive 
training on how to implement SLM and IWRM to mainstream sustainable land and water resourc e management 
into the public sector. The provision of training on climate -resilient agricultural practices will improve the climate 
resilience of beneficiary communities, resulting in improved food security for subsistence farmers as well as higher 
incomes  for smallholder farmers. The incorporation of these income - and livelihood -generating activities has been 
previously demonstrated as an important factor that will ensure the long -term sustainability of adaptation and 
development projects83. Knowledge shar ing on sustainable charcoal production methodologies will help improve 
 
82 Widme r et al.  2018. A Vision for Water in Haiti, 2018.  
83 Gibbons, A. 2010. Greening Haiti, Tree by Tree. Science,  327, pp. 640 –641.


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 the efficiency of these activities and reduce wood loss during the production process — presently, approximately 
70% of wood energy is lost during the production of charcoal. This will reduce deforestation and contribute to 
improved climate -resilient flood management. In addition, awareness -raising campaigns will be promoted in city 
hall meetings as well as community radio broadcasts, focusing on: i) promoting the benefits sustainable la nd-use 
practices; ii) encouraging community participation in land -use plans; and iii) creating awareness of adaptation and 
landscape management solutions to address climate change -induced flooding. These capacity -building activities, 
combined with the moni toring and evaluation systems included in the proposed project design, will produce an 
evidence base detailing the success of project interventions. This will be an important incentive for the creation of 
an enabling environment for future upscaling and re plication of project activities in other areas of Haiti and the 
Caribbean region.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
156. The proposed project will contribute towards the achievement of at least 5 of the 17 United Nation Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), including: i) SDG 2 — Zero Hunger; ii) SDG 5 — Gender Equality; iii) SDG 6 — Clean 
Water and Sanitation; iv) SDG 11 — Sustainable Cities and Communities; and v) SDG 15 — Life on Land. In 
addition, project interventions  will generate several environmental, social, economic and gender -responsive co -
benefits, as described below.  
 
Environmental co -benefits  
157. The restoration of degraded forests through targeted reforestation interventions and expanded agroforestry 
practices, as well as the implementation of integrated water resource management (IWRM) practices (Outputs 1 .1 
and 3.1, respectively) will generate several environmental co -benefits. Such benefits include reduced surface runoff 
and soil erosion, carbon seq uestration and improvements in air quality.  
 
158. Historically, deforestation in Haiti has increased erosion rates by six -fold and river flows by 25%84. This problem 
has also been experienced in the country’s Trois -Rivières (TR) watershed, where soil erosion is exacerbated by 
climate change -induced flooding. To address this climate change problem, 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems will 
be implemented, and 7,700 ha of priority forests restored in the TR watershed (Activity 1.  2). These interventions 
will not only have direct flood -reduction benefits for vulnerable communities in the watershed85, but they will also 
contribute to soil conservation. This will lead to inter alia:  i) reduced surface runoff and soil erosion caused by 
flooding; ii) increased wa ter infiltration and storage capacity of the soil; iii) improved water quality, particularly in 
near-shore marine environments because of reduced sedimentation; improved air quality; and iv) improved soil 
quality and productivity. Furthermore, the stabilis ation of degraded watersheds will result in greater biodiversity, 
increased provisioning of ecosystem goods and services to communities living adjacent to intervention sites, and 
improved conservation of indigenous plant and animal species.  
 
159. While most of the environmental co -benefits that will be conferred by agroforestry and reforestation interventions 
are adaptation -focused, there is also the potential for mitigation co -benefits to be provided through the project. 
Implementing agroforestry and reforestat ion activities will contribute to enhancing the carbon sequestration 
potential of the restored landscapes, while promoting the adoption of climate -resilient sustainable land -use 
practices (Activity 2.  2) will catalyse a shift away from unsustainable charco al production that contributes to 
increasing CO2 emissions in the country. It should be noted that the potential mitigation benefits associated with 
reforestation interventions have not been calculated for this project as the potential benefits will be per ipheral to 
the adaptation impact of these interventions. Instead, the carbon sequestration potential of reforestation 
interventions is supported by evidence across the United States, where reforestation interventions have 
demonstrated that “the establishme nt of woody vegetation delivers immediate to multi -decadal carbon 
sequestration benefits in biomass and woody debris pools”86.  
 
Social co -benefits  
160. Implementing targeted landscape restoration and IWRM, as well as enhancing the technical capacity of 
smallholder farmers and communities to utilise climate -resilient agricultural practices will generate several social 
co-benefits. These benefits are descri bed in further detail below and include improved food security, social 
empowerment, greater energy security, as well as health benefits.  
 
 
84 Inter-American Development Bank (IADB). 2014. Haiti: Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II – Proposal for Operation Develop ment. 
[online] Available: https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/meeting -
documents/haiti_climate_proofing_of_agriculture_in_the_centre -artibonite_loop_idb -project_document_0.pdf  
85 as described in Sections B.2 and B.3 of this Funding Proposal  
86 Nave, L.E. et al. 2019. The role of reforestation in carbon sequestration. New Forests , 50: pp. 115 -137.


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 161. Training communities and individual farmers in climate -resilient agroforestry practices (Activity 1.1 .1), as well as 
expanding access to agricultural markets and credit facilities (Activity 2. 1.2) will improve food security at the 
household level. These benefits will be realised through improved food production and increased income. In 
addition, a reduction in the incide nce and intensity of flooding achieved through reforestation and agroforestry 
activities (Activity 1. 1.2) will improve food security, as flooding often undermines agricultural production. In 
particular, productive floodplains are impacted by increased rate s of erosion, which contributes to food and water 
being contaminated by heavy chemicals and/or pesticides transported by flooding87. Enhanced food security will 
also increase the likelihood of project beneficiaries continuing agroforestry practices and the  conservation of 
restored forests after project closure.  
 
162. Project interventions will also generate positive social co -benefits for beneficiary communities in the form of 
greater social empowerment. First, communities will have improved stewardship over fo rests and other natural 
resources and will receive long -term benefits from the sustainable use of non -timber forest products and other 
forest resources. This will be achieved through training provided on , inter alia , community land -use plans and 
sustainable charcoal production and reforestation (Activity 1.  1). Second, the active engagement of communities in 
the development of these community land -use plans (Activity 1. 1) will also improve community cohesion. Finally, 
the development of community land-use plans (Activity 1.1), as well as the establishment of communal development 
councils (Activity 2. 1), Catchment IWRM Committees and Sub -Catchment Resource Users Associations (Activity 
3.1 ) will improve the decision -making power of traditionally mar ginalised groups — including women and local 
communities — on natural resource management. These benefits will be supported by the diversified and improved 
climate resilience of incomes amongst smallholder farmers through the promotion of agroforestry syst ems (Activity 
1. 2) and the provision of training on climate -resilient agricultural practices (Activity 2 .2).   
 
Economic co -benefits  
163. Project interventions — particularly reforestation, IWRM, and the expansion of agricultural markets — will 
generate several economic co -benefits. These are described in detail below and include reduced damage to 
infrastructure, employment creation, enhance d climate resilience of the agricultural sector and the adoption of 
climate resilient livelihoods amongst smallholder farmers and other community beneficiaries.  
 
164. At present, approximately 50% of built -up areas in Haiti are vulnerable to climate change -induced flooding. This 
is evidenced by the densely populated cities of Port -de-Paix and Gonaives, which saw 30 and 80% of their areas 
flooded after Hurricane Jeanne  made landfall in northern Haiti, a tropical storm which caused approximately US$41 
million in total damages in 2004. Flood management interventions under the project are expected to reduce peak 
surface runoff and floodplain extents in Haiti’s TR watershed. This, in turn, will contribute to reducing the economic 
damages to existing infrastructure, g enerating public savings and indirectly increasing the fiscal space available for 
other social and developmental investments88. These economic co -benefits will be supported by the creation of 
additional employment opportunities and through the adoption of agroforestry systems and reforestation activities. 
Such opportunities will include the involvement of farmers and other commun ity members in the establishment of 
nurseries, physical planting of seedlings, and promotion of regeneration activities. Encouraging farmers, in 
particular, to participate in planting specific tree seedlings (e.g. coffee, cocoa and cassava) will provide th em with 
an important economic safety net to reduce the economic impacts of climate change -induced flooding on their 
production. These impacts will be further reduced by expanding agricultural markets (Activity 2.2), which will 
increase the resilience of th e agricultural sector to external climate change shocks, such as flood and hurricane 
impacts. This, in turn, will contribute to reducing fluctuations of agricultural employment and improved food price 
stability.  
 
165. Smallholder farmers and beneficiary commun ities will also secure climate -resilient livelihoods as a result of 
several project interventions including: i) establishing 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems (Activity 1.2), which will 
diversify farmers product base , generate higher levels of income and i mprove climate resilience as beneficiaries 
will have a wider resource base to draw from; ii) training community members who depend on agriculture for the 
livelihoods on climate -resilient agricultural practices and sustainable land management (Activity 2.2) , which will 
improve agricultural productivity under future climate change conditions; and iii) increasing access to agricultural 
finance (Activity 2.  2), which will allow beneficiaries to purchase necessary agricultural inputs and improve their 
yields. In  addition, the reforestation of 7,700 ha of forest in priority areas in the TR watershed will result in, inter 
alia, reduced erosion and improved soil fertility. This will bolster yields, resulting in higher income levels and 
contributing to more resilient  livelihoods.  
  
 
87 Associated Programme on Flood Management (APFM). 2015. Health and Sanitation Aspects of Flood Management. Integrated Flood 
Manage ment Tools Series, 23.  
88 Ibid.


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 Gender -sensitive development impact  
166. Approximately 52% of direct beneficiaries of the proposed project are women. In addition, project interventions 
will result in several gender -specific co -benefits described below, including gender -responsive health and socio -
economic benefits .  
 
167. Implementi ng an integrated approach to flood management in the TR watershed will have several positive 
gender -based co -benefits. First, this will reduce the rate of displacement, and in turn reduce the amount of violence 
— particularly sexual violence — experienced by women. Previous studies have documented increased incidence 
of gender -based violence when displacement has occurred. In the aftermath of Hurricane Matthew, field 
assessments reported an increased incidence of sexual violence against displaced women and girls. Increased 
incidences of gender -based violence in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake further support this finding, and it has 
been partially attributed to the breakdown of traditional social networks between neighbours and communities that 
occur al ongside displacement89. Second, reduced flooding will result in a decline in the spread of water -borne 
diseases as the contamination of water  supplies will decline. This will generate a disproportionately positive impact 
on women, who are the most exposed to contaminated water because of gender roles in the home90.  
 
168. Additional gender -responsive health co -benefits that will be achieved in the proposed project include a reduction 
in the horizontal transmission  of HIV/AIDS and other STIs amongst women because of improved food security. 
This is because women are more likely than men to engage in high -risk strategies to mitigate food insecurity — 
including sex work — which exposes them to the disease91. The projec t will also generate gender -responsive 
economic co -benefits in the form of resilient livelihoods. Haiti has a high percentage of female -headed rural 
households (approximately 39%), the majority of whom are smallholder farmers. These women, in particular, w ill 
benefit from Activity 2.  2, which will include the provision of training on climate -resilient agricultural practices and 
sustainable land management as well as the extension of agricultural finance and provision of climate -resilient 
agricultural inputs . Studies have found that closing the gender gap in agriculture92 results in improved agricultural 
production levels overall, as well as increased levels of food availability and a decline in average food prices93.  
 
169. The promotion of gender equality has been mainstreamed throughout proposed project interventions wherever 
possible, based  on the gender assessment and action plan (Annex 8). This gender mainstreaming will contribute 
to the promotion of gender -sensitive dev elopment beyond the conclusion of the project.  
coment D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Vulnerability of the country  
170. Ranking 163rd out of 188 countries on the 2016 UN Human Development Index, Haiti faces multiple development 
challenges related to food and economic security, health, education, political violence, and environmental 
degradation. These challenges are compounded by extrem e climate events such as hurricanes and tropical storms 
that cause flooding and landslides and the frequent occurrence of natural disasters (e.g. earthquakes) in the 
country. As the inhabitants  of a SIDS and LDC, most Haitians are particularly vulnerable t o impacts of these events. 
Indeed, with more than 96% of its population living at risk of multiple climate and natural hazards94, Haiti is 
considered one of the world’s most vulnerable countries to the acute shocks and chronic stresses of climate 
change. T his is supported by the findings of the 2020 Climate Risk Index95, where Haiti was listed as the third most 
affected country by hydrometeorological disasters that occurred during the period 1998 –2018. Additionally, with a 
vulnerability index of 0.58 and a sensitivity index of 0.22, the Development Bank of Latin America listed Haiti as the 
most vulnerable country to climate change in Latin America and the Caribbean96. 
 
 
89 International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC). 2015. Unseen, Unheard: Gender -based violence in disasters . 
Geneva, IFRC.  
90 APFM. 2015. Health and Sanitation Aspects of Flood Management.  
91 Anema, J., Vogenthaler, N., Frongillo, E.A., Kadiyala, S., and Weiser, S.D. 2009. Food Insecurity and HIV/AIDS: Current Knowl edge, 
Gaps, and Research Priorities. Current HIV/AIDS Reports, 6(4): 224 -231.  
92 The “gender gap in agriculture” is an observed dif ference in yields per ha between male and female farmers, which has predominantly 
been attributed to differences in input levels. On average, female farmers are less productive than their male counterparts b ecause of lower 
levels of access to agricultural inputs including, inter alia , seeds, fertilisers and pesticides. From: FAO. 2011. The State of Food and 
Agriculture: Women in Agriculture.  Office of Knowledge Exchange, Research and Extension, Rome. Retrieved from: 
http://www.fao.org/3/i2050e/i2050e.pdf  
93 FAO. 2011. The State of Food and Agriculture: Women in Agriculture.  
94 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). Available at: https://www.gfdrr.org/en/haiti.  
95 D. Eckstein, V. Künzel, and L. Schäfer (2020). Global Climate Risk Index 2020. Germanwatch, Bonn. Available at: 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/20 -2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf  
96 CAF (2014). Vulnerab ility index to climate change in the Latin American and Caribbean Region. CAF, Caracas. 206 pp. Available at: 
http://scioteca.caf.com/handle/123456789/509


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 171. In the past two decades, Haiti has experienced 26 floods (12 of which were catastrophic), 8 hurricanes, and 
numerous other extreme climate events such as tropical storms and earthquakes. With a total of 55 extreme climate 
events , 2.81 related deaths per 100,000 inhabitants and approximately US$390 million in losses during the period 
1999 –2018, the country ranks in the top three at risk countries to climate change impacts97. Of these impacts, the 
damages and losses caused by climate change -induced flooding are particularly severe. For example,  in 2004, 
Hurricane Jeanne  caused severe flooding in the northern part of Haiti, resulting in more than 2,800 deaths and 
approximately US$41 million in damages. More recently, Hurricane Matthew struck Haiti in 2016, causing 546 
deaths and the loss of up to 90% of crops and livestock in some areas98. The frequency and intensity of flood 
events is already increasing in Haiti. This trend is expected to continue under future climate change conditions as 
a result of projected higher average annual temperatures and increased intensity and concentration of precipitation 
events across the country99. The impacts of these climatic changes will be particularly severe for the country, which 
is already extremely vulnerable to external shocks caused by climate change. This is because Haiti is currently 
locked in to a reactive cycle of costly disaster response and rebuilding that is preventing the adoption and 
implementation of climate -resilient approaches to managing the cross -sectoral impacts of flooding in the country. 
These impacts are further exacerbated by th e country’s fiscal challenges and dependency on neighbouring 
countries for importing critical supplies. For example, approximately 50% of the national budget comes from foreign 
aid, 100% of the hydrocarbons used for energy production are imported, and 60% of its food requirements are 
imported, despite agriculture being the primary economic activity . Extreme climate events are already affecting 
these imports, resulting in shipping routes becoming unsafe and insurance premiums for shipping companies 
becoming unaffordable. The cumulative impact of these factors inhibits the capacity of national and local decision -
makers to implement long -term strategies for responding to the adverse impacts of climate change on the country’s 
population.  
 
Vulnerability of beneficiary groups  
172. While the TR watershed covers three departments in Haiti (namely the Artibonite, North and Northwest 
departments), the Northwest department has the joint highest number of inhabitants living under poverty, with an 
extreme poverty rate exceeding 40% (representing approximately 20% of the extreme poor)100. Poverty is 
particularly prevalent in the Trois Rivières  (TR) region, which is the most populous of the three watersheds in the 
Northwest department. This region also  encompasses Port -de-Paix, a major city ranked as the third -most food -
insecure area in Haiti101. High levels of poverty and food insecurity experienced in the TR region contribute directly 
to increasing the vulnerability of inhabitants to the impacts of cli mate change.  
 
173. Within the Northwest department, the TR region is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change -
induced flooding . The reason for this is two -fold. First, the region’s steep topography contributes to increased runoff 
during extreme  precipitation events which consequently exacerbates flood impacts. Second, the TR region is 
located near Haiti’s north  coast which increases the exposure of the region’s population to the impacts of hurricanes 
and tropical storms coming from the north -east. The cumulative negative impacts of climate change -induced 
flooding and extreme events are compounded by land degrada tion in the TR region, resulting from deforestation 
and unsustainable crop farming on the surrounding steep slopes. Current agricultural practices — particularly the 
increasing prevalence of annual crop cultivation which leaves the soil bare during most of  the year — and charcoal 
production in the mountainous areas of the catchment cause widespread deforestation. Consequently, these 
practices have resulted in large -scale changes in the natural landscape of the TR region, with the clearing of tress, 
in parti cular, contributing to decreased infiltration and increased surface runoff in the catchment. This, in turn, has 
resulted in increased erosion and soil degradation within the catchment area, further exacerbating flood impacts.  
 
Socioeconomic status  
174. Haiti i s the only LDC in the Western Hemisphere and the least wealthy country in the Americas with an annual 
GDP per capita of approximately US$1,850. Poverty is endemic with approximately 59% of the population living 
below the national poverty line of US$2.41 pe r day, and approximately 24% living below the national extreme 
poverty line of US$1.23 per day. In rural areas, poverty is highest , where 52% of the population and 63% of 
extremely poor households reside. Inhabitants of rural areas also have limited capaci ty to adopt alternative 
livelihoods, resulting in an increased dependence on agriculture. Approximately 40% of the population is dependent 
 
97 D. Eckstein, V. Künzel, and L. Schäfer (2020). Global Climate Risk Index 2020. Germanwatch, Bonn. A vailable at: 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/20 -2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf .  
98 World Bank. 2017. Rapidly Assessing the Impact of Hurricane Matthew in Haiti. Available at: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2017/10/20/rapidly -assessing -the-impact -of-hurricane -matthew -in-haiti 
99 BRGM (France) & CIAT. “Atlas des menaces naturelles en Haiti.”  
100 World Bank. 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social gains at timid pace. Available at: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/643771468257721618/pdf/895220BRI00pau00Box385284B00PUBLIC0.pdf  
101 35% of households are exposed to food insecurity. WFP. 2016. Evaluation de la sécurité  alimentaire en milieu urbain.


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 on the agricultural sector for their livelihoods which consists mostly of small -scale subsistence farming that is hig hly 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and natural disasters. Poverty, corruption, vulnerability to climate 
change and natural disasters, as well as low levels of education across much of the population, represent some of 
the most serious impedime nts to Haiti’s economic growth.   
 
175. The country’s small tax and market base as well as its high public debt — outstanding external debt was cancelled 
by donor countries following  the 2010 earthquake, but has since risen to approximately US$2.8 billion as of 
December 2017102 — constrain the government’s  ability to allocate funding from the national budget for climate 
change adaptation . Moreover,  limited opportunities exist for the p ublic and private sector to access financial 
resources for addressing climate change impacts, which is estimated to cost the country approximately US$20 
million per annum103. Given that this cost is likely to increase significantly under future climate chan ge conditions, 
external investment is critical to increase the climate resilience of Haiti’s population.  
 
Institutional capacity needs  
176. Governance of land and water resources, as well as improving the sustainability of agricultural practices, are 
major challenges that need  to be addressed to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable communities in the TR region 
to the impacts of climate change. Critical condi tions needed for the implementation of an effective and efficient 
resilience strategy for vulnerable populations are the strengthening of governance and technical capacities of 
institutions and the establishment of appropriate legal frameworks in relation to land and water resources 
management. A multi -sectoral approach is therefore required to establish an integrated water resource 
management (IWRM) approach in the TR region. The adoption of such an approach will contribute to the 
implementation of sustain able agricultural practices, which will concomitantly increase food security and reduce the 
adverse impacts of climate change -induced flooding on the most vulnerable communities in the region.  
 
177. Most national and local decision -makers, as well as farmers, are aware of the adverse impacts of climate change -
induced flooding on land and water resources in the TR catchment. However, there is limited knowledge on 
adaptation options for communities, as well as limited awareness surrounding the urgent need for an integrated 
approach to flood  management  in the region. Consequently, people in the TR region that rely on farming for their 
livelihoods are unable to understand the implications of conventional, unplanned agricultural practices on the 
landscape under climate change conditions. For example, the cultivation of annual crops leaves soil bare during 
most of the year, resulting  in its degradation and erosion caused by extreme weather. This leads to decr eased 
surface cover and reduced infiltration capacity of the soil, subsequently exacerbating the impacts of flooding on the 
landscape and surrounding communities. Furthermore, profit margins for the farmers within the catchment are small 
and government bud gets are extremely limited. As a result, on -farm decision -making is aimed at sustaining 
livelihoods in the short term, while government investments do not currently prioritise the long -term sustainability 
of climate -resilient activities within the catchmen t. GCF resources supported by government co -financing will, 
therefore, be used to: i) demonstrate the benefits of implementing an integrated, climate -resilient flood management 
approach in the region; and ii) strengthen the technical and institutional capa cities of national and local decision -
makers, farmers, community members, CSOs and association representatives to implement coordinated and 
planned long -term adaptation interventions. The combined effect of these adaptation interventions will contribute 
enhanced climate resilience of vulnerable communities in the TR region.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
178. The proposed  project is strongly  aligned with Haiti’s national priorities, having been designed in collaboration 
with project stakeholders  at all levels. These priorities are summarised below.  
 
• The revised National Adaptation Programme of Action  (NAPA)104, developed in 2017, identified fo ur priority 
areas for addressing the impacts of climate change — namely, soils, agriculture, coastal zones and water 
resources. Focus was placed on these areas because they are among the most vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate change such as flooding, hu rricanes and tropical storms, and addressing these negative impacts will 
contribute considerably to climate -resilient sustainable development in Haiti. The NAPA is of relevance 
because of its linkages with, and integration into, other  national -level plans and priorities centred around 
climate -resilient land and water resources management. Specifically, national policies that have been 
integrated into the revised NAPA include the Interim Cooperation Framework105 and the Poverty Reduction  
 
102 CIA World Factbook. 2019. Field listing: Debt – external. Available at: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -world -
factbook/fields/246.html  
103 D. Eckstein, V. Künzel, and L. Schäfer (2020). Global Climate Risk Index 2020. Germanwatch, Bonn. Available at: 
https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/20 -2-01e%20Global%20Cli mate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf  
104 In French, referred to as Programme d’Action National d’Adaptation  or PANA . 2006.  https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/hti01f.pdf   
105 Available at: https://reliefweb.int/report/haiti/haiti -interim -cooperation -framework -2004 -2006


---
*Page 60*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 56 
   
 Strategy Paper (PRSP)106. These policies share common goals relevant to the proposed project such as 
ramping up agricultural production in a sustainable way, preventing land degradation and improving access to 
clean water. Haiti’s NAPA and PRSP also share mutual objectives towards implementing activities that reduce 
the vulnerability of communities to climate change alongside the National Disaster Risk and Management 
Plan107. Another relevant plan integrated into the NAPA is the National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP), 
released in 1999, which prioritises addressing the impacts of climate change, particularly flooding, on land and 
water resources in the country. The proposed project strongly aligns with the NAPA, as it will complement the 
response to p riority needs outlined within this national plan, as well as other plans that have been integrated 
into it. This alignment is evidenced in the project’s focus on promoting the adoption of an integrated approach 
to land and water resources management to inc rease the climate resilience of the most vulnerable communities 
in the Trois Rivières (TR) region of Haiti.  
• The proposed project aims to build on achieved results of the national adaptation planning (NAP) process, 
supported by a GCF Readiness project, thr ough the strengthening of institutional and technical capacities 
and the strengthening of existing frameworks and systems. The NAPA called for increased local and sub -
regional capacity to support adaptation initiatives and NAP implementation, in the form o f an Inter -
sectoral Regional Programme Approach (APRIS). This approach aims to better focus the efforts of 
government and non -government actors at the regional level by making it possible to adequately 
implement programs and projects, and to better meet th e needs of populations in the regions of the 
country. APRIS opens the possibility for broader inclusion of civil society groups at a decentralized level 
and to build their capacities for influencing and implementing localized actions on climate change 
adap tation. It also aims to develop regions considering the environmental and economic potential of each, 
while seeking coherence and complementarity in actions, in line with land -use planning approach and 
socio -economic national development strategy. The GCF NAP project builds on these existing processes 
and cooperates with ongoing initiatives to strengthen the Government of Haiti’s capacity to effectively 
respond to climate change threats while avoiding duplication of efforts.  
• The Strategic Development Plan f or Haiti (SDPH)108 (Plan Stratégique de Développement d’Haïti ) of 2012 
presents a plan for long -term development centred around four core themes. Specifically, this plan focuses on 
building resilience to climate change impacts by: i) mainstreaming climate change considerations into planning 
and awareness -raising ini tiatives at the national and local level; ii) establishing a network of protected areas; 
iii) restoring degraded ecosystems ; and iv) managing the use of watersheds and forests in a sustainable way.  
The proposed project strongly aligns with the country’s ad aptation priorities in that project interventions will 
increase the climate resilience of the TR region through ecosystem restoration, as well as improved watershed 
and landscape management.  
• Haiti’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)109 has the follow ing adaptation priorities: i) enhancing the 
resilience and sustainable management of 15 watersheds; ii) undertaking afforestation and/or reforestation 
activities of 137,500 ha of land; iii) strengthening the protection of coastal areas; and iv) preserving marine 
protected areas across the country’s coastal zone. The focus of the proposed project on enhancing climate -
resilient land and water resources management supported by agroforestry interventions is, therefore, strongly 
aligned with the priorities and o bjectives set out in the NDC.  
• The Initial (First) and Second National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC  (INC and 
SNC)110,111 highlight the importance of managing watersheds to address the impacts of climate change. Both 
communications emphasise the need to: i) implement climate -resilient solutions that will address the impacts 
of climate -induced flooding on vulnerable communiti es and the main economic sectors (e.g. agriculture); ii) 
promote the adoption of an integrated approach to land and water resources management in the country; and 
iii) strengthen the cohesion between existing and planned initiatives focused on landscape an d watershed 
management, informed by best practices generated from past projects and/or programmes across the country 
and Caribbean region. The proposed project is strongly aligned with the abovementioned adaptation needs. 
Specifically, project intervention s will promote the adoption of an integrated approach to land and water 
resources management in the TR region and, in so doing, will initiate a shift away from existing decentralised 
management of natural resources towards climate -resilient sustainable dev elopment.  
 
106 Available at: https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2008/cr08115.pdf   
107 In French, refe rred as Plan National de Gestion des Risques et des Désastres — PNGRD . 
108 In French, Plan Stratégique de Développement - PSDH. Available at: 
http://www.ht.undp.org/content/dam/haiti/docs/Gouvernance%20démocratique%20et%20 etat%20de%20droit/UNDP_HT_PLAN%20STRAT
ÉGIQUE%20de%20developpement%20Haiti_tome1.pdf   
109 MdE, Contribution Prévue Déterminée au Niveau National . 2015.  
110 Available at: https://www.ldc -climate.org/country/haiti/  
111 UNEP. Enabling Activities for the Preparation of the Second National Communication under the UNFCCC. Available at: http://www.un -
gsp.org/sites/default/files/documents/haiti_prodoc_29.09.2005.pdf


---
*Page 61*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 57 
   
 • The Action Plan for Water Resources Management in Haiti  was developed in 1999 . Outlined in this 
document are the needs for: i) reforms; ii) legal frameworks; iii) capacity building among policymakers and 
water users; and iv) recognition of the economic importance  of water resources and the need for integrated 
management of these re sources. In a 2018 review of the 1999 Action Plan where the progress of implementing 
integrated water resources management (IWRM) initiatives in Haiti was assessed, the country obtained a score 
of only 29 out of 100112. The Action Plan noted gaps in the cou ntry’s capacity for implementing IWRM. These 
gaps were largely because of: i) a limited enabling environment; ii) the unavailability of management 
instruments; and iii) limited finance for the efficient implementation of interventions. The gaps were also 
highlighted in the review of Action Plan, showing limited progress towards IWRM in Haiti since 1999. Project 
interventions will support the current three -year work plan (2019 –2021) through prioritising addressing the 
capacity gaps noted in the 2018 review o f the action plan.  
 
Stakeholder engagement  
179. The proposed project has been designed following extensive consultations with members of the Haitian 
government, public authorities, civil societies, and the private sector113. Haiti’s NDA, the MoE, has been fully 
involved in the development  of this project since inception through its valuable contributions to the consultation 
process and inputs during field missions . UNDP has facilitated dialogue between the MARNDR , other rele vant 
institutions, as well as the MoE, to confirm that the project responds to the adaptation priorities of the country. 
Furthermore, the proposed adaptation interventions under this project have been validated by all the relevant 
project stakeholders, inc luding the NDA.  
 
180. Consultations were organised by UNDP in the North -West, North and Artibonite regions of Haiti. Given the 
observed impacts of flooding on the communities in these regions, developing climate -resilient solutions that are 
supported by technical  assessments to  address this problem were prioritised by the GoH and other stakeholders, 
including women’s and farmers’ associations. Discussions — with the regional branches of the MoE, Civil Protection 
Agency (DPC), Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), the National D irectorate for Water Supply and Sanitation 
(DINEPA) in the Ministry of Public  Works, Transport and Communications (MTPTC) and the Regional Water Supply 
and Sanitation Office (OREPA) and irrigation associations — also underlined the need for a coordinated e ffort 
towards improved flood risk management as the preferred solution for increasing resilience to climate change -
induced flooding. Additional adaptation priorities that were discussed during stakeholder consultations included the 
need for: i) improved po licies on natural resource management; ii) strengthened coordination between adaptation 
projects, donors, and their executing entities; iii) further information on climate change and adaptation solutions to 
facilitate decision -making around flood managemen t; and iv) the implementation of climate -resilient solutions to 
reduce the impact of climate change and natural hazards on vulnerable communities in the regions.  
 
181. During the implementation phase, all target beneficiary groups will remain engaged to ensure that the benefits 
conferred by project  interventions respond directly to the needs of these groups. This will simultaneously encourage 
stronger inputs from stakeho lders, while allowing for challenges that may be encountered to be addressed early 
on, which will reduce adverse effects on project implementation. F urther details on the stakeholder engagement 
process relevant to the project development and implementation  phases are presented in Annex 7: Stakeholder 
engagement plan, with specific details related to the grievance mechanism and environmental and social risk 
mitigation measures presented in Section 10 of Annex 6: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and  
Management Plan.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
182. The Government of Haiti (GoH) is requesting US$2 2.7 million in GCF grant finance to implement climate -resilient 
integrated water resources management (IWRM) to respond to the impacts of flooding on the Trois Rivières (TR) 
watershed. This GCF investment will be supported by the Heifer International  Haiti, which has committed US$8. 86 
million114 in co -financing for the implementation  of project interventions. Funding from the GCF will only be used to 
address the additional impacts of climate change, with co -finance from the Heifer being used to cover all baseline 
costs — such as business  as usual  operations and maintenance necessary to ensure sustainable land a nd water 
resources management. With the support of GCF grant funding, the proposed project will deliver several adaptation 
benefits using an integrated approach to land and water resources management that will contribute to achieving a 
paradigm shift in the country’s approach to addressing the impacts of climate change -induced flooding115. A GCF 
 
112 UN Environment. 2018. Progress on integrated water resources management. Global baseline for SDG 6 Indicator 6.5.1: degree of  
IWRM implementation.  
113 Further details on the engagements conducted for the development of the proposed project are presented in  Annex 7: Stakeholder 
engagement plan.  
114 the equivalent of €7.06 million  
115 A detailed description of project activities is presented in Sections B.3 and E.6 of the Funding Proposal.


---
*Page 62*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 58 
   
 grant is deemed the most appropriate level of concessionality given: i) the public good nature of the project’s  
activities and lack of financial reflows; ii) Haiti’s  status as a SIDS and LDC; and iii) the level of debt of the country, 
with its limited capacity to repay loans  and iv) the project beneficiaries are small poor farmers that need grants to 
make these investments . Indeed, the absence of financial resources r equired to implement the necessary 
adaptation investments has been identified as a considerable barrier to implementing climate -resilient IWRM in 
Haiti.  
 
183. The combined investment of nearly US$3 1.58 million will be used efficiently and effectively to achieve three main 
project objectives. First, agroforestry and ecosystem restoration interventions will be implemented at priority sites 
in the TR watershed to improve the infiltration of water into soil s and increase surface roughness. This will contribute 
to attenuating overland flows from heavy rainfall events and consequently reduce the severity of associated flood 
events. Second,  a shift from unsustainable land -use practices, including charcoal produ ction, towards productive 
land-use management will be initiated in the TR watershed. This will be achieved by enhancing the technical and 
institutional capacity of decision -makers involved in agriculture and charcoal production at the commune, inter -
commun e and department levels in the watershed to implement climate -resilient and sustainable land -use 
management techniques. Specifically, communal development councils and multi -sectoral management structures 
will be established to oversee and manage the imple mentation of Sustainable Land Management (SLM) 
interventions. To support this, training will be provided to representatives from relevant government entities, 
including MARNDR , NCFS and MSAL, on the implementation of SLM in the TR watershed. Additionally, an 
agricultural finance mechanism will be established under the VSCA. Under this mechanism, financing will be made 
available to smallholder farmers to facilitate their adoption and implementation of sustainable, climate -resilient 
agricultural practices. Th is long -term solution will be supplemented by providing immediate relief, in the form of 
food coupons , to vulnerable people affected by climate change. This will not only safeguard the lives of these 
people against the immediate climate change shocks but a lso contribute to reducing further pressure on the 
environment by providing an alternative option to resorting to unsustainable charcoal production.  
 
184. Last, the required governance framework for integrated land and water resources management will be 
establi shed and implemented  at catchment and sub -catchment levels in the TR watershed to optimise the 
sustainable use of these resources under future climate change conditions. The cost -effectiveness of proposed 
project interventions as well as a summary of the i nternational best practices and lessons learned used to inform 
project development are presented below.   
 
Cost -effectiveness of project interventions  
185. Climate change -induced flooding in Haiti severely impacts vulnerable communities living in the TR region through 
inter alia the degradation of land and water resources, reduced resilience of agricultural livelihoods and increased 
prevalence of waterborne  diseases . The projected reductions in total average annual rainfall combined with an 
increase in intensity of concentrated precipitation events  under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios are expected to 
exacerbate these flood impacts. In order to take decisions rega rding the type of climate change adaptation options 
that the Government of Haiti (GoH) should implement to respond to this, it is necessary to understand the 
adaptation expenditure options and expected internal rate of return (IRR) on these options. To do this, a financial 
and economic analysis (FEA) was conducted to inform this decision -making116. This analysis focused on 
determining costs and benefits associated with: i) implementing EbA interventions, including agroforestry and 
reforestation activities, t o enhance the resilience of the TR watershed to climate change -induced flooding; ii) 
facilitating sustainable catchment management practices with the strengthening of agricultural value chains; and 
iii) supporting the GoH in the development of a national -level policy framework to facilitate IWRM in Haiti.  
 
186. The economic analysis estimated the net present value (NPV) of interventions to be US$376 million with an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 40.7% , therefore  representing a highly cost-effective spend for GoH . The estimated 
health benefits under the FEA considered water -borne diseases (such as diarrhoea and cholera) that would, without 
project interventions, likely increase in prevalence because of increased flooding and related imp acts. Relevant 
literature on the link between these diseases and floods was used to estimate the likely number of additional cases, 
 
116 The financial and economic analysis undertaken to support the proposed p roject is presented in Annex 3: Financial and Economic 
Analysis.


---
*Page 63*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 59 
   
 morbidity, and mortality117,118,119,120,121,122. Benefits from agroforestry interventions were estimated based on field 
data in the financial analysis . Benefits of avoided infrastructure damage due to floods was calculated based on 
Gaspard (2016) which is limited to calculating direct damages to househ olds.  
 
187. The economic analysis of the proposed project was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the 
Economic Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program .123 The economic efficiency of the 
investment was determined by computing the economic net present value (NPV) with an assumed 10% discount 
rate, and the economic internal rate of return (EIRR). For consistency purposes, all proposals developed with the 
suppo rt of UNDP have thus far opted to use a 10% discount rate, in line with the existing practice of multilateral 
development banks.  
 
188. Economic values (costs and benefits) are all measured in real terms of 2019. Economic costs of the project 
are net of taxes, d uties, and price contingencies. Furthermore, the analysis assumes a shadow wage rate of 1.00 
for unskilled and semi -skilled labour in Haiti. Given the official unemployment rate of approximately 14%,124 the 
economic cost of unskilled labour in Haiti is expe cted to be considerably lower than the market wage rate (financial 
cost). As a result, this assumption leads to significantly over-estimating  the economic cost of the project and thereby 
under -estimating  the true net economic value of the project. The abov e assumption allows the use of financial cost 
as a measure of the economic cost of the project (once again noting that in doing so, the economic cost of the 
project is over -estimated, and the net present value of the investment is then under -estimated).  
 
189. As is common when undertaking the economic analysis of investment projects, numerous assumptions were 
used to delineate the “with project scenario” from the “without project scenario”. These assumptions are presented 
and discussed in Annex III where the de tailed economic analysis is presented. Assumptions were made so as to 
under -estimate the true net economic value of the proposed investment project. The analysis covers a period of 25 
years, from 2019 to 2043.  
 
190. Economic costs . Economic costs were obtained  from the project budget. They were available for each of the 3 
outputs in addition to project management. With the exception of the co -financing, project costs were also available 
for each of the 8 years of project implementation. Solely f or purpose of th e economic analysis, it is assumed that 
the co -financing is disbursed annually at the same as GCF funding. This provided a flow of project cost as presented 
in the table below.  
 
Total Cost of the Project per Output per Year  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 Eisenberg, M.C. et al. 2013. Examining Rainfall and Cholera Dynamics in Haiti Using Statistical and Dynamic Modelling Approaches. 
Epidemics 5 (4).  
118 Barzilay, E.J.  et al. 2013. Cholera Surveillance During the Haiti Epidemic — The First 2 Years. New England Journal of Medicine 368 
(7). 
119 WHO. 2010. Public health risk assessment and interventions. Earthquake: Haiti. Available at: 
https://www.preventionweb.net/files/12945_haitiearthquake201001181.pdf  
120 WHO. 2004. Cholera outbreak: Assessing the outbreak response and improving preparedness. Available at: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/43017/WHO_CDS_CPE_ZFk_2004.4_eng.pdf;jsessionid=79C09A3DE1F0B1E71168734B
ACFD790D?sequence=1  
121 Gaudart, J. et al. 2013. Spatio -Temporal Dynamics of Cho lera during the First Year of the Epidemic in Haiti . PLoS neglected tropical 
diseases . 7. 
122 CDC. 2011. Lessons Learned during Public Health Response to Cholera Epidemic in Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Available a t: 
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/17/11/11 -0827_article  
123 UNDP. 2015. Guidance on the conduct and reporting of the Economic and Financial Analysis of Climate Change Adaptation 
and Mitigation Projects and Programmes . UNDP.  
124 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS?locations=HT  
Output Total Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7 Year 8
Output 1 18,399,600 301,200 1,079,340 1,148,990 4,446,050 4,316,700 4,231,050 1,865,130 1,011,140
Output 2 8,303,355 1,088,628 1,416,536 1,335,623 1,373,123 1,144,106 1,046,831 898,508 0
Output 3 3,273,519 481,880 395,720 527,666 432,866 428,666 360,220 299,820 346,680
Mgment 1,314,087 152,867 171,573 158,280 177,564 172,559 158,118 154,163 168,965
Total 31,290,561       2,024,575               3,063,169        3,170,559               6,429,603              6,062,031          5,796,219             3,217,621           1,526,785


---
*Page 64*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 191. Project benefits included in the economic analysis are health benefits of the project and improvement in rural 
livelihoods. Both of these benefits are estimated on an annual basis, comparing with and without project scenarios 
in presence of climate change.   
 
192. Health benefits . Health benefits were limited to a reduction in the number of cases of cholera and mortality. 
These reductions were estimated by constructing a scenario of the potential number of such cases (of cholera and 
mortality) with climate change in the absence of  the project, and another scenario of the potential number of such 
cases with climate change with the project. Three scenarios are developed in terms of the possible impacts of the 
project on reducing the number of cases morbidity and mortality: Scenario 1 : a 10% reduction; Scenario 2: a 20% 
reduction; and Scenario 3: a 30% reduction. Based on best available information, a cost per case of cholera in Haiti 
was estimated to be $35. For purpose of assessing the economic value of mitigating the death toll, a v alue of 
statistical life (VSL) of $223,500 is used in the analysis  (a sensitivity analysis on this estimate was also calculated).  
Details are available in Annex III.  
 
193. Rural livelihood benefits . A financial analysis of agroforestry was carried out based on field data. The table 
below provides a summary of these results with and without GCF support:  
 
 
 
194. Additional assumptions for the economic analysis are:  
• As reported in the Feasibility Study, the average farm size within the TR catchment ranges between 0.8 and 
1.2 hectares (ha). For purpose of the economic analysis, it is assumed that average farm size is 1.0 hectare.125 
It is also assumed that the number of household farm s benefiting from the agro -forestry activities of the project 
is 17,740 farms, thus reaching a total of 17,740 ha.  
 
• Profit margins in the sector are estimated to be approximately 1 0%.  
 
• It is important to note that the net incremental benefits from agroforestry are deducted by $9.15 per ha which 
is an estimate of the foreg one net revenues from charcoal production.126  
 
195. Infrastructure benefits . The proposed investment project shows a significant reduction of the projected extent 
of flood zones and impacts of the project on the number of houses and infrastructure exposed to pr ojected floods 
(relative to a no project scenario). There is however limited information currently available on historic  losses and 
damages to the stock of housing and infrastructure. The only estimate we could find is Gaspard (2016) which 
estimated the di rect losses due to flooding in 2004 by interviewing households throughout the Gonaives region 
(located adjacent to our project area). He estimated direct damages (by asking how much it would cost to repair 
the houses due to flood damages) at between USD960.85 and USD1489.5 per household. It is important to note 
that these benefits only consider direct damages from flooding (e.g. the cost to repair the damage) and only 
consider household costs (and not costs to public infrastructure, schools, hospitals , public administration. 
Therefore, we present these numbers with a strong word of caution that they do not represent the extent of flooding 
damages the project will reduce. These costs were included in the economic analysis without changing results 
signif icantly.  
 
196. Economic efficiency . In the base case, the NPV of the project is estimated to reach between $ 375 and $ 412 
million depending of the scenario of flood reduction benefits developed earlier (as presented above). The IRR 
ranges between 41% and 43%.  
 
Base Case: Estimated NPV and IRR  
 
 
125 In a World Bank recently funde d project of a somewhat similar nature but in the Southern departments of Haiti, a similar assumption of 
an average farm size of 1.0 hectare is also made. See: World Bank. 2018. Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant to the 
Republic of Haiti for a Resilient Productive Landscapes Project . World Bank. Washington, D.C. (page 74)  
126 Kennedy, N.S. 2015. Id.  
Without GCF With GCF Without GCF With GCF Without GCF With GCF
Smallholder farmer - 
AgroforestryUSD 1.818,33 USD 3.618,41 25% 42% 4 3NPV IRRPerspectivePayback period


---
*Page 65*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
 
NPV IRR
Scenario 1 375.516.111       41%
Scenario 2 393.838.100       42%
Scenario 3 412.160.089       43% 
 
197. The above estimates already include a sensitivity analysis pertaining to the expected flood benefits of the 
project (from the construction of the 3 scenarios).  In addition, a further sensitivity analysis was included: a reduction 
of 20% in total benefits;  an increase of 20% in total costs; and a combination of both of these scenarios. Results 
are presented in the table below. Results show the project’s economic efficiency to be robust to these changes.  
 
Sensitivity Analysis (1): Changes in Costs and Benef its 
 
 
 
Application of best practices in land and water resources management  
198. Best practices from similar projects127 were used to inform the design of IWRM interventions to be implemented 
under the proposed project. Lessons learned from numerous baseline investments into climate change adaptation 
in Haiti were also used to guide the design of all project interventions. Such lessons include appropriate 
mechanisms for ensuring that project activities are implemented in a participatory, gender -inclusive and sustainable 
way. The specific international best practices and lessons learned that were applied to the design of the proposed 
project and that will contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of project interventions are summarised below. 
Additionally, details on all best practices and lessons learned relevant to the project are presented in Section 7 of 
Annex 2: Feas ibility Study.  
 
199. International  best practices and lessons learned identified for the project include:  
• ensuring that landscape planning, implementation of policies and strategies and monitoring processes are 
implemented  using an integrated and iterative approach to account for the dynamic nature of landscape 
processes;  
• acknowledging the need to regularly engage stakeholders in an equitable manner to ensure that adaptation 
benefits and incentives of integrated land and wa ter resources management are responsive to the needs of the 
target groups;  
• ensuring that water resource planning and management is linked to Haiti’s overall sustainable development 
strategy and public administration framework;  
• acknowledging that approaches  to land and water resources management will evolve as the pressures on 
natural resources change;  
• facilitating participatory monitoring and adaptive management by ensuring that information is widely accessible 
and not controlled by any single stakeholder;  
• incorporating traditional knowledge into training for farmers and local communities on climate -resilient 
agricultural practices as well as land and water resources management strategies;  
 
127 as outlined in Section B.1 of this Funding Proposal and Section 6 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study  
NPV IRR
Benefits: - 
20%Scenario 1 297,547,350                               38%
Scenario 2 312,204,941                               39%
Scenario 3 326,862,533                               40%
Costs: +20% Scenario 1 372,961,434                               38%
Scenario 2 391,283,423                               40%
Scenario 3 409,605,412                               41%
Benefits: -
20% and 
Costs: +20%Scenario 1 293,438,365                               36%
Scenario 2 308,095,957                               37%
Scenario 3 322,753,548                               38%


---
*Page 66*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 62 
   
 • ensuring the provision of high -quality seedlings and starter kits fo r nurseries to create a sustainable agroforestry 
production cycle;  
• drawing on regional, national and local experiences and resources to increase capacity to respond to the 
impacts of extreme events;  
• developing appropriate strategies for securing financial resources for project development and implementation;  
• effectively managing the available financial and human resources to ensure the efficient and cost -effective 
implementation of project interventions;  
• undertaking regular monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of climate -adaptive interventions to ensure that the most 
effective and appropriate solutions are being implemented under future conditions of climate change;  
• engaging and collaborating extensively with all relevant project stakeholders to encourage buy -in from national - 
and local -level decision -makers, which will contribute to the sustainability of proposed adaptation interventions 
over the long term; and  
• implementing effective financial and project management strategies to ensure the efficient use of fin ancial 
resources and avoid delays during the implementation phase.


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 63 
  
  
  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework  to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co -financing.   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the parad igm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimension s - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe th e current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three -point -scale rating ( low, medium, and high ) provided in the guidance note.  Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, repli cability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2 (a) (theory of 
change).         
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  Various initiatives in Haiti 
have been developed to 
increase its capacity for 
ecosystem management 
as well as to enhance its 
capacity for disaster risk 
reduction. However, while 
these initiatives have 
mobilized important 
resources, many of these 
have been unsuccessful in 
reaching the territorial 
scale that is required to Low The paradigm shift will be two fold. First it will 
take on a user end approach in its ecosystem 
based interventions that will allow the project 
to create the enabling conditions that will 
allow for these interventions to achieve the 
scale that is required to result in adaptation 
benefits in the form of flood reduction. This 
will include a strong community based focus 
that is linked to livelihood and health benefits 
but is also informed by the hydrological 
models developed by the project, thus 
ensuring that  ecosystem based interve ntions 
are prioritized in areas that will effectively 
reduce climate induced flood risk.    
The scale of the project is built around the 
principles of climate -resilient, sustainable 
development and underpinned by three main 
interventions. First, agroforestry systems will 
be established and degraded forests restored 
at priority intervention sites ac ross the 
watershed to: i) reduce peak surface runoff 
and flood extent; and ii) provide alternative 
livelihood options to the unsustainable land -
use practices on which most vulnerable 
communities in the TR watershed depend. 
Second, complementary interventio ns focused 
on enhancing technical and institutional 
capacity at the commune, inter -commune and


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
 achieve meaningful  
adaptation benefits.  
Often these projects are 
focused at a sub 
catchment rather than a 
catchment level, or invest 
in limited actions at an 
ecosystem level that do 
not a llow them to reach 
their disaster reduction 
objectives that are 
originally expected. The 
lack of scale in results by 
these initiatives comes as 
a result of initiatives that 
fail to include an end user 
approach to the 
reforestation initiatives that 
is requi red to ensure the 
level of impact (in the form 
of survival rates and 
sustainability of ecosystem 
based investments) to 
produce the adaptation 
benefits that are required. 
Failure to produce these or 
other tangible benefits also 
limit the scale and reach of 
these projects to a 
meaningful part of the 
population (as ecosystem 
investments are often not 
guided on producing 
adaptation benefits). As 
these interventions are 
often implemented without 
linkages to national 
policies they also fail to 
reach the transform ative At a community level, the paradigm shift will 
involve shifting away from current degrading 
practices – resulting from poor land -use 
planning and a lack of viable livel ihood 
alternatives – that are increasing flood risk in 
Haiti, towards an integrated approach to flood 
management to adequately address the 
diverse impacts of climate change -induced 
flooding on the watershed and population 
living within it. This will includ e shifting 
decision -making on flood management away 
from the existing uncoordinated and 
compartmentalised approach, towards an 
integrated approach that is underpinned by 
the uptake and implementation of climate -
resilient land -use practices that will result  in 
enhanced ecosystem based flood protection, 
strong governance, as well as the sustainable 
use and management of land and water 
resources.  Together these actions will create 
a concept of proof that will be observed at a  
catchment level scale (rather th an sub 
catchment) and will be observed in the 
project’s capacity to deliver on benefits to 
over 700,000 people both directly and 
indirectly. The scale of these results will in 
turn be measured to carbon sequestration, 
health monitoring, increased water sup ply and 
reduced risk to allow for it to become a 
relevant to policy makers and development 
practitioners working in the country  department levels will be implemented to 
promote productive climate -resilient 
agricultural practices and sustainable land 
management. In addition,  the necessary  
governance framework for IWRM will be 
established in Haiti to support the uptake of 
climate -resilient land management systems 
and facilitate sustainable use and 
management of water resources over the long 
term. Finally the project has integrated within 
it's the design the monitoring of the projects 
benefits as felt by the communities to create  
linkages between the tangible results seen as 
a result of the project in the form of improved 
livelihoods, food security, health and flood 
protection thus creating a connection between 
the scale of the project’s investments (at a 
catchment level) to the concrete benefits that 
are being felt by the community within the 
project’s target areas.


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 65 
  
  
 effect that is needed to 
evidence the role of EBA 
as a viable adaptation 
strategy in the country that 
is linked to multiple co 
benefits as these fail to 
materialize at the level that 
is required or are not 
monitored.  
Replicability  While several initiatives 
have attempted to 
introduce sustainable land -
use systems in Haiti,  the 
lack of a c oordinated and 
integrated decision making 
process es by land 
planners , as well as the 
knowledge and technical 
capacity of communities to 
adopt sustainable 
practices,  and immediate 
economic vulnerability  is 
constraining the uptake o f 
agroforestry and 
restoration activities in 
Haiti.  Lack of information 
on the economic returns of 
agroforestry at the 
community level  for 
example have made this 
transition appear risky in 
light of immediate 
economic needs  and  there 
are limited financial 
mechanisms  to help 
enable these .   Low Together, project interventions will transform 
flood management in Haiti by catalysing a 
shift away from uncoordinated, 
compartmentalised decision -making around 
flood management, towards an integrated 
approach that can be scaled up and 
replicated nationall y. This will be enhanced by 
demonstrating the viability of eco -businesses 
linked to agroforestry  (reducing the risk 
assessment constraint ), will promote the 
uptake of project interventions across other 
watersheds in the countr y by other farmers . 
From a development perspective it will also 
demonstrate the importance of generating 
social protection to communities during the 
transition period between unsustainable land 
management practices to encourage a just 
transition , thus informating future appro aches 
linking EBA to green growth opportunities . It 
will also generate financial mechanisms 
through VSCA to help not only sustain these  
practices but encourage its replicability 
through access  to savings.    
The replicability of the project interventions will 
be underpinned by the drafting of revisions to 
the Water Act for the adoption of an integrated 
approach to water resources management in 
Haiti as well as the establishment of 
Catchment IWRM Committees , as well as 
Sub-Catchment Water Resource Users 
Associations  in each of the country’s 
watersheds  (Output 3 ). As a result of these 
changes, a new strategy will be developed for 
IWRM in Haiti that addresses both the existing 
challenges of a fragmented and 
uncoordinated s ystem of water management, 
particularly at a catchment and sub -catchment 
level, as well as the current and projected 
impacts of climate change -induced flooding.  
Output 2  will also train representatives from 
appropriate government entities, including 
MARNDR, NCFS and MSAL, on the 
implementation of climate -resilient agricultural 
techniques and SLM, which can be 
transferred across other regions in the 
country.  
 
More significantly the tangible benefits from 
the EBA approach will motivate  replicability of 
the sustainable management of water and 
land resources by farmers in the region as 
these will be linked to increased food security 
and incomes. The project will work to create


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 66 
  
  
 VSCAs as financial mechanisms to enable 
upscale and continued investment.  
Sustainability  Although the establishment 
of a Water Act has been 
identified as one of the 
Ministry of Environment's 
priorities in its 2019 -2022 
Triennial Plan, there are 
currently no integrated, 
climate -sensitive water or 
sustainable land 
management policies and 
governa nce frameworks in 
Haiti to allow for its 
practical implementation . 
The country lacks 
overarching water 
management legislation, a 
formal cadaster, a 
standard practice for land 
tenure arrangements, or 
relevant strategies to 
promote sustainable 
landscape mana gement . 
Households make 
decisions in their own 
immediate interest, without 
necessarily considering the 
impact of those decisions 
on the sub -catchment and 
the long -term impacts on 
their own wellbeing  thus 
increasing their 
vulnerability to climate 
impacts su ch as flooding . 
There is no experience or 
incentive among water Low 
 Relevant stakeholders at national, department 
and commune levels have the technical and 
institutional capacity for the implementation of 
an integrated approach to land and water 
resources management that is centered  
around sustainability and climate resilience.  
This will enable the compatibility of SLM with 
the effective functioning of the entire 
watershed which, in turn, will contribute to 
enhancing flood management across the TR 
watershed. By building the capacity of the 
targeted institutions, the transfer of knowledge 
and skills related to sustainable watershed 
and flood management will extend beyond the 
project.  These results are enhanced through 
monitoring (such as health) that will provide 
relevant information r egarding the benefits of 
IWRM for local communities .   
Vulnerable farmers are equipped with the 
necessary knowledge and support to 
transition from unsustainable agricultural and 
charcoal production practices towards the 
development of sustainable agrofores try 
businesses that are progressive and gender -
responsive.  These in turn provide not only 
economic benefits but also increase resilience  
through EBA induced flood protection at a 
territorial level thereby reducing the potential 
impacts from climate induced flooding to lives 
and livelihoods.  
Positive impacts of E BA seen in water and 
food security as well as increased income and 
improved  health will sustain the EBA 
interventions by creating an added value  to Under the project, the technical and 
institutiona l capacity of relevant stakeholders 
at national, department and commune levels 
will be strengthened for the implementation of 
an integrated approach to land and water 
resources management that is centered  
around sustainability and climate resilience.  
By building the capacity of the targeted 
institutions, the transfer of knowledge and 
skills related to sustainable watershed and 
flood management will extend beyond the 
project.   
 
Strengthening  of the Water Act  will establish a 
legal foundation for optimising  the use of 
water  resources without compromising the 
sustainability of vital ecosystems under future 
climate change conditions, consequently, 
securing equitable economic and social 
welfare. The Water Act will also provide a 
framework for the institutionali zation  of 
integrated watershed management to 
empower regional administrations across Haiti 
— through establishing Catchment Water 
Resources Management Committees 
(CIWRMC s) and Sub -Catchment Water 
Resource Users Associations (SCWRUAs).   
 
The country -driven project has been 
developed using a participatory and 
consultative process, enabling all relevant 
stakeholders to contribute to the design of 
interventions , ensuring buy -in and 
commitment from national - and local -level 
stakeholders . More impo rtantly to 
communities, the social protection  system 
provided through the project as well as the 
EBA interventions  that will be installed will 
provide tangible benefits to communities


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 67 
  
  
 users to consider sub -
catchment scale water 
management in their 
household decision -
making  to enable long term 
strategies to reduce their 
own vulnerability by 
protecting critical water 
sources and ecosystems 
on which they depend .    
 communities through sustainable land and 
water manag ement   linking the IWRM approach to reduced 
vulnerability.   
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and  or suppleme ntary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area  and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme -specific i ndicators should be developed under section E.5  (project/programme specific indicators) .  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final128 
Total number of project 
beneficiaries  
 
Sum of all project   
beneficiaries identified 
under  ARA1, ARA2, 
and ARA 4 accounting 
for overlaps  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Primary MoV  
 
Baseline and Completion 
Surveys and project 
participation lists129 
 
Simulation of future flooding 
impact on households 
taking into account 
historical, no action 
scenarios and conditions 
derived from project Direct: 0 (Male: 0, 
Female: 0)  
 
 
 
Indirect: 0 (Male: 
0, Female: 0)  Direct: At least 
54,714 people 
(Male: 40,561 
Female: 14,153)  
 
 
Indirect: At least 
237,886 people 
in Haiti 
(Male:114,185, 
Female: 
123,701)  Direct: At least 
292,600 people 
in Haiti (Male: 
140,448, 
Female: 
152,152)  
 
Indirect: At least 
441,272 people 
in Haiti  (Male: 
211,811 Female: 
229,461)  Projections for population 
growth taken by the project for  
the TR area are accurate (see 
Annex 3 for numbers)  
 
Direct beneficiaries calculated 
by project mid term do not 
account for EBA benefits that 
are expected to be seen only 
by the project’s Y7.  
 
Identified farmers within the 33 
communal section are willing to 
 
128 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the targ et value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the inve stment are expected to be effective.  
129 Means of Verification for Fund -level Impact and Outcome indicators will be triangulated with the baseline surveys that will be undertaken by project consult ants, and at project mid -term and 
project end with the latest  available national census data.


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 68 
  
  
 implementation (increased 
forest cover).  
 
Increased forest coverage 
within the project areas 
measured by GIS mapping 
(see above MoV)  
 
Statutes of Creation of the 
committees that specify 
their coverage area.  
 
 participate in land planning and 
land management capacity 
building exercises by the 
project’s mid term accounting 
for direct beneficiary calculation 
at mid term  
 
Direct beneficiary calculation at 
project end includes all 
households identifie d that are 
located less than 30m to the 
waterways in the target 
communes (See Section 10.3 
Site Selection Section in FS 
and Annex 3) per mapping by 
the project.  
 
Project investments in 
agroforestry and forest 
rehabilitation in priority areas 
are completed  by the project’s 
Y7 with 50% being achieved by 
Y5.  
 
Water management system 
provides effective governance 
to the benefit of all water users 
within the project’s 33 
communal sections  
 
 
 
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Baseline and Completion 
Surveys130 
 Direct: 0 (Male: 0, 
Female: 0)  
 Direct: At least 
54,714 people Direct: At least 
292,600 people 
in Haiti (Male: 
140,448, Projections for population 
growth taken by the project for  
the TR area are accurate (see 
Annex 3 for numbers)  
 
130 Means of Verification for Fund -level Impact and Outcome indicators will be triangulated with the baseline surveys that will be undertaken by project consult ants, and at project mid -term and 
project end with the latest available national census data.


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 69 
  
  
 Simulation of future flooding 
impact on households 
taking into account 
historical, no action 
scenarios and conditions 
derived from project 
implementation (increased 
forest cover).  
 
Increased forest coverage 
within the project areas 
measured by GIS mapping 
(see above MoV)  
 
Community land use plans 
developed  
 
Capacity assessment of 
farmers that have been 
provided with training  
 Indirect: 0 (Male: 
0, Female: 0)  (Male: 40,561 
Female: 14,153)  
 
Indirect: At least 
237,886 people 
in Haiti 
(Male:114,185, 
Female: 
123,701)  Female: 
152,152)  
 
Indirect: At least 
441,272 people  
in Haiti  (Male: 
212,064 Female: 
229,736)   
Direct beneficiaries calculated 
by project mid term do not 
account for EBA benefits that 
are expected to be seen only 
by the project’s Y7.  
 
Identified farmers within the 33 
communal section are willing to 
participate in land planning and 
land management c apacity 
building exercises by the 
project’s midterm accounting 
for direct beneficiary calculation 
at mid term  
 
Direct beneficiary calculation at 
project end includes all 
households identified that are 
located less than 30m to the 
waterways (those most 
vulnerable) in the target 
communes (See Section 10.3 
Site Selection Section in FS 
and Annex 3) per mapping by 
the project.  
 
Project investments in 
agroforestry and forest 
rehabilitation in priority areas 
are completed by the project’s 
Y7 with 50% being achiev ed by 
Y5.


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 70 
  
  
 ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Baseline and Completion 
Surveys and project 
participation lists131 
 
Capacity needs 
assessment of farmers that 
have been provided with 
training  
 
Statutes of Creation of the 
water governance 
committees that specify 
their coverage area.  
 
Statutes of 
Creation/Reports of  farmer 
field schools created by the 
project  
 
Adaptation interventions 
developed by the project 
and report on their usage  
 
Monitoring reports of 
beneficiaries receiving food 
coupons  
 
Statues of 
Creation/Reports of VSCAs Total:  0 
 
  Direct: At least 
10,000 people  
 
Indirect:  At least 
226,400 people 
in Haiti 
(Male:176,112, 
Female: 
190,788)  Direct: 58,328 
(male:42,362/ 
female: 15,966)  
 
Indirect: 441,272 
Male: 211,811 
Female: 229,461  Direct beneficiaries under 
ARA2 include farmers with 
enhanced productive capacity 
through training provided by 
the project’s Output 2  & 
members of households 
receiving food coupons as well 
as 340 technical staff from local 
governments (Refer to Annex 2 
Section 10).  
 
Indirect beneficiaries under 
ARA2 include all water users 
within the 33 sub communes 
(total 733,872). To avoid doble 
counting the number  of direct 
beneficiaries under ARA 1&4 
which are also water users 
users (292,600) has been 
subtracted.  These  will benefit 
from improved water 
governance systems and their 
enhanced capacity in 
monitoring water quality and 
implementing improved 
(climate sma rt) water 
management practices  
 
Projections for population 
growth used for the indirect 
total beneficiary number taken 
by the project for  the TR area 
are accurate (see Annex 3 for 
numbers)  
 
 
131 Means of Verification for Fund -level Impact and Outcome indicators will be triangulated with the baseline surveys that will be undertaken by project consult ants, and at project mid -term and 
project end with the latest available national census data.


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 enhanced/formed by the 
project  
 
 
 
 Information on amount of 
farmers in the 33 sub 
communes (representing direct 
beneficiary numbers )  responds 
to the 2008 the Agricultural 
Census and does not take into 
account population growth as it 
relates to associated farmers  
 
Representatives from farmers’ 
association are willing to 
participate in the project 
through training for productive 
purpo ses as well as in the 
water management committees  
   
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  
 Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached  Baseline and Completion 
Surveys132 
 
Simulation of future flooding 
impact on households 
taking into account 
historical, no action 
scenarios and conditions 
derived from project 
implementation (increased 
forest cover).  
 
Increased forest coverage 
within the project areas 
measured by GIS mapping 
(see above MoV)  
 
Community land use plans 
developed  Direct: 0 (Male: 0, 
Female: 0)  
 
Indirect: 0 (Male: 
0, Female: 0)  Direct: At least 
54,714 people 
(Male: 40,561 
Female: 14,153)  
 
Indirect: At least 
237,886 people 
in Haiti 
(Male:114,185, 
Female: 
123,701)  Direct: At least 
292,600 people 
in Haiti (Male: 
140,448, 
Female: 
152,152)  
Indirect: At least 
441,272 people 
in Haiti  (Male: 
211,811 Female: 
229,461)  Projections for population 
growt h taken by the project for  
the TR area are accurate (see 
Annex 3 for numbers)  
 
Direct beneficiaries calculated 
by project mid term represent 
farmers that will participate in 
the implementation of 
agroforestry model and do not 
account for EBA benefits that  
are expected to be seen only 
by the project’s Y7.  
 
Identified farmers within the 33 
communal section are willing to 
participate in land planning and 
land management capacity 
building exercises by the 
project’s midterm accounting 
 
132 Means of Verification for Fund -level Impact and Outcome indicators will be triangulated with the baseline surveys that will be undertaken by project consult ants, and at project mid -term and 
project end with the latest available national census data.


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
  
Capacity a ssessment of 
farmers that have been 
provided with training for 
improved land use 
management in keeping 
with land use plans  
 for direct beneficiary ca lculation 
at mid term  
 
Please refer to Annex 2 
Section 11 for more details on 
calculations for total direct and 
indirect beneficiaries  
 
Project investments in 
agroforestry and forest 
rehabilitation in priority areas 
are completed by the project’s 
Y7 with 50% being achieved by 
Y5.  
 
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities  
 Supplementary 3.1: 
Change in expected losses 
of economic assets due to 
the impact of extreme 
climate -related disasters in 
te geographic area of the 
GCF intervention  Baseline Survey and Year 
7 monitoring if there is a 
flood event133 
 
Simulation of future flooding 
impact on households 
taking into account 
historical, no action 
scenarios and conditions 
derived from project 
implementation (increased 
forest cover).  463  households 
affected by 20 
year floods under 
the baseline 
scenario  
1,342 houses 
affected by a 100 -
year floods under 
the baseline 
scenar io 
Assets in USD 
TBD134 0 USD  
No immediate 
impact as 
agroforestry and 
reforestation 
actions will 
require 
increased time 
span to provide 
significant flood 
mitigation 
impacts .  At least USD 
134,100 of 
savings  on 
household 
losses assuming 
35% fewer 
houses affected 
by the 20 -year 
floods (163 
households) at a 
minimum 
damage cost of 
USD 822.7 per 
household Flooding simulations prepared 
durin g project development are 
able to project flooding impact 
based on climate change 
scenarios  
Population numbers for this 
output are those taken from 
the existing 2003 census 
information and do not take 
into account population growth.  
 
133 Methodolo gically it is challenging to anticipate the change in losses of lives and set targets, so the indicator to be reported would focus on change in losses of economic assets US$, noting that 
this can only be measured at project end point if there is a flood ev ent at that time.  In the absence of these, the project will be able to simulate impact based on the climate modelling used in the 
development of the project (See FS Annex II).  The project in its economic analysis (Annex III) was able to calculate assets based on Gaspard (2016) that estimated household damage cost between 
USD 822.7 to USD 1275.35 due to flooding in the region in 2004. It is important to note that these benefits only consider dir ect damages from flooding (e.g. the cost to repair the damage) and only 
consider household costs (and not costs to public infrastructure, schools, hospitals, public administration). Therefore, thes e numbers while available are presented with a strong word of caution that 
they do not represent the extent of flo oding damages the project will reduce and as such are not included within the log frame.  A survey will be able to better present these amounts and will also 
account the cost of health impacts derived from extreme climate related disasters in the area. Anne x III includes information re a reduction rate of 10 -30% of diarrhea  and its avoided costs (between 
USD 2.1 million to 6.4 million) by 2030 and demonstrating increased reduction amount over time (USD 3 million - 9 million by 2043)  .   
134 Baseline  Survey to b e conducted in Year 1  of project implementation and reported in the first two annual progress report.


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 based on 
floodings in 
2004  
At least USD 
579,181  of 
savings  on 
household 
losses assuming 
50% fewer 
houses affected 
by a 100 year 
flood (704 
households) at a 
minimum 
damage cost of 
USD 822.7 per 
household 
based on 
floodings in 
2004  
 
Final 
US$ amount will 
be determined 
based on survey 
information.  If there is a flood ev ent in Year 
7, appropriate tracking of the 
final target will be undertaken.  
 
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or 
new climate -resilient 
livelihood options  Agricultural and beneficiary 
surveys to measure 
farmers’ capacity for 
sustainable and climate 
resilient production, income 
and satisfaction  
 
 Site visits  Total:  0 
 10,000 farmers 
adopting 
sustainable 
productive land 
management 
measures as a 
result of the 
project  54,252 farmers  
(13,921 women 
and 40,331 
men) adopting 
sustainable 
productive land 
management 
measures as a Agricultural census information 
(2008) used for beneficiary 
calculation remains accurate 
(these numbers do not account 
for population growth amongst 
associated farmers)  
 
The project’s farmer field 
school approach for providing 
capacity building to agricultural


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 result of the 
project  associations allows for project 
derived training to extend to all 
associated farmers within the 
33 sub com munes  
 
Adaptation interventions 
invested by the project are 
accessible to all associated 
farmers within the 33 
communal sections  
 
 
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with improved food security  Baseline and completion 
survey  
 
Household surveys135 
 Total: 0 
 
 
 
 At least 25,245 
beneficiaries 
(Male: 12,118, 
Female: 13,127)  
decrease in food 
insecurity.  
Accounting for 
an at least 8% 
households 
decreas ing in 
food insecurity  
 At least 88,359 
beneficiaries 
(Male: 42,412, 
Female: 45,947) 
decrease in food 
insecurity.  
 
Acoounting for 
at least 28% of 
households that 
decrease in food 
insecurity  
 Calculations were made on the 
assumption that at the 
beginning of t he project 43% of 
households in the TR 
watershed are food insecure.  
Calculation based on direct 
beneficiaries (292,600) and 
indirect beneficiaries (441,272) 
with an average of 5 persons 
per household, so based on 
the number of households in 
TR watershed: 146,774.4 a 
total of 63,113 households in 
the TR watershed are food 
insecure at the start of the 
project.  
 
Food vouchers provided 
through the project are 
 
135 The change in food security will be measured using the Household Economy Approach — HEA. The HEA methodology is based on the analysis of family/household livelihoods. It highlights how 
households usually support themselves, assess the impact of external f actors on their livelihoods and provides recommendations to support coping strategies. It is a dynamic approach that divides 
households into four socio -economic groups, namely the "very poor", "poor", "better -off" and "haves". Evidence for Development is a vailable at: http://efd.org/methods/the -household -economy -
approach -hea.


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 effective in addressing 
immediate food security needs 
allowing for a reduction in 
unsustainable charcoal 
production.  
Households  in the seven target 
communes adopti climate -
resilient agriculture and 
sustainable land -use practices.  
Farmers in the project target 
area are willing to adopt new 
market opportunities for the ir 
produce.  
Communities participate in the 
VSCAs to mobilize savings for 
capital investments  that 
increase their own productivity 
rate 
At end of project at least 28% 
decrease in food insecurity for 
farmers, communities and 
households in target 
communes.  
 
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with more climate -resilient 
water security  Baseline and Completion 
Surveys136 
 
Statutes of Creation of the 
water governance 
committees that specify 
their coverage area.  
Capacity assessment of the 
water governance Total:  0 
 
  Direct: 340 (102 
women and 238 
men)  
 
Indirect:  At least 
226,400 people 
in Haiti 
(Male:176,112, 
Female: 190,788  Direct: At least 
340 (102 women 
and 238 men)  
 
Indirect: At least 
441,272 people 
in Haiti  (Male: 
211,811 Female: 
229,461)  Beneficiaries are water users 
that will fall under the 
jurisdiction of the newly created 
water governance committees  
(Output 3) and will have 
increased water security as a 
result of improved water 
management capacities 
created through the project  
 
 
136 Means of Verification for Fund -level Impact and Outcome indicators will be triangulated with the baseline surveys that will be undertaken by project consult ants, and at project mid -term and 
project end with the latest available national census data.


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
 committees created under 
Output 3  
 
Minutes of meetings taking 
place in water governance 
committees at all levels 
specifying interventions 
made for enhanced water 
management  
 
Site visits  
  Improved capacity for water 
management planning and 
governance combined with 
improved land management 
practices will result in improved 
water security amongst water 
users.  
 
A governance water scorecard 
adapted to assess water 
catchment and sub catchment 
levels will be used based on 
UNDPs guide on assessing 
water governance.137  
 
For Indirect Beneficiaries, the 
total number takes into account 
the total population of the TR 
watershed that are water users 
(733,872) minus the number of 
direct beneficiaries of water 
users under ARA 1& 4. The 
340 are  assumed to be part of 
the 292,600 direct 
beneficiaries.  
 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  Core 4: Hectares of natural 
resources brought under 
improved low-emission 
and/or climate -resilient 
management practice  Baseline Survey;  
 
Site surveys; and  
 
GIS mapping  0 At least 8,870 ha 
of agroforestry 
systems 
established  
 
At least 3,850 ha 
of water towers 
rehabilitated  17,740 ha of 
agroforestry 
systems 
established  
 
7,700 ha of 
water towers 
rehabilitated  Sustainable land management 
practices will improve the 
provision of ecosystem 
services, including flood 
management (reduced run off 
hence reducing losses), 
increased water quality and 
agricultural produc tivity  
 
137 UNDPs User’s Guide on Assessing Water Governance available at: 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publications/Users%20Guide%20on%20Assessing%20Water%20Governance1.pdf  will be adapted, using Box 6.2 as reference.


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
    
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services  
 Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non -forest, 
freshwater and coastal 
marine areas brought 
under resoration and/or 
improved ecosystems  Baseline Survey;  
 
Site surveys; and  
 
GIS mapping  0 At least 8,870 ha 
of agroforestry 
systems 
established  
 
At least 3,850 ha 
of water towers 
rehabilitated  
 17,740 ha of 
agroforestry 
systems 
established  
 
7,700 ha of 
water towers 
rehabilitated  
 Sustainable land management 
practices will improve the 
provision of ecosystem 
services, including increased 
water quality and agricultural 
productivity.  
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome agai nst the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of  the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to comple te this section.  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for current 
state (baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will 
contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 5: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to strengthening 
institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for low 
emission climate -resilient 
development pathways in a 
country -driven manner  At present, the government 
is organised along 
departmental and 
communal lines. As a 
result, there is an overlap 
between existing water 
governance structures, 
particularly at the 
catchment and sub -
catchment levels. This 
leads to challenges in 
coordination and planning, 
as well the effective and 
efficient implementation of 
an integrated approach to 
water resources 
management in the TR 
watershed.  low The Water Act is 
developed and 
implemented to respond 
not only to national level 
priorities, but also to the 
adaptation needs of 
vulnerable communities 
living in vulnerable 
watersheds.  
 
Vulnerable communities 
are in turn empowered to 
act in support of IWRM 
through coordinated and 
more inclusive governance 
mechanisms.  
 The project will fund the 
establishment of  the 
governance framework 
required to facilitate the 
adoption of a climate -
resilient integrated water 
resources management 
(IWRM) approach in Haiti’s 
TR watershed.   
 
Under Output 3 , the 
capacity of the GoH will be 
strengthened to develop 
and implement the Water 
Act, which is an essential 
legal foundation for 
enabling participatory, 
integrated water resources Multiple sub -national areas 
within a country


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
  
More importantly it has 
excluded the role of 
communities in the  correct 
use of thes critical 
resources particularly in 
consideration of future 
climate change conditions. 
It has also failed to create 
awareness of the linkages 
of IWRM to development.  
While the GoH has made 
good progress in drafting 
the Water Act to add ress 
these challenges, there is a 
need for technical 
assistance for the ‘last mile’ 
of its drafting , meaning its 
linkage at the territorial 
basin level and to the role 
of water users. This last 
mile is required to ensure 
the effectivyt of the Water 
Act in practice.  By strengthening national 
capacities for the 
implementation of the 
Water Act, promoting the 
adoption of an integrated, 
climate -resilient water 
management governance 
framework at the 
catchment and sub -
catchment levels, and 
monitoring the impact of 
IWRM plans  while linking 
these to concrete benefits , 
the governance framework 
will be establishing to 
facilitate the adoption of 
IWRM in Hait i both in a 
legal framework as well as 
in practice at a basin level.  management in Haiti’s 
vulnerable  watershed s.  
 
A Catchment Integrated 
Water  Resources 
Management Committee 
(CIWRMC ) will also be 
established to support the 
implementation of the 
Water Act.  
 
Together the project will 
create local capacities that 
will be enable the 
framework that is being 
promoted to the Water Act 
ensuring that onc e it is 
enacted it (and even if it 
isnot) will detonate the 
change that is required, it 
will also create a local 
framework for action.  
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  Local communities have 
limited practical and 
technical experience to 
establish and manage 
local, financially 
sustainable small -scale 
operations for tree 
propagation, reforestation 
and agroforestry  – 
compoiunduing their 
climate vulnerability .  low Local communities have 
the technical capacity to 
implement EbA 
interventions as flood 
reduction measures , 
including sustainable, 
climate -resilient land -use 
practices and techniques 
(e.g. agroforestry) to 
reduce the risk of 
increased land degradation 
under future climate 
change conditions.  
Enabling communities to 
adopt  these activities as 
viable alternative livelihood The project will strengthen 
the capacity of community 
groups, including farmer 
and women’s associations, 
for climate -resilient land -
use planning in seven 
target communes in the 
Trois -Rivières watershed. 
This will be complemented 
by direct support for the 
uptake agroforestry and 
restoration activities and 
the establishment of 
alternative  livelihood 
practices  and sustainable 
agroforestry businesses.  Single sub -national area 
within a country


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 79 
  
  
 options under the project 
will also incentivise their 
uptake and contribute to 
maintaining their social and 
environmental 
sustainability beyon d the 
project lifetime.    
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformatio
n at the sectoral, local, or 
national level  Farmers currently lack 
access to capital to invest 
in start -up costs, 
maintenance materials and 
tools, as well as limit ed 
“bridging” household 
reserves to cope with 
crises . Alternative sources 
of funding and credit are 
not available or are difficult 
to access, which leads to 
short planning horizons. 
These planning horizons 
drive short -term relief 
activities, such as the 
production of charcoal at 
unsustainable rates to 
meet pressing short -term 
financial needs.  low Farmers have access to 
sustainable and affordable 
finance options that enable 
private investment in 
agroforestry , climate -
resilient agriculture and 
agricultural value -chains . The project will  establish 
an adaptation finance 
mechanism for the 
agricultural sector. This 
mechanism will increase 
access to finance for 
smallholder farmers, 
therefore, encouraging a 
shift in land use away from 
unsustainable fa rming 
practices such as charcoal 
production.  Single sub -national area 
within a country  
Choose an item.   Choose an item.    Choose an item.  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
This section should list out project/programme -specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1 -E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the  freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co -benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co -benefit indicators under the 
“Project/program me co -benefit indicators ” section in table below. Add rows as needed.  
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numb ering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the  output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan).  
 Baseline  Target  Assumptions / Note


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 80 
  
  
 Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Mid-term  Final  
Output 1.  Ecosystem -
based  flood management 
solutions implemented in 
25,440 hectares of  the 
Trois -Rivières watershed  Hectares of land under 
agroforestry and/or 
rehabilitated  for EBA  Baseline Survey;  
 
Site surveys; and  
 
GIS mapping  0 ha of agroforestry 
systems 
established  
 
0 ha of water 
towers rehabilitated  
 
Forested area in 
the target 
catchment is 34%  At least 8,870 ha 
of agroforestry 
systems 
established  
 
At least 3,850 ha 
of water towers 
rehabilitate d 
 
Forested area in 
the target 
catchment is 
48% 17,740 ha of 
agroforestry 
systems 
established  
 
7,700 ha of 
water towers 
rehabilitated  
 
Forested area in 
the target 
catchment is 
62% Sustainable land 
management practices will 
improve the provision of 
ecosystem services, 
including in creased water 
quality and agricultural 
productivity.  
Output 2.   Climate -
resilient agricultural 
practices, optimised value 
chains and social safety 
nets established to 
promote SLM and reduce 
degradation in the Trois -
Rivières watershed  Number of farmers 
trained in climate 
resilient sustainable 
land use practices.  
 
 
 
 
 
% increase in yields per 
productive unit  Participants lists of farmer 
field schools.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline Survey;  
 
Site surveys (agricultural 
surveys)  
 
 
 0 farmers part of 
field schools  
 
 
 
 
 
 
0   At least 5400 
active 
representatives 
of farmers' 
associations in 
33 communal 
sections  
 
 
 
0, No immediate 
impact as 
improved 
agricultural 
practices will 
require 
increased time 
span to provide 
improved 
productivity and At least 48,852 
farmers within 
the farmers 
associations 
within the 7 
communes who 
will benefit 
through indirect 
training provided 
by their 
representatives  
 
At least 25% 
increase from 
baseline  Representatives of farmers 
associations in 7 communes 
participate in farmer field 
schools  
 
Agricultural Census totaling 
all farmers associated within 
the farmers ’ association 
within the 7 communes 
minus their representatives 
that are direct beneficiaries 
(5,400)              
                              
All households in the seven 
target communes are 
supported in adopting 
climate -resilient agriculture 
and sustain able land -use 
practices which increases 
productivity.


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
  
 increase in yields 
per unit.   
 
Output 3 . Strengthened 
governance and capacity 
for climate -resilient 
integrated water 
resources management 
(IWRM)  Number of governance 
frameworks at the 
communal and inter 
communal level is 
created for  integrated, 
climate -resilient water 
management  Statutes of Crea tion of the 
committees  
 
Water management 
agreements established at 
the community level 
governing water 
management  
 
Capacity assessment of the 
water committee members 
(measuring their relevance 
in capacity of incidence at a 
territorial level and  
knowledge of integrated 
water measures in their area 
of competence)   0 10  Catchment 
IWRM 
Committees 
created  
 
31  Sub-
Catchment 
Water Resource 
Users 
Associations  
created  
 
Establishment of 
a Catchment 
Integrated Water 
Resources 
Management 
Committee 
(CIWRMC ) to 
manage water 
resources in the 
TR watershed  31 Catchment 
IWRM 
Committees 
created with 
sufficient 
capacity  for 
integrated, 
climate -resilient 
water 
management  
 
31  Sub-
Catchment 
Water Resource 
Users 
Associations 
created with 
sufficient 
capacity to 
support  
integrated, 
climate -resilient 
water 
management  
 
Establishment of 
a Catchment 
Integrated Water 
Resources 
Management 
Committee 
(CIWRMC ) to 
manage water 
resources in the 
TR watershed  Willingness to participate in 
the creating of these 
commitees  
 
  
Project/programme co -benefit indicators


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 82 
  
  
  
138 The World Health Organisation (WHO) will provide technical support to the project in the development of methodology that would enable comparis on studies to be 
undertaken across watersheds similar to the methodologies being used for the monitoring of HIV and cholera in the country. This line of cooperation is backed up by the 
technical collaboration already established through the NAP process.  
139 Please refer to Annex III for methodological notes on calculation. The baseline will be updated as part of the project’s scop e and reported upon on the project’s Y1  to 
include not just cholera but all .  Co-benefit  1: Social 
Empowerment  Number of community 
land-use plans giving 
stewardship over forests 
and other natural 
resources  Land use plans created and 
validated by communities  0 community land -
use plans  
 33 community 
land-use plans  
 33 community 
land-use plans  
 Participatory design of 
community land use plans 
provides local communities 
with stewardship over 
natural resources and 
promotes social 
empowerment.  
Co-benefit 2: Carbon 
mitigation   GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Baseline Survey;  
 
Site surveys; and  
 
GIS mapping  0 436,410  tCO 2-e 1,018,290 tCO 2-
e Rate of sequestration is 
evenly distributed across the 
25 year lifespan of project 
interventions.  See ME 
Annex for mitigation 
calculation methodology  
Co-benefit 3: Reduced 
incidence of water borne 
diseases  Reduced incidence of 
water borne diseases  Baseline Survey;  
 
Health Monitoring by 
WHO138 
Government reports  
 Average  incidence 
rate of cholera in 
the TR basin at 
11.1 per 1,000 
people 139 0 At least a 10% 
reduction  No further  aggravating 
conditions other than 
flooding occur that may 
increase the rate of water 
borne diseases (i.e. 
cancellation of preventive 
action campaigns)  
 
See Annex 3a Section 
C.3.2.1 for methodological 
assumptions for target and 
calculations.  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables   
Activities  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1 Strengthen the capacity of 
community groups, including farmer and 
women’s associations, for climate -resilient 
land-use planning in seven target 
communes in the Trois -Rivières watershed  Under this activity, community members 
and farmer and women’s associations in 
33 communal sections within the 7 target 
communes in the TR watershed (Port -de-
Paix, Chansolme, Bassin Bleu, Plaisance, 1.1.1  Develop 33 community land -use 
plans.  
 
1.1.2  Train communities, farmer and 
women’s associations in the • 33 community land -use plans  
• 20 Trainings delivered in the seven 
target communes for communities, 
farmer and women’s associations


---
*Page 87*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 83 
  
  
 Pilate, Ma rmelade, Gros Morne) will be 
trained on climate -resilient land -use 
management. 118 communities will be 
reached by these plans and the 
associated training, which will focus on: 
  
• the expected impacts of climate 
change, particularly flooding, in Haiti 
and th e associated consequences of 
these impacts on the population’s 
livelihoods;  
• linkages between land -use and 
hydrology of the TR watershed, 
particularly the implications of 
unsustainable land -use practices on 
the frequency and intensity of flooding 
in the wa tershed;  
• promoting sustainable, climate -
resilient agricultural practices such as 
slope stabilisation, riparian protection, 
and contour line farming, as well as 
the importance of protecting forest 
areas, as viable options for improving 
hydrological function  of the watershed 
and reducing flood impacts;  
• the role of the community in 
sustainable charcoal production and 
reforestation, as a strategy for 
increasing climate resilience in the 
watershed; and  
• practical aspects of agroforestry as a 
climate -resilient li velihood alternative.  
 
The groups of people targeted for training 
will also be encouraged to participate in 
the development of the community land -
use plans, which will inform this training. 
The development of these plans will focus 
on identifying the impacts of climate 
change, p articularly flooding, on the TR seven target communes on the 
application of the community 
land-use plans and 
implementation of climate -
resilient land -use practices.  
 
1.1.3  Conduct  one awareness 
campaign in each of the seven 
target communes in Haiti.  • Awareness campaigns designed and 
implemented in the seve n target 
communes


---
*Page 88*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 84 
  
  
 watershed and designing appropriate 
actions for addressing these impacts. 
Furthermore, farmers will be targeted to 
receive training on the development of 
sustainable agroforestry business models 
that will contribute to both improving 
livelihood security and enhancing the use 
of sustainable land -use practices in the TR 
watershed. To support these capacity -
building initiatives, awareness -raising 
campaigns will be designed and 
implemented in the seven target 
communes through cit y hall meetings and 
community radio broadcasts. These 
campaigns will focus on: i) increasing the 
knowledge of people living in the TR 
watershed on sustainable land -use 
practices and promoting the uptake of 
these practices; ii) encouraging community 
members  to participate in the development 
of community land -use plans; and iii) 
raising awareness among people living in 
the target communes on the impacts of 
climate change -induced flooding and 
effective adaptation and landscape 
management solutions for addressi ng 
these impacts.  
Activity 1.2.  Implement ecosystem -based 
flood management solutions in the Trois -
Rivières watershed  This project activity will focus on reducing 
the impacts of climate change -induced 
flooding in the TR catchment and Port -de-
Paix. This will be achieved by implementing 
17,740 ha of agroforestry systems and 
rehabilitating 7,700 ha of forests in priority 
areas in the watershed. Implementing 
these EbA interventions will result in a 40% 
reduction in peak runoff, with rehabilitation 
interventions, in particular, expected to 
reduce floodplain extents in the target 1.2.1.  Establish 17,740 ha of agrofor estry 
systems in priority areas the TR 
watershed, including: i) 
agrisilvicultural systems — which 
are a combination of crops and 
trees, such as alley cropping; ii) 
silvopastoral systems — which 
combine forestry and grazing of 
domesticated animals; and iii)  
agrosilvopastoral systems that 
combine trees, crops and 
animals.  
 • 17,740 ha of agroforestry systems 
established in priority areas the TR 
watershed,  including: i) 
agrisilvicultur al systems — which are 
a combination of crops and trees, 
such as alley cropping; ii) 
silvopastoral systems — which 
combine forestry and grazing of 
domesticated animals; and iii) 
agrosilvopastoral systems that 
combine trees, crops and animals  
• 7,700 ha of forests in priority areas 
the TR watershed reforested


---
*Page 89*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 85 
  
  
 areas by 20% and 26% under the 20 -year 
and 100 -year flood scenarios, respectively.  
The implementation of agroforestry 
systems has a particularly high adaptation 
impact potential because of the provision 
of ecosystem goods and services (e.g. 
improved quality and quantity of water, 
more productive and sta ble soils, and crop 
pollination) combined with the creation of 
alternative livelihood options to 
unsustainable land uses, such as 
unregulated charcoal production. All 
agroforestry activities will also involve 
extensive engagements with farmer and 
women’s a ssociations, as well as relevant 
community representatives and groups, to 
encourage a progressive and gender -
responsive transition towards sustainable 
agroforestry businesses that are 
sustainable over the long term.   1.2.2.  Restore 7,700 ha of forests in 
priority areas the TR watershed 
through planting indigenous tree 
species in degraded areas within 
the seven target communes.  
 
1.2.3.  Hold 8 engagement workshops with 
community leaders, farmer and 
women’s associations to facilitate 
the implementation of Sub -activities 
1.1.2 and 1.1. 3. • 8 engagement workshops with 
community leaders, farmer and 
women’s associations  
Activity 2.1. S trengthen institutional 
capacity at the commune, inter -commune 
and department levels in Haiti’s Trois -
Riviè res watershed for productive and 
sustainable land -use management  Under this activity, a capacity needs 
assessment will be conducted for the 
agricultural sector to identify the technical 
and institutional requirements for 
transitioning the sector from unsus tainable 
land-use practices towards a sustainable 
landscape management (SLM) approach 
to land and water resources management 
that is climate resilient. Capacity will be 
assessed in six of the seven target 
communes in the TR watershed. From the 
capacity nee ds assessments, 
opportunities will be identified, and plans 
made to enhance the management of 
natural resources and promote the uptake 
of climate -resilient agricultural practices to 
increase productivity. To facilitate the 
uptake of these new sustainable p ractices, 
governance mechanisms and frameworks 2.1.1 Conduct capacity gap/needs 
assessments for the agricultural sector in 
seven  priority communes in the TR region.  
 
2.1.2 Establish communal development 
councils and multi -sectoral management 
structures to oversee and manage the 
implementation of interventions designed 
to address priority areas identified in Sub -
activity 2.1.1  
 
2.1.3 Train representatives from 
appropriate gov ernment entities, including 
MARNDR , NCFS and MSAL, on the 
implementation of climate -resilient 
agricultural techniques and SLM.   • Capacity needs assessment  
• Communal development councils 
established  
• Trainings for government entities, 
including MARNDR , NCFS and 
MSAL, on SLM in the TR watershed


---
*Page 90*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 86 
  
  
 for SLM will be developed in the TR 
watershed through the establishment of 
communal development councils. These 
councils will represent all agricultural 
sector stakeholders, including smallholder 
farmers, in t he seven  communes. 
Additionally, multi -sectoral governance 
structures will be established to oversee 
and manage the implementation of 
interventions designed to address priority 
areas identified under the capacity needs 
assessment. Support for the governanc e 
structures established will be provided 
through strengthening the capacity of 
relevant government entities, including the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (/ MARNDR ), 
National Coordination of Food Security 
(NCFS) and Minist ry of Social Affairs and 
Labour (MSAL), to implement SLM at the 
department level. This will enable the 
adoption of SLM practices to be guided in 
a manner that is compatible with the 
effective functioning of the entire 
watershed and that contributes to 
enha ncing flood management across the 
TR watershed.  
Activity 2.2. Enhance the technical 
capacity and access to finance of national 
and local representatives involved in 
agriculture in the Trois -Rivières watershed 
for adopting climate -resilient sustainable 
land-use practices  This project activity will increase the 
technical capacity of farmers to implement 
climate -resilient agricultural techniques and 
land-use practices, using the findings f rom 
the capacity needs assessments being 
conducted under Activity 2.1.1. Specifically, 
this will be achieved through implementing 
targeted adaptation interventions in Haiti’s 
TR watershed to optimise the agricultural 
value chain and promote the use of clim ate-
resilient agricultural techniques across the 
sector. Such interventions will include 
enhancing the transportation of agricultural 2.2.1.  Strengthen the technical capacity of 
farmers and communities in the 
seven target communes to 
implement climate -resilient 
agricultural practices and SLM.  
 
2.2.2.  Provide climate -resilient agricultural 
inputs (e.g. climate -resilient 
seeds and infrastructure 
updgrades) to households in the 
TR watershed.   
 • Trainings for farmers and 
communities in the seven target 
communes  
• Strengthened agricultural finance 
mechanism  
• Climate -resilient agricultural 
inputs/inputs and/or infrastructure 
provided to smallholder farmers


---
*Page 91*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 87 
  
  
 produce (e.g. by developing agricultural 
tracks), as well as improving water supply 
systems (e.g. irrigation and water pum ps) 
to address decreasing water security 
caused by the impacts of climate change -
induced flooding. Infrastructural upgrades 
will also be undertaken in the form of 
increasing the storage capacity and quality 
of post -harvest facilities, as well as 
establishi ng local processing facilities for 
agricultural produce to optimise agricultural 
production in the watershed. These 
interventions will be supported by the 
provision of climate -resilient agricultural 
inputs (e.g. climate -resilient seed varieties) 
to vulnera ble households that depend on 
subsistence agriculture for their livelihoods. 
This will be supplemented by delivering 
technical skills training on climate -resilient 
agricultural techniques and SLM to 
farmers. Specifically, this will involve: i) 
enhancing th eir ability to effectively 
manage and organise irrigation and other 
associations; ii) facilitating participatory 
access to agricultural inputs, farming 
equipment, maintenance facilities; and iii) 
upskilling of maintenance staff.  
Strengthening these key ele ments of the 
agricultural value chain in Haiti’s TR 
watershed will not only enhance the 
climate resilience of agricultural production 
in the country, but also contribute to 
increased food security in the watershed 
by improving market access for farmers 
and those people who depend on 
agriculture for their livelihoods. This 
increased market access will be supported 
by the establishment of an agricultural 
finance mechanism under the Agricultural 2.2.3.  Enhance access to finance for 
smallholder farmers through the 
VSCA.


---
*Page 92*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 88 
  
  
 Village Savings and Credit Associations 
(VSCA). Financing will be  made available 
to smallholder farmers under this 
mechanism to facilitate their adoption and 
implementation of sustainable, climate -
resilient agricultural practices. These 
farmers will be able to access financing 
from this mechanism during and 
immediately after the impacts of a climate 
change -related event, such as flooding. 
This will promote the adoption of more 
sustainable land -use practices that are 
resilient to climate change.  
Activity 2.3.  Implement a social protection 
system to support vulnerable households 
at risk to food insecurity because of 
climate change  While Activity 3.1.2 provides a long -term 
solution to addressing these negative 
impacts, this activity will provide the 
required imm ediate relief to vulnerable 
people affected by these events, 
concomitantly reducing further pressure on 
the environment by providing an alternative 
option to resorting to unsustainable 
charcoal production. Specifically, Activity 
2.1.3 will facilitate the d evelopment of a 
social safety net whereby food coupons  will 
be provided to vulnerable households 
affected by food insecurity. To determine 
eligible households for these coupons , 
vulnerable households will be identified 
through a site survey and/or assessme nt, 
with their details captured in a database for 
future reference. Recipients of these 
coupons  will be able to redeem the 
coupons  for local produce at selected 
primary and secondary markets. These 
coupons  will also serve as a form of 
currency (or e - coupon ), which will provide 
recipients with purchasing power to 
exchange the coupons  for specific goods. 
A total of 934 farmers will be selected to 
participate in the operation of the food 2.3.1.  Conduct a site survey/assessment 
to determine eligible households to 
receive food coupons  to be 
developed under Sub -activity 2.3.2  
 
2.3.2.  Establish and operationalise a food 
coupons mechanism  in the TR 
watershed.  
 
2.3.3.  Engage and train 934 farmers on 
the implementation of the food 
coupons mechanism  established 
under Sub -activity 2.3. 2.   
 
2.3.4.  Create 150 new VSCAs in the TR 
watershed to enhance the food 
security of vulnerable households.  
 
2.3.5.  Establish a network of village 
agents to monitor existing VSCAs 
and establish new ones, as well as 
to monitor market performance 
contributing to food coupons 
mechanism s. • Operational food coupons mechanism  
in the TR watershed.  
• Site survey/assessment  
• Training for 934 farmers on the 
implementation of the food coupons 
mechanism   
• 150 new VSCAs created in the TR 
watershed  
• A network of village agents 
established for the monitoring and 
establishment of VSCAs


---
*Page 93*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 89 
  
  
 coupons mechanism . Participating farmers 
will receive training on inter alia  hygiene, 
modalities of exchange and personal 
security.  
To support the efficient and effective 
implementation of the food coupons 
mechanism , existing VSCAs will receive 
operational improvements under this 
activity, supplemented by the creation of 
150 new VSCAs in the TR watershed. The 
VSCAs will provide additional financial 
support to the coupons mechanism , which 
will secure its effectiveness  as a food relief 
mechanism. To ensure that this system 
remains operational throughout the lifetime 
of the project, a network of village agents 
will be established, with their primary 
responsibilities being the monitoring of 
existing VSCAs and creation of new ones.  
Activity 3.1. Strengthen national capacities 
for the implementation of the Water Act  Under Activity 3.1, provisions will be 
drafted to the Water Act to ensure that it 
promotes an integrated approach to water 
resources management, including 
considerations for the coordi nated 
development of water, land and related 
resources. This will contribute towards: i) 
maximising economic and social welfare in 
an equitable manner without 
compromising the sustainability of vital 
ecosystems under future climate change 
conditions; and i i) facilitating efficient, 
integrated adaptation responses to the 
impacts of climate change in Haiti. 
Provisions to the Water Act will also 
recommend the establishment of 
Catchment IWRM Committees (Committes 
de GIRE des Bassins Versants, CGBVs) 
within each  of the 31 catchments in the 
country, and the establishment of Sub -3.1.1.  Draft provisions to Haiti’s Water Act 
for the adoption  of an integrated 
approach to water resources 
management and implement the act 
in the TR watershed.  
 
3.1.2.  Establish Catchment IWRM 
Committees ( Committes de GIRE 
des Bassins Versants, CGBVs ) 
within each of the 31 catchments in 
Haiti, as per the provision s drafted 
in Sub -activity 3.1.1.  
 
3.1.3.  Establish Sub -Catchment Water 
Resource Users Associations 
(Associations d'Usagers des 
Ressources en Eau du Sous -bassin 
versant; AssURES) within the sub -
catchments of the 31 catchments in • Provisions drafted to the Water Act  
• 31 Catchment IWRM Committees 
established


---
*Page 94*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 90 
  
  
 Catchment Water Resource Users 
Associations (Associations d'Usagers des 
Ressources en Eau du Sous -bassin 
versant, or AssURES).  Haiti, as per the provisions drafted 
in Sub -activity 3.1.1  
Activity 3.2.  Develop an integrated, 
climate -resilient water management 
governance framework targeting the 
catchment and sub -catchment levels in the 
Trois -Rivières watershed  Under this activity, an inclusive and 
equitable water management governance 
framework will be d eveloped for the TR 
catchment, namely the Catchment 
Integrated Water Resources Management 
Committee (CIWRMC ). This committee 
will work with representatives from 
productive sectors (e.g. agriculture), land 
users at sub -catchment level and Sub -
Catchment Water Resources User 
Associations (SCWRUAs) to achieve two 
main goals. First, these groups will work 
together t o develop climate -resilient IWRM 
plans for end users at the sub -catchment 
and catchment levels that promote 
sustainable water resources management 
and an equitable distribution of the 
available resources among all users. The 
IWRM plans will define roles an d 
responsibilities of institutions and civil 
society stakeholders for water resources 
management (complementary to the 
decentralised management of water 
resources to be established in the Water 
Act under Activity 3.1). It will also promote 
a landscape mana gement approach that 
will be linked to the implementation of 
community land -use plans (Activity 1.1), 
considering gender dynamics. Second, the 
CIWRMC , together with the relevant land 
users and SCWRUAs, will ensure that the 
management of water resources in the 
catchment considers climate change 
impacts, particularly the expected impacts 
at landscape level as well as on upstream 
and downstream flow dynamics. Training 3.2.1.  Establish the Catchment Integrated 
Water Resources Management 
Committe e (CIWRMC ) to manage 
water resources in the TR 
watershed.  
 
3.2.2.  Develop climate -resilient IWRM 
plans for end users at the sub -
catchment and catchment levels in 
a participatory, gender -responsive 
way with representatives from 
CIWRMC  and productive sector s 
(e.g. agriculture), land users and 
Sub-Catchment Water Resources 
User Associations (SCWRUAs).  
 
3.2.3.  Promote a climate -resilient, 
integrated landscape management 
approach in the TR watershed that  
considers gender dynamics, using 
the community land -use plans 
(Activity 1.1).  
 
3.2.4.  Train the CIWRMC  (established 
under Sub -activity 3.2.1) and 
representatives  from productive 
sectors (e.g. agriculture), land users 
and Sub -Catchment Water 
Resources User Associations 
(SCWRUAs) on the application of 
climate -resilient IWRM plans in 
decision making.  
 
 
 
 • Catchment Integrated Water 
Resources Management Committee 
(CIWRMC ) established  
• Climate -resilient IWRM plans  
• Promotion of climate -resilient, 
integrated landscape management 
approach in the TR watershed  
• Trainings delivered to the CIWRMC  
(established under Sub-activity 3.2.1) 
and representatives from productive 
sectors (e.g. agriculture), land users 
and Sub -Catchment Water Resources 
User Associations (SCWRUAs)


---
*Page 95*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 91 
  
  
 on the climate -resilient IWRM plans will 
also be delivered focusing on the 
application of the se plans in decision -
making. The combined result of these 
actions will be the establishment and 
operation of an integrated governance 
framework that will contribute to 
preserving climate -resilient, sustainable 
land and water resources management 
beyond the  lifetime of the project. During 
the implementation of Activity 3.2, 
considered efforts will be made to securing 
equitable representation, participation and 
leadership of women.  
Activity 3.3.  Implement regular monitoring 
and evaluation of water resources at the 
catchment and sub -catchment levels to 
support the implementation of integrated 
water resources management (IWRM) 
plans  From project inception (Year 1), 
continuous health monitoring and impact 
evaluations will be undertaken and will 
continue throughout the implementation 
phase. By monitoring the evolution, 
frequency and location of flood -related 
illnesses from the start of the project, the 
impact of the project will be assessed 
once a suf ficient time series of 
observations is completed. UNDP will 
commission an expert to undertake the 
health monitoring and impact evaluations 
of the EbA flood management solutions. 
The World Health Organisation (WHO) will 
provide technical support to this exp ert, as 
they are currently monitoring cases of 
water - and vector -borne diseases in Haiti 
and therefore have a pre -defined 
methodology that would allow comparison 
studies to be undertaken across 
watersheds. The contracted expert will 
undertake a baseline as sessment of the 
prevalence of water - and vector -borne 
diseases within the TR watershed and 
analyse the impact of climate change -
induced flooding on the spread of these 3.3.1.  Commission an expert to undertake 
the health monitoring and impact 
evaluations of the EbA flood 
management solutions (Activity 
1.2), supported by WHO.  
 
3.3.2.  Undertake a baseline assessment 
of the prevalence of water - and 
vector -borne diseases — as well as  
monitor dry season baseflow — 
within the TR watershed, assisted 
by local representatives from 
SCWRUAs.  
 
3.3.3.  Assess the effectiveness of EbA 
interventions (Activity 1. 2) in 
reducing the spread of water - and 
vector -borne diseases.  
 
3.3.4.  Generate lessons through the 
implementation of all project 
interventions and disseminate these 
lessons through the committees 
and councils established under 
Output 2  • Expert contracted to undertake the 
health monitoring and impact 
evaluations of the E bA flood 
management solutions  
• Baseline assessment of the 
prevalence of water - and vector -borne 
diseases within the TR watershed  
• Assessment of the effectiveness of 
EbA interventions (Activity 1.2) in 
reducing the spread of water - and 
vector -borne diseases.  
• Workshops for the generation and 
dissemination of lessons learned


---
*Page 96*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 92 
  
  
 diseases. Following this assessment, the 
expert will report on her/his findings and 
provide the required health impact data to 
assess the health benefits of the EbA 
interventions implemented under the 
project. Simultaneously, this expert, 
assisted by representatives from 
SCWRUAs, will monitor dry season 
baseflow at four locations along the ma in 
stem of the Trois -Rivières (TR) river. This 
will be done to provide a stable indicator of 
the increased infiltration capacity of the 
soil because of forest rehabilitation and 
restoration activities to be implemented 
under Activity 1.2 of the project. Th e 
monitoring will facilitate an evidence -
based assessment of these EbA solutions 
as effective measures for reducing the 
impacts of climate change -induced 
flooding in the TR watershed and for 
improving the health of the watershed’s 
population. Finally, less ons generated 
through the implementation of all project 
interventions will be shared through the 
relevant committees and associations at 
the catchment and sub -catchment levels 
to inform adaptative management of these 
interventions under future climate chan ge 
conditions.   
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max . 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
200. Project -level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP Evaluation Policy. The Proje ct Manager and 
Monitoring and Gender Officer, under the oversight of UNDP as the AE, will be responsible for monitoring the progress of all project activities against the 
outcome -based indicators presented in the Logical Framework (Section E of this Funding Proposal). Any delays or challenges experience d during the 
implementation phase wil l be communicated timeously to the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office by the Project Manager, so that any appropriate 
support and corrective measures required can be actioned efficiently. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project s taff m aintain transparency, 
responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting on project results.  
   
201. Monitoring and evaluation of project activities will be undertaken on an annual basis. The type of monitoring activities to b e conducted during the 
implementation phase, as well as the responsible parties for undertaking these activities, are detailed in A nnex 11: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Plan. Such


---
*Page 97*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 93 
  
  
  
140 The project’s gender targets as well as the associated gender -disaggregated indicators are presented in Annex 8: Gender Assessment and Action Plan.  activities include field observations, key informant interviews and focus group sessions. The costs associated with undertaki ng the necessary monitoring, 
assessments and engagements required to inform the  project evaluations are presented in Annex 4: Detailed budget.     
 
202. A project inception workshop will be held once the proposed project has been approved to: i) re -orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss 
any changes in the overall context that may influence project implementation; ii) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting 
and communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; iii) review the project Logical Framework; iv) discuss report ing, monitoring and evaluation roles 
and responsibilities and finalise the M&E plan (Annex 11); v) review the financial reporting procedures and mandatory require ments, and agree on the 
arrangements for the annual audit; and vi) plan and schedule Project B oard meetings and finalise the first year annual work plan for the project. The final 
inception report will be shared with the UNDP Country Office, UNDP Regional Technical Advisor and Project Board for clearance . Once the report has been 
cleared by the rel evant parties, it will be submitted to the GCF for approval. This will happen within six months after the Funded Activity Agr eement (FAA) 
becomes effective.    
 
203. An annual progress report (APR) will be prepared by the Project Manager, UNDP Country Office, a nd UNDP Regional Technical Advisor for submission to 
the GCF, Project Board and relevant project stakeholders. The Project Manager, supported by the Monitoring and Gender Officer , will ensure that the indicators 
included in the project Logical Framework ar e monitored annually and that the results from regular M&E activities are presented in the GCF APR. Any challenges 
and delays experienced during the implementation phase will be monitored by the Project Manager and reported in the GCF APR.  
 
204. During the imp lementation phase, specific means of verification will be used to assess the: i) progress of project interventions towards ac hieving GCF Fund -
level impacts and Fund -level outcomes; and ii) performance of interventions against the project performance indica tors presented in Section E.5 of this Funding 
Proposal. A full -time Monitoring and Gender Officer will be employed to conduct and coordinate on -the-ground monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project 
and ensure that gender targets are met. The Monitoring  and Gender Officer will design and operationalise a performance monitoring framework to track the 
project’s progress towards achieving its targets. This will be achieved by: i) measuring the performance against the project indicators (Sections E.3 –5) to 
evaluate the progress of the project; ii) reporting the project’s performance to the National Steering Committee (NSC) and Pro ject Management Unit (PMU); 
and iii) providing technical support to the Project Manager. Additionally, the Monitoring and Gender Of ficer will be responsible for overseeing and monitoring 
the application of gender -disaggregated indicators140. At particular milestones (e.g. baseline, mid -term and project closure), the Monitoring and Gender Officer 
will undertake evidence -gathering exerci ses to verify the project’s performance against the outcomes -based indicators presented in the Logical Framework, 
M&E Plan and Gender Action Plan. The results from this process will be presented in periodic reports developed by the Monitor ing and Gender Of ficer, supported 
by the Project Manager. These reports will be submitted to the NSC and validated during the Independent Interim and Final Eva luations for the project, as 
described below.  
 
205. UNDP will be responsible for managing the Independent Interim (mid -term) and Final Evaluations of the project, including the process for contracting these 
positions. For the Interim Evaluation, an independent consultant will be contracted to provide an assessment of project perfo rmance against its targets at the 
project’s  mid-term (end of Year 3). This will be an outcomes -based assessment and will include analysing whether the project is on track, what problems and 
challenges the project is encountering, and what corrective actions are required, so that the project can ach ieve its intended outcomes by project completion in 
the most efficient and sustainable way. Following this evaluation, the NSC will develop a management response to the evaluati on recommendations along with 
an implementation plan for undertaking the requir ed actions. It is the responsibility of UNDP to assess whether the agreed recommendations are being


---
*Page 98*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 94 
  
  
  
 
 
 
141 available at: www.erc.undp.org .  implemented during the remainder of the project period. The completed Interim Evaluation report will be cleared by the UNDP C ountry Office as well as the 
UNDP Regional Technical Advisor and submitted to the Project Board for approval.  
 
206. An independent consultant will be contracted by UNDP to conduct the Final Evaluation Report at the end of project implementat ion. UNDP will be responsible 
for overseeing the Fi nal Evaluation Report, which is a summative evaluation. This evaluation will include an independent assessment of the project ’s overall 
performance against standard evaluation criteria (e.g. strategic relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, likelihood of imp act and sustainability), as well as against 
the project indicators presented in the Logical Framework. This evaluation will be based on inter alia documentaries of evide nce, field observation visits and 
key informant interviews. Following completion of the  evaluation, the Final Evaluation report will be developed and shared with the UNDP Country Office as 
well as the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor for clearance. Once the report has been cleared, it will be submitted to the Proj ect Board for approval.  
 
207. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project evaluations in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan. All evaluati on reports, including responses 
to feedback received from the public, will be uploaded in English to the UNDP Evaluation Resource C entre (ERC)141. The UNDP Country Office will retain all 
M&E records for this project for up to eight years after project financial closure to support ex -post evaluations.


---
*Page 99*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 95 
   
  RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), san ctions, 
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describ e the 
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability  
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact  
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as wel l as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices  
Selected Risk Factor 1   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
Low survival rates of crops and trees planted during the project makes stabilisation of slopes ineffective, hampering 
improvement in soil conservation measures.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Risk mitigation measures will include:  
• Specifically selecting and using robust (ideally indigenous) species that are well adapted to local conditions, with 
high levels of fire resistance and good re -sprouting capacity;  
• Providing technical assistance to households implementing agroforestry;  
• Involving the community in planning at the inception stage to foster ownership and promote long -term monitoring 
and protection of planted sites;  
• Practicing participatory planning for reforestation activities; and  
• mobilising civil society to raise awareness of the importance of monitoring and protection of ground cover for 
ecosystem service provision.  
Selected Risk Factor 2   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High 
Description  
Weak land -tenure, -use and -management systems prevent or delay implementation if agreements with landowners 
or communities cannot be reached.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Ownership of project interventions will be supported by the development of Community Land Use Plans (under Activity 
1.1), including assessing land -tenure and prioritising areas for interventions based on community recommendations 
and agreements.  
 
Since modifying the legislative framework for non-climate related aspects of land management is not within the scope 
of the project, other risk mitigation measures include:  
• ensuring the involvement and participation of target communities in the TR watershed at the inception and planning 
stage to estab lish trust  and support in the validation of land ownership ; 
• using the consultation process during the assessment phase as a platform to address concerns and increase buy -
in of communities;  
• encouraging community involvement in IWRM at the sub -catchment leve l, helping to work towards more sustainable 
agricultural and sub -catchment management practices; and  
• capitalising upon top -down (e.g. establishment of the Water Act) and bottom -up (e.g. establishment and capacitating 
of sub -catchment Water Resource Users’ Associations (WRUA)) approaches to land and water resources 
management to ensure that local needs and experiences are considered during project implementation.


---
*Page 100*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 96 
   
 Selected Risk Factor 3   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
Limited uptake of project interventions by target communities because of a preference towards fulfilling the 
immediate need for sustenance through conventional agricultural techniques over long -term climate action.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Risk mitigation measures will include:  
• building community interest by engaging Haitian civil society organisations (CSOs) and working with community 
governance systems and associations to  raise awareness of the challenges and impacts of climate change on 
environmental degradation and food security;  
• training and knowledge sharing initiatives to facilitate capacity building and ownership; and  
• emphasising the introduction of more sustainable farmin g systems (i.e. agroforestry), sustainable (sub -) 
catchment management and IWRM, as well as food security and nutrition interventions, which are designed to 
be inclusive.  
• Working with community members in monitoring the project’s indicators to establish a link between project action 
and benefits.  
Selected Risk Factor 4   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description  
 Inadequate national focus on adaptation measures because of other development pressures affecting the 
sustainability of the proposed project beyond GCF involvement.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Risk mitigation will consider:  
• building resilience into watershed management is increasingly becoming a national priority and is expected to 
develop into a sustained focus on adaptation in Haiti; and  
• a participatory and inclusive processes to help institutionalise climate change adapta tion and ensure the 
sustainability of the integrated management approach.  
• Embedding the project within national policy efforts including water management and the National Adaptation 
Plan process  
Selected Risk Factor 5  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High 
Description  
Continued overexploitation and unregulated land -use and -tenure renders soil conservation measures redundant, 
causing increasing degradation and permanent losses in soil fertility.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
• Through an integrated flood management planning approach, the project is intended to address environmental 
degradation partially and indirectly by framing regulations pertaining to land -use in areas directly impacted by 
climate change.  
• Additionally, improved institut ional capacity will also contribute to reducing degradative practices through better 
planning, policy decision -making and natural resource -management capacities.  
• The risk will further be mitigated by shifting practices and garnering buy -in of the local com munity through 
consultations to promote active involvement in sub -catchment IWRM, participation in crop/tree planting activities 
and building awareness of climate change impacts by mobilising the CSOs.  
Selected Risk Factor 6


---
*Page 101*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 97 
   
 Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Low 
Description  
Weak coordination between stakeholders, climate initiatives and implementation partners reduce the effectiveness 
of IWRM approaches in Haiti.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The risk will be mitigated by promoting coordination through the strategic identification of established multi -
stakeholder groups, including the WRUAs at sub -catchment level and the CIWRMC  at catchment level. 
Coordination between these groups will be stren gthened through workshops and knowledge -sharing initiatives 
aimed at: i) building awareness of activities being undertaken; ii) developing best practices to draw from; iii) 
synchronising efforts; and iv) replicating successes from each project.  
 
Risk will further be reduced by involving multiple actors in supporting catchment IWRM, including NGOs, private 
development organisations and community -based organisations. The participation of these entities will complement 
the relevant stakeholders within MoE and other relevant sector ministries, contributing towards coordination and 
integration of interests, needs and perspectives.  
 
The project will report regularly to the Technical Secretariat of the National Committee on Climate Change  to ensure 
alignment with t he GoH own Climate Strategies including the country’s National Adapation Plan. The project will 
also shares result with development partners and agencies through the the various donor groups for the 
environmental sector and for disaster risk reduction.  
Selected Risk Factor 7   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High 
Description  
Extreme weather event and/or natural disaster during project implementation and/or operations inhibits or delays 
progress.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
Mitigation measures include:  
• land-use plans taking these risks into account;  
• accelerating project execution during non -peak wet weather periods; and  
• choosing tree varieties and timing of planting to favour fast -growing species during the first planting cycle to 
shield crops and newly planted seedlings from extreme weather events.  
Selected Risk Factor 8   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  High 
Description  
Socio -political instability undermines envisaged project out puts because of disruptions and changes in national 
priorities and government operations.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
This risk will be mitigated by ensuring a continuity of process through:  
• Ensuring outreach to new officials/political administration at both local and national levels based on technical 
results to allow for an easy transition.  
• mainstreaming integrated flood governance into the institutional framework at multiple levels and amongst 
diverse jurisdictions and mandates;  
• defining roles and responsib ilities and developing clear standard operating procedures (SOPs) for implementing 
stakeholders , this includes working through NGOs,and Responsible Parties such as Heifer with local presence 
and with clear knowledge on how to address instability at a terri torial level  when working with communities ;


---
*Page 102*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 98 
   
 • undertaking capacity building initiatives  at various levels looking to empower local government and mid level 
technical officals that are less vuln rable to political disru ptions . These actions allow technical wor k to continue 
despite social and political upheavals ;  
• focusing on ensuring buy -in and participation of vulnerable communities by mobilising local CSOs to raise 
awareness on climate change, climate impacts and adaptation strategies  and creating local train ers. Working at 
community level as well as mobilizing community associations has proven effective to ensure transformative 
action on the ground despite economic and social disruptions.   
• Enhancing community and local governance structures around common  objectives that result in clear value 
adds and hence improve buy in from local actors for the development of project outputs.  
• Enabling local structures to enhance local capacities and resilience.  
• Ensuring outreach to new officials/political administ ration at both local and national levels based on technical 
results to allow for an easy transition.  
Selected Risk Factor 9  
 
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  Medium  
Description  
 
Insecurity within the country may seep into project sites particularly in Bassin Bleu and Gros Morne and cause 
delays in the implementation of project activities.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
 
An initial conflict analyis  has been prepared  by the project and included within the  project’s ESMF . The analysis 
and the project’s ESFM  provideds guidelines for the development of Security Plans and Conflict Assessments  that 
will be developed as part of  the activity  level EISA s/ESMFs during the proj ect’s first year  and will result in activity 
specific  management plans  per grouped areas . To reduce the potential of project beneficiaries or staff being 
targeted by illegal actors, the project has avoided the provision of direct cash benefits  focusing mor e on community 
based benefits (capacity building, agroforestry inputs, enhanced associative capacity, etc.) . In terms of mobility, 
UNDSS rules will be used and strictly adhered to by the project particularly during internal travel and security issues 
will be continuously monitored  to allow for adaptive management in case it is required . Procurement strategies will 
favor local purchases to avoid any potential danger in the transport of project equipment and its delivery to project 
sites. In addittion, a logi stics and operations officer has been foreseen by the project to ensure that logistics take 
into account insecurity risks when planning the delivery of project activities and on the ground missions. The 
project’s community based approach will allow for the project to ensure strong community buy in and enhance 
social capital, this approach will help develop community informed practices in the implementation of project 
activities to avoid potential security risks while creating an opportunity to maximise the p eacebuilding potential of 
the project.


---
*Page 103*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 99 
   
  GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
208. This project has completed the UNDP social and environmental screening procedure undertaken to ensure  it 
complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards. The social and environmental risk category for this 
project is: Moderate (Category B). A detailed risk assessment undertaken for the project Social and Environmental 
Risk Procedure (SESP), as well as the Environm ental and Social Management Framework (ESM F), are presented 
in Annex 6.   
 
209. UNDP will be responsible for the ESM F, ensuring it is adequate and followed. The PMU will be responsible for 
the revision or updates of the ESM F document during project implementation and will ensure timely corrective 
actions are taken, as identified. Any non -conformances to the ESM F are to be noted in environmental inspections 
and logged into the register. Depending on the severity of the non - conformance, the Site Supervisor may specify 
a corrective action on the site inspection report. The ESM F and its procedures are to be reviewed at least every 
year by UNDP staff and the MoE. The objective of the review is to update the document to reflect kno wledge gained 
during project delivery/construction and to reflect new knowledge and changed community standards (values).  
 
210. The progress of all corrective actions will be tracked using the register. Any non -conformances and the issue of 
corrective actions a re to be advised to UNDP. UNDP and the MoE will also release updates on the project on a 
regular basis to provide interested stakeholders with information on project status. Updates may be via a range of 
media, for example print, radio, social media or for mal reports, and all material must be published in English and 
Haitian Creole (Kreyòl) as appropriate. A publicised telephone number will be maintained throughout the project to 
serve as a point of contact for enquiries, concerns, complaints and/or grievan ces. All enquiries, concerns, 
complaints and/or grievances will be recorded on a register and the appropriate manager will be informed.  
 
211. The project has the potential to cause low to moderate environmental and social impacts. The Project’s design 
has avoi ded all high -risk environmental and social impacts and favoured a wholly climate resilient infrastructure 
approach to flood management, eschewing high -risk grey infrastructure for flood control. Furthermore, the project 
does not require any land acquisitio n and/or resettlement, does not promote the use of pesticides and fertilisers, 
prohibits the use of alien invasive species in planting, and promotes diverse agroforestry systems and reforestation 
that will not only build climate resilience and food securit y, and decrease the impact of floods, but also provide 
significant environmental and social co -benefits.  
 
212. When undertaking the risk assessment, all activities were assessed, with an emphasis on those with the potential 
for some adverse risk, specifically O utput 1, Activity 1.2 which involves the project’s physical interventions 
(agroforestry and reforestation) financed by GCF. Potential risks identified  include: i) the possibility that activities 
reproduce discriminations against women based on gender, due  to existing structural inequalities and roles in 
agriculture and decision -making; ii) the possibility that activities lead to the unintentional increased use of pesticides 
and fertilisers in agroforestry systems because of improved income; and iii) a  low  risk that there is a possibility of 
child labour use in the promoted agroforestry systems. Specific measures for each environmental and social risk 
are discussed along with mitigation measures in the ESM F. 
 
213. The preparation of the ESM F included public consultation as part of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. The full 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan is appended as part of the proposal in Annex 7: Stakeholder Engagement Plan, 
which includes the full list of stakeholders consulted, and a summar y of the consultations. The project was 
discussed with a wide range of stakeholders including relevant government departments, industry groups, NGOs, 
and individual community members (including marginalised groups) and was approved by the Government of Hai ti. 
These extensive on -the-ground consultations undertaken during the design of the project (as well as during the 
earlier interventions that this project complements and up -scales) closely informed overall project design and the 
ESM F, and it is expected t hat consultations with affected communities and beneficiaries will continue. It is 
anticipated that based on the communities’ needs, the projects will be fully accepted.  
 
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
214. A Gender Assessment and Action Plan (GAAP) was developed for this project in order to provide an overview of 
the issue of gender in Haiti, with a specific focus on the gender differentiated impacts of climate change and how 
this information can be used to design a gender -sensitive adaptation intervention. The GAAP identifies gender 
issues relevant to the project interventions and situated in the Haitian context, across elements such as use and 
access to resources, gender -differentiated roles in employment a nd livelihoods, and roles in political decision


---
*Page 104*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 100 
   
 making. The Gender Action Plan specifically describes opportunities for gender mainstreaming in the project design 
so that the proposed project interventions address gendered climate resilience across the hou sehold, community 
and institutional levels.  
 
215. Haiti ranks third globally on the Long -Term Climate Risk Index142, demonstrating its extreme vulnerability to 
climate change — to which women are especially vulnerable. Widespread deforestation and soil degradation have 
so severely impacted the island’s environment that it can no longer provide critical ecosystem functions, such as 
mitigating the effects of heavy rain and flooding. This has progressively increased human vulnerability to climate 
change. Ex treme climate events, such as tropical storms and hurricanes, are expected to increase in frequency 
and intensity, while rainfall is expected to become more erratic across seasons143. In an already denuded and 
degraded landscape, this increased rainfall eng enders severe erosion and landslides, flash flooding, and 
sedimentation of river channels144.  
 
216. Climate change impacts are not gender -neutral and many of the consequences of climate -induced impacts are 
more severe for women, and other socio -economically mar ginalised groups, given their specific livelihood 
circumstances. In relative terms, women lack access to productive resources, and this has impacts on their health, 
food security and safety in the context of flooding and other extreme climate events. The a dditional socio -cultural 
barriers limiting participation and movement outside the household sphere is worsened by phenomena such as 
flooding, drought and erratic rainfall. These constraints cause women to have to work much harder to secure food 
and water, and generate additional income through livelihoods which, in turn, diminishes their ability to advance 
out of poverty, particularly when they have, for example, lost their land due to the impacts of flooding during cyclone 
events.  
 
217. Gender equality and wome n’s empowerment are not addressed in most of Haiti’s strategy or action plan 
documents for climate change and disaster risk management145, 146. Flooding has cumulative livelihood effects that 
unfairly impact women and exacerbate gender inequality. In Haiti, women are disproportionately represented 
among the poor and there is a significant portion of women -headed households, so impacts such as crop loss, 
animal drowning, destroyed homes, health risks or displacement and loss of life resulting from flood s ultimately 
affect women to a higher extent. Yet, during these extreme flooding events, the importance of grassroots 
organisation and mobilisation of women’s groups during disaster relief efforts has been unparalleled and critical, 
demonstrating the resil ience of Haitian women in the face of extreme adversity.  
 
218. Over 40% of households in Haiti are headed by women, and this percentage has been on the rise since 2007147, 
148. Today, there are more women living under extreme poverty than men, with a large propor tion residing in rural 
areas149. Most of Haiti’s population is rural, and two -thirds of this population is dependent on agriculture; with 
women comprising a significant portion of the labour force involved across all aspects of agricultural processes150. 
 
219. To address gender dimensions within the project design and implementation, the Gender Action Plan will account 
for: 
• specific strategies to include/target female -headed households;  
• differing conservation incentives faced by women;  
• identification of gaps in gender equality through the use of sex -disaggregated data enabling the gender action 
plan to close those gaps, devoting resources and expertise for implementing such strategies, monitoring the 
results of implementation, and holding individuals and institut ions accountable for ou tputs  that promote gender 
equality;  
• advocacy and awareness that is adjusted to most effectively reflect gender -specific differences; and  
• the inclusion of a Gender Specialist position/provision of advice within the project to implemen t gender -related 
activities.  
 
 
142 German Watch, Global Climate Risk Index 2020. https://germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/20 -2-
01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf.  
143 Ibid.   
144 IUNC 2011 gender action plan.  
145 USAID (2016).  
146 Shadow Report (2011).  
147 IHSI, enquête, emploi, économie  informelle, 2010.  
148 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir.  
149 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir.  
150 USAID (2016).


---
*Page 105*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 101 
   
 220. Gender  benefits through this project have been optimised by promoting the full involvement of women in decision -
making regarding integrated flood management at the community and institutional levels, as well as promoting 
women  as the stewards of agroforestry systems, playing key roles in the selection of species and transformation 
of products. In addition, as during the design of the project, strong efforts will continue to be made during 
implementation  to ensure the equitable participation of women. Additionally, going forward beyond the 
implementation phase, equal participation of women will be pursued and achieved in ongoing management and 
water governance especially on the Water Governance Committees .  
 
221. During project implementation, qualitative assessments will be conducted on the gender -specific benefits that 
can be directly attributed to the project. This will be incorporated in the annual Project Implementation Report, Mid -
Term Report , and Termina l Evaluation. Indicators to quantify the achievement of project objectives in relation to 
gender equality will include men and women who had access to affordable solutions, number of men and women 
employed from the jobs created by the project, training opp ortunities, knowledge management and information 
dissemination.  
 
222. The stakeholder consultations and engagement of women’s organisations promote gender equality at the local 
as well as the national level. The involvement of women’s organisations in the project design aided in identifying 
relevant gender  issues within the country’s social context, as well as in implementing and monitoring the gender 
aspects of the project.  
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
223. The financial  management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here151. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Program 
and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) available here. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies 
in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s POPP. See here. 
 
224. The project will be implemented following the full -support National Implementation Modality (NIM) following the 
UNDP’s POPP guidelines available here152. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the implementing partner 
by undertaking an eva luation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners 
(part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer ( HACT ). All projects 
will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and 
policies.  
 
225. The Full Support to NIM guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s po licies and procedures, as set out in the 
UNDP  POPP. The NIM guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by UNDP and are fully compliant with 
UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations.  
 
226. The national executing entity MoE (also r eferred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology), 
is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies, and procedures 
(including the NIM guidelines). In legal terms, this is ensured through the  national Government’s signature of the 
UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be signed 
by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds. Both of these documents require compliance. Duri ng 
implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, 
and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed 
with the GCF. This may incl ude, but is not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and participation 
in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project level or at 
implementing partner level on the resources rece ived from UNDP.  
 
 
151 In line with UNDP National Implementation (NIM) Guidelines, the Government is responsible for the management and procurement of the 
Project to achieve project outputs. Government regulations, rules and procedures apply to project implement ation to the extent that they do 
not contravene the principles of the Financial Regulations and Rules of UNDP. UNDP Financial Regulations section 16.05 state:   
- “The administration by executing entities or, under the harmonized operational modalities, imp lementing partners, of resources obtained 
from or through UNDP shall be carried out under their respective financial regulations, rules, practices and procedures only to the extent 
that they do not contravene the principles of the Financial Regulations and  Rules of UNDP.  
- Where the financial governance of an executing entity or, under the harmonized operational modalities, implementing partner, does not 
provide the required guidance to ensure best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency, and ef fective international competition that 
of UNDP shall apply.”


---
*Page 106*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 102 
   
 The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing 
the auditors . In UNDP, scheduled audits are performed during the project cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, 
based on the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine 
whether the funds transferred to the impleme nting partner were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance 
with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit and/or an internal control audit.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals wi ll be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in 
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception sh ould not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information.  
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity decl ares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the fundi ng proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 107*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 103 
   
 
 ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided ) 
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social  Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan (temp late provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18  Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)153 
☐  Eligibility Criteria  
☐  Beneficiary Calculation Worksheet  
 Results Framework sheet


---
*Page 108*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V. 3.0 | PAGE 104 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 
153 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.


---
*Page 109*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 110*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois-Rivières region of 
Haiti through Integrated Flood Management
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  Yes 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific 
location (s) of project or 
target country or location (s) 
of programme  Trois Rivières Watershed , Republic of  Haiti  (within the 
communes of Marmelade, Plaisance, Pilate, Gros -Morne, 
Bassin Bleu, Chansolme, and Port -de- Paix.)  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Monday, June 5, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  French is an official language of Haiti . 
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023 -
06/Annex%2006%20- %20Annex_VI -A_-_FP-UNDP -0562023 -
5996- Haiti- ESMF%20highlight_4.pdf 
Fre
nch:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023 -
06/Annex%2006%20- GCF_PIMS5996 -Haiti-
ESMF_J une2023.pdf  
Other link(s)  The Ministry of Environment of the Government of Haiti  
English:  
https://mde.gouv.ht/index.php/fr/nos -
publications/documents- officiels#  
Fre
nch:  
https://mde.gouv.ht/phocadownload/Annex%2006%20 -
GCF_PIMS5996- Haiti -ESMF_June2023.pdf  
Hei
fer International 
English:  
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/Annex -06-UNDP -5996 -GCF -
Haiti -ESMF_English.pdf  
Fre
nch:  
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/ 06/Annex -06-GCF_PIMS5996- Haiti-
ESMF_June2023.pdf


---
*Page 111*
---

Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework  (ESMF) ”.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Monday, June 5, 2023  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  French is an official language of Haiti.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files /zskgke326/files/2023 -
06/Annex%2006%20- %20Annex_VI -A_-_FP-UNDP -0562023 -
5996- Haiti- ESMF%20highlight_4.pdf   
 
French:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/202
3-06/Annex%2006%20 -GCF_PIMS5996 -Haiti -
ESMF_June2023.pdf  
  
Other link(s)  The Ministry of Environment of the Government of Haiti  
English:  
https://mde.gouv.ht/index.php/fr/nos -
publications/documents- officiels#   
 
French:  
https://mde.gouv.ht/phocadownload/Annex%2006%20 -
GCF_PIMS5996 -Haiti -ESMF_June2023.pdf  
  
Heifer International  
English:  
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/Annex -06-UNDP -5996 -GCF -
Haiti -ESMF_English.pdf    
 
French:  
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/Annex -06-GCF_PIMS5996- Haiti-
ESMF_June2023.pdf   
 
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF)”.    
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website  Gender Analysis and Action Plan,  
Social and Environmental Safeguards Procedure (SESP)/ 
Monday, June 5, 2023


---
*Page 112*
---

Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language  French is an official language of Haiti.  
Link to disclosure  English:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023 -
06/Annex%2006A -UNDP -5996- %20GCF -Haiti-
SESP_cleared%207june2023_0.pdf  
 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023 -
06/Annex%2008- UNDP -5996 -GCF%20Haiti -
GAAP_cleared%207june2023.pdf  
 
French:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023 -
06/Annex%2006-
A%20 -%20Sauv egarde%20Environnementale%20et%20soci
ale%20Haiti_FP -UNDP5996_GCF%5B60141%5D.pdf   
 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023 -
06/Annex%2008%20-
Plan%20d%27action%20genre%20Haiti_FP -
UNDP5996_GCF.pdf   
  
Other link(s)  The Ministry of Environment of the Government of Haiti  
English:  
https://mde.gouv.ht/index.php/fr/nos -
publications/documents- officiels#   
 
French:  
https://mde.gouv.ht/phocadownload/Annex%2006 -
A%20 -%20Sauvegarde%20Environnementale%20et%20soci
ale%20Haiti_FP -UNDP5996_GCF60141.pdf   
 https://mde.gouv.ht/phocadownload/Annex%2008%20 -
Plan%20daction%20genre%20Haiti_FP -
UNDP5996_GCF60142.pdf   
 
 
Heifer International  
English:  
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/Annex -06A -UNDP -5996 -GCF -
Haiti- SESP_English.pdf  
 
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/Annex -08-UNDP -5996- GCF -Haiti-
GAAP_English.pdf  
 
French:  
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/Annex -06-A-Sauvegarde -
Environnementale -et-sociale -Haiti_FP -
UNDP5996_GCF60141.pdf  
 
https://heiferinternationalhaiti.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/06/Annex -08-Plan -daction -genre -
Haiti_FP -UNDP5996_GCF60142.pd f


---
*Page 113*
---

Remarks  The project’s SESP as well as its Gender Analysis and Action 
Plan is also disclosed by UNDP Haiti’s website, the Ministry 
of Environment’s website and Heifer international’s 
website . 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, June 9, 2023  
Place  A physical copy of the documents has been made available 
as within the mayor’s office of each commune  
•Marmelade, Mayors Office, 22 Rue Geuerrier,
Marmelade
•Plaisance  Mayor’s Office, Poudriere, Rue, Sylla,
Ducheine, Plaisance Nord Haiti
•Pilate  Mayor’s Offi ce Complexe Administratif de
Pilate, Route Frosiine
•Gros -Morne, 34 Rue Simone Complex Administratid
de Gros Morne
•Bassin Bleu, Rue de la Independence 1er La Plat e
P
alais Municipal de BAssin Bleu
•Chansolme  Mayor’s Office, 5 Route Nationale ,
Chansolde
•Port d e Paix Mayor’s Office Rule du Commisariat,
Port de Paix
Information meetings have also been planned to occur later 
in June in each of the Project target Communes  ( Marmelade, 
Plaisance, Pilate, Gros -Morne, Bassin Bleu, Chansolme, and 
Port -de-Paix ) through  Public Hearing Meetings.  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting Monday, July 10, 2023  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 114*
---

G
CF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 114 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP 208 
Proposal name:  Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois- Rivi ères region of Haiti 
through Integrated Flood Management  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Republic of Haiti  
Project/programme size: Small 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths  Points of caution  
Direct benefits to 292,600 people (2.7  per 
cent  of the total population), targeting the 
most vulnerable population, and 40  per cent  
reduction in peak run -off with  the increase in 
tree cover (17,740 ha agroforestry and 7,700 
ha restoration ) and reduce floodplain extents 
26 in  1 per cent  AEP.  Ongoing crises  including gang -related 
insecurity could pose a risk that needs to be 
carefully managed.  
Shifting away from unsustainable land -use 
practices to an integrated and climate -
resilient approach to land and water resources management , including  
community -led governance.  
Increasing household incomes, community 
health outcomes, improved water and soil 
quality and greater biodiversity , bridging 
sustainable land use and guarantee ing 
income . 
Economically viable ( economic internal rate 
of return : 22 per cent ; net present value: USD 
38.5 million ). Highly efficient with USD 
32/beneficiary (direct) . 
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the term sheet and addendum XVII , titled “List of  proposed  conditions and
recommendations”, respectively .
II. Summary of  the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project background


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 115 
 
 
3. Haiti is a small i sland  developing State (SIDS) and the only l east developed country 
(LDC) in the Caribbean region.  The geographical location, heavy dependence on climate -
sensitive livelihoods, and high level of longstanding macroeconomic challenges make Haiti 
highly  vulnerable to hydrometeorological disasters . In particular, projected climate change 
impacts including temperature rise, greater annual rainfall variability, and more frequent and 
intense hurricanes  will lead to i ncreased and more severe flooding events. Between 1975 and 
2012, floods, tropical storms and hurricanes resulted in economic damage and losses equivalent 
to 2 per cent  of the country’s gross domestic product on average per year. As such, the 
Government of Haiti  has prioritized watershed management actions  in its national adaptation 
plan in the Northwest and the Aribonite regions where t he Trois -Rivières (TR) watershed is 
located.  
4. Although the TR watershed is not the largest watershed in the co untry, its population is 
particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change- induced flooding , with limited  
resources to adequately adapt or respond to such events . The rural areas of the TR catchment 
have an extreme poverty rate of 40  per cent , which  is almost twice the national average of 23.9  
per cent  and much higher than any other area of Haiti . This  project will provide a suite of 
interventions to enhance the resilience of the population and ecosystems of the TR  region and 
promote a transformative  approach to the  flood management  system in the TR watershed.  
5. The objective of t his project is to e nhanc e the climate resilience of the TR region by 
initiating a shift  away  from uncoordinated decision -making and unsustainable land -use 
practices towards an integrated, climate- resilient approach to land and water resources 
management.  This will be achieved through  the following integrated components:  
(a) Ecosystem -based flood management solutions implemented in 25,440 h a of the TR  
watershed ; 
(b) Climate -resilient agricultural practices, optimized value chains and social safety nets 
established to promote sustainable landscape management and reduce degradation in 
the TR watershed ; and  
(c) Strengthened  governance and capacity for climate -resilient  integrated water resources 
management (IWRM ).  
6. The project will directly benefit at least 292,600 people , of which 52 per cent are 
women , in the seven targ et communes across  the TR region of Haiti, which accounts for about 3 
per cent  of the country’s total population. These are the most vulnerable populations of Haiti 
who have limited adaptive capacity to cope with the increased frequency of flooding  and will 
benefit from the project’s combination of interventions  detailed below. The project will also 
indirectly benefit an additional 441,272 people , of which 52 per cent are women  (approximately 
4 per cent  of the entire population of Haiti) .  
7. The total project financing is USD 31,290 ,561, with a request for GCF grants of USD 
22,427 ,206 . Heifer International Haiti will provide  co-finance of USD  8,303,355 in the form of 
grants , and United National Development Programme (UNDP) will also provide grant co -
financing of USD 560,000 . The project is submitted under environmental and social safeguards 
(ESS) category B.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1 : Ecosystem -based flood management solutions  implemented in 25,440 hectares of 
the Trois -Rivières watershed (total cost :  USD 18.40 million; GCF  cost:  USD  18.20 million ) 
8. Component  1 aims to directly enhance the resilience of the TR catchment  by 
implementing agroforestry systems and restoration  of arboreal land cover on degraded 
mountainous  slopes  in the TR  watershed. An increase  in concentrated  and heavy rainfall,


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 116 
 
 
combined with the increasing frequency and intensity of hurricanes and tropical storms, has 
resulted in the rapid erosion of fertile soils throughout the TR watershed. This is exacerbated  by 
the steep topography  and highly deforested landscape of the  watershed , which intens ifies flow 
rates because of reduced ground cover  and further increas es erosion and river sedimentation. 
The combination of these factors often results in the destruction  of crops, farmlands and 
agricultural infrastructure , as well as a loss  of livestock and human lives during the flood events.  
The implementation of t he proposed ecosystem -based adaptation (EbA) flood management 
solutions  is expected to address these issues by significantly reduci ng peak run -off and flooding 
extent in the area by increasing vegetative cover in the watershed  and the infiltration capacity 
of the soil. More specifically, the agroforestry systems will be implemented in 17,740 h a of 
degraded land, and reforestation and restoration will be implemented in 7,700 h a of forest 
areas across the target areas.  
9. The proposed activities include  establishing nurseries, planting seedlings (e.g. for fruit 
production and reforestation) and provi ding ongoing technical assistance to end users including 
on establish ing and monitoring of nurseries, scheduling seedling planting , using technical 
packages for agroforestry and monitoring the agroforestry systems t o account for the growing 
times of many a groforestry species . The spaces between the agroforestry species will be filled 
with perennial food crops (e.g. plantains, sugar cane, cassava, pigeon peas and pineapple), in 
combination with annual crops (e.g. sweet potato, yams and other annuals) .  
10. This intervention, which is an example of EbA , will be supplemented by develop ing the 
capacity of the target community groups , including farmers ’ and women’s associations 
regarding climate -resilient land -use planning . Thirty -three communities within the se ven target 
communes in the TR watershed will receive this training, which will then result in the 
development of 33 community land -use plans , through community engagement in a 
consultative process. These plans will focus on identifying the impacts of climate change, 
particularly flooding, on the TR watershed and designing appropriate actions for addressing 
these impacts. Such actions include the impleme ntation of EbA solutions to reduce flood risk in 
the watershed as well as the promotion of sustainable, climate- resilient land -use practices and 
techniques to reduce the risk of increased land degradation under future climate change 
conditions.  The farmers  in the target areas will receive training on develop ing sustainable 
agroforestry business models that will contribute to both improving livelihood security and 
enhancing the use of sustainable land -use practices. This participatory approach will ensure 
that the proposed interventions will have buy -in from beneficiary groups .  
Component 2 : Climate -resilient agricultural practices , optimi zed value chains and social safety 
nets established to promote sustainable landscape  management  and reduce degradation in the 
Trois -Rivières watershed (total cost: USD 8.30 million; GCF  cost:  USD  0) 
11. Component 2  will facilitat e a transformative shift in Haiti’s agricultural sector from 
unsustainable practices (e.g. the cultivation of annual crop types and clearing of forests for 
charcoal production) towards sustainable options that are resilient to the impacts of climate change -induced flooding. This shift will result in  sustainable livelihoods for the populations  of 
the TR region,  while reducing deforestation and land degradation  and maintain ing the integrity 
of its land and soil . In turn , this will contribute to decreasing flood damage, and a virtuous cycle 
will be created in the integrated flood management practices in this region.  This component will 
be entirely funded and implemented by Heifer International  for this project  with its co-finance 
funding. A suite of complementary activities will be implemented  to achieve  this component 
including: (1) strengthening the institutional capacity of the people who are involved in the 
technical aspects of agriculture at the target commune, inter -commune and department levels 
for implementing sustainable and climate -resilient agricultural practices; ( 2) enhancing access 
to financial resources for smallholder farmers in order to facilitate the uptake and 
implementation o f climate -resilient agricultural practices over the long term; and ( 3) 
establishing a social protection system for households that face chronic food insecur ity. The co-


---
*Page 117*
---

G
CF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 117 
finance funding f or this c omponent w ill be cataly sed by the approval of the GCF amount, and the 
sequence of activities w ill be aligned in o rder to m aximize t he impacts of t hese a ctivities.  
Component 3 : Strengthened g overnance a nd c apacity f or climate -resilient integrated water 
resources management (total c ost: USD  3.27 million ; GCF cost: USD  3.27 million) 
12. Component 3 w ill strengthen t he capacity of the G overnment o f Haiti to d evelop an d 
implement t he Water A ct, which w ill be an indispensable l egal f oundation for enabling 
participatory IWRM in t he TR w atershed. The current w ater g overnance sy stem in Haiti is 
organized at both the department al and the communal level, w hich creates an overlap b etween 
different b odies , particularly at the catchment a nd sub-catchment lev els. This poses challenges 
in coordination and p lanning among s takeho lders at d ifferent lev els an d leads t o ineffective and 
inefficient i mplementation o f an i ntegrated ap proach t o water r esources m anagement i n the TR 
watershed . The activities envisaged u nder this component include: (1 ) drafting p rovisions t o 
Haiti’s W ater A ct for  the adoption o f an i ntegrated a pproach t o water r esources m anagement;
(2) establishing c atchment IWRM c ommittees within 3 1 ca tchment s in H aiti; and (3) 
establishing sub -catchment w ater  resourc e users ’ associations within t he sub -catchments of t he 
31 c atchments . These committees w ill work w ith d ifferent s takeholders in t he 31 c atchments 
and s ub-catchments t o manage the efficient u se of land an d water r esources and will be 
responsible f or fostering community e mpowerment a nd o wnership o ver t hese cr itical r esources 
under fu ture climat e change conditions. T hese a ctivities will e nsure t hat t he Water A ct is 
developed and implemented to respond not only to national level priorities, but also to the 
adaptation n eeds of vulnerable commun ities living in t he TR w atershed.
Project m anagement (total c ost: U SD 1. 31 million; GCF co st: USD 0.9 5 million ) 
13. The GCF p ortion of this p roject m anagement c ost i s less t han 5 p er cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees.
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria
3
.1 Impact potential  Scale: N/A  
14. The proposed project will d irect ly benefit 292,600 people (2.7  per cent  of the total
population), targeting the most vulnerable population .
15. The project  net present value (NPV) of interventions is estimated to be US D 207 million
with an internal rate of return (IRR) of 37.9  per cent , and therefore represent s a highly cost -
effective spend for the Government of Haiti. The estimated health benefits under the economi c
an
d financial analysis list  water -borne diseases (such as diarrhoea and cholera) that would ,
w
ithout the project interventions, likely increase in prevalence because of increased flooding
and related impacts.
16. Th e increase in tree cover (17,740 ha agroforestry and 7,700 ha restoration ) is
ex
pected to result in a 40  per cent  reduction in peak run -off and reduce floodplain extents by 26
per cent  in the areas with a 1 per cent  annual exceed ance probability (AEP) of floods.1
3.2 Paradigm shift potential  Scale: N/A  
17. The proposed project will catalyse a paradigm shift in Haiti’s approach to flood
management in the TR watershed by initiating a shift away fro m uncoordinated decision -
1 A 1 per  cent AEP implies a 1 in 100 chance of flood in any one year in the given area.


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 118 
 
 
making and unsustainable land -use practices towards an integrated, climate -resilient approach 
to land and water resources management.  
18. First ly, agroforestry systems will be established and degraded forests restored at 
priority inter vention sites across the watershed to: (1 ) reduce peak surface run -off and flood 
extent; and (2 ) provide alternative livelihood options to the unsustainable land -use practices on 
which most vulnerable communities in the TR watershed depend. Second ly, compl ementary 
interventions focused on enhancing technical and institutional capacity at the commune, inter -
commune and department levels will be implemented to promote productive climate -resilient 
agricultural practices and sustainable land management. Finally, the necessary governance 
framework for IWRM will be established in Haiti to support the uptake of climate -resilient land 
management systems and to facilitate sustainable use and management of water resources over 
the long term.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential         Scale: N/A  
19. Under the project, the technical and institutional capacity of relevant stakeholders at the 
national, department and commune levels will be strengthened regarding  implementation of an 
integrated approach to land and water resources management that is centred around 
sustainability and climate resilience. By building the capacity of the targeted institutions, the 
transfer of knowledge and skills related to sustainable watershed and flood management will 
extend beyond the project.  
20. Strengthening the Water Act will establish a legal foundation for optimi zing the use of 
water resources without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems under future 
climate chang e conditions, consequently securing equitable economic and social welfare. The 
Water Act will also provide a framework for the institutionalization of integrated watershed 
management to empower regional administrations across Haiti – through establishing 
catchment water resources management committees and s ub-catchment water resource users 
associations.  
21. This country -driven project has been developed using a participatory and consultative 
process, enabling all relevant stakeholders to contribute to the desi gn of interventions, ensuring 
buy- in and commitment from national - and local -level stakeholders. More importantly to 
communities, the social protection system provided through the project . as well as the EbA  
interventions that will be installed , will provi de tangible benefits to communities linking the 
IWRM approach to reduced vulnerability.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                Scale: N/A  
22. Haiti is a SIDS  and an LDC  hit by cascading and compounding climate hazards ( floods, 
hurricanes , tropical storms , erosions , etc) . The target beneficiaries endure double  the national 
average poverty rate. The watershed is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change-
induced flooding. Given the near -complete absence of embankments and levees in the 
watershed , such flooding causes severe damage to crops and farmland, as well as agricultural 
infrastructure and equipment. Flooding in the region also has severe consequences for both 
human and livestock health, resulting in an increased risk of loss of human li fe and livestock.  
Addressing the impact of climate change -induced flooding on vulnerable communities in the 
region requires the adopti on of an integrated approach to flood management that responds to 
the impacts of climate change.  
23. At present, the G overnment of Haiti does not have the capacity to fully finance 
integrated climate -resilient flood management interventions through domestic finance in both


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 119 
 
 
the private and public sector. Without GCF support, the G overnment of Haiti will continue to 
operate under the existing paradigm of reactive recovery from the impacts of climate change . 
3.5 Country ownership  Scale: N/A  
24. The project is a direct contribution to Haiti’ s adaptation targets in relation to watershed 
management , coastal and marine protection, and reforestation , as reflected in the updated 
nationally determined contribution submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change  in 2022  and responds to the institutional capacity needs identified in Haiti’s 
national adaptation plan submitted in early 2023. The project is also a prioritized intervention 
with GCF and is included in the advanced draft country programme  which, at the time of 
writing, was  in the last  stages of preparation. In this regard the no -objection letter was issu ed 
and cleared in  April 2022.  
25. Extensive stakeholder consultations were held during the project elaboration and 
feedback was incorporated into the development of the proposal. Active stakeholder  
engagement, notably in the intervention areas, is planned to ensure optimal execution of the 
project and as  part of the adaptive management strategy  of the project . 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness  Scale:  N/A  
26. The funding proposal package presents economic and  financial analys es with reasonable 
assumptions as well as a clear definition of scope and the counterfactual scenarios. The 
economic analysis contains estimation s of all the relevant economic values from the project 
activities that are consistent with the  information provided in the funding proposal. The model 
uses a social  discount rate of 10  per cent  in line with all the other UNDP projects . In summary, 
the economic model results show the NPV ranging between USD 375 million and USD 412 
million with an IRR of 41 per cent  and 43  per cent  depending on the different flood reduction 
scenarios. The model shows that the proposed project is economically viable.  
27. The financial analysis has been conducted at the  individual farmer’s perspective for the 
agroforestry activity, assessing whether the farmers would be able to invest in the agroforestry 
activities described in the funding proposal through their own resources or other existing 
sources of finance (microfin ance, bank loans, etc.) The weighted average cost of capital ( WACC ) 
used is 3.7  per cent  as the mean of the lowest and highest nominal monthly rates charged by 
microfinance institutions in peer group and village banks. The financial IRR is above the WACC, 
although grants are still requested , on the basis of  the sensitivity analysis conducted with loan 
scenarios.  
28. Financial adequacy and appropriate of concessionality is assessed to be high. The 
accredited entity ( AE) has conducted a sensitivity analysis for t he agroforestry model and 
calculated financial profitability indicators for the agroforestry model (NPV, financial IRR and 
payback period) in four cases: ( 1) when activities are fully financed by farmers on their own 
(“without project”); ( 2) when activitie s are financed with GCF grants (“with project”); ( 3) when 
activities are financed with bank loans at the lowest interest rates (2.75  per cent ); and ( 4) when 
activities are financed with bank loans at the highest interest rates (4.8  per cent ). The results 
show that the agroforestry activities cannot be financed with full bank loans (negative cash 
flows), and the payback period would be too long for low interest rate loan s. An analysis of the  
mix of loans and grants scenario has not been conducted.  
29. The need for grants in this project is also justified by the public nature of the project 
activities. The funding proposal  describes the absence of financing for the proposed activities 
for farmers as one of the major barriers. Alternative sources of funding and credit are not 
available or are difficult to access, leading farmers to go for the option of short -term relief


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 120 
 
 
activities, such as the production of charcoal at unsustainable rates to meet pressing short -term 
financial needs.  
30. The project’s adaptation cost is USD 78/direct beneficiary and USD 31/total beneficiary. 
Cost per direct beneficiary is in line with the portfolio average for Latin America and the 
Caribbean. The co -financing ratio is 1:0.39, which is lower than the target set in the  updated 
Strategic Pla n for the GCF 2020 –2023 . The proposal does not present a clear roadmap or 
prospect about the potential for  leveraging or mobilizing additional financial resources.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
31. Project background. The project aims to take a sustainable land and water resource 
management (IWRM) approach as adaptive measures to build resilience in the Trois -Rivières 
(TR) watershed in Haiti. The main interventions proposed by the project include: i) 
implementing green infrastructure (agroforestry and restoration  activities) to strengthen flood 
resilience, supported by capacity -building programmes for land -use management; ii) 
establishing and promoting climate -resilient agricultural and lan d-use practices to enhance food 
security in the watershed; and iii) improving national and local governance frameworks for the implementation of integrated water resources management at national, catchment and sub -
catchment levels to contribute to creating  an enabling environment for climate -resilient flood 
management in Haiti. The project will be implemented through community -based governance 
and planning mechanisms to be developed in seven communes targeted by the project in the TR 
watershed, namely Port -de-Paix, Chansolme, Bassin Bleu, Plaisance, Pilate, Marmelade, and Gros 
Morne. The project will improve climate resilience and food security, decrease the impact of 
floods, and provide significant environmental and social co -benefits, through ecosystem -based 
flood management and improved flood management governance.  
32. Environmental and social risk category and safeguards instruments . The AE has 
classified the project substantial environmental and social (E&S) risk against AE’s own 
screening criteria. The AE considers the project as equivalent to Category B per GCF’s E&S  risk 
categorization. The project is expected to have potential limited adverse environmental and 
social risks and/or impacts which are site -specific, largely reversible, and can be mitigated wi th 
appropriate environmental and social management measures. Any high -risk activities will be 
excluded by the project, favouring  a climate resilient and green infrastructure approach to flood 
management, and eschewing high -risk grey infrastructure for flood control. The Secretariat 
confirms that the risk category is aligned with GCF’s E&S risk categorization and is within the 
E&S risk accreditation level of the AE. The AE has prepared a screening report against its own 
social and environment screening procedure (SESP) and an environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) to guide the E&S screening, assessment and management to be 
conducted during the project implementation phase, where the preparation of a strategic 
environmental and social assessment (SESA), site -specific environmental and social impacts 
assessments (ESIAs) and environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) will be required.  
33. Compliance with GCF’s ESS standards.  The paragraphs below describe the 
programme’s compliance with GCF’s ESS  standards.  
34. ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts.  The ESMF provides the general information about the project activities, the baseline 
socio -economic and environmental conditions of the project, and an overview of the laws and 
regulations as well as AE’s E&S standards applicable to the project. Using the SESP screening, the ESMF identifies and briefly describes a total of 18 potential social and environmental risks 
associated with this project. Among which, three su bstantial risks identified relate to the


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 121 
 
 
project’s potential negative impacts on economic displacement, critical habitats and KBA, and 
security concerns. The rest are considered moderate risks.  
35. In response to the security concerns, the ESMF includes a con flict and fragility 
assessment and identifies that the project will unlikely increase or exacerbate the national -level 
political or security crisis. At the local level, the AE considers the security issue a destabilizing factor that makes the project’s operating context more prone to conflict and increases its risk on 
conflict and security. The ESMF states that the project may inadvertently trigger new and/or 
existing factors of conflict in certain project sites where social tensions around land tenure have  
been observed. Such risk is currently not considered by the AE as flashpoints for wider violence 
or conflict because such tensions are not to be related to inter -community grievances or to 
issues of identity, ethnicity, or religion. As the project will pr omote an inclusive community 
approach and continuous consultations during the implementation phase, it will mitigate the 
social tensions by working with stakeholders to ensure that all land and water users in the 
project areas will be involved in the proje ct and will have the space to share their views and 
needs.  
36. The AE will adopt a proactive approach to conflict sensitivity. This will begin with a 
detailed conflict analysis to be conducted at each project site as part of the site- specific ESIA. 
The ESMF p rovides a methodological guide for conducting a conflict and development analysis 
(CDA). The CDA will include management measures related to the security situation and the 
human rights and conflict related risks specific to the project site. These manageme nt measures 
identified through the CDA will be incorporated into the site -level ESMPs and/or stakeholder 
engagement plan (SEP). The CDA will also provide recommendations to tailor the delivery of the 
project interventions and support. It will also inform t he design of community land use plans. 
The project will also take an environmental peacebuilding approach by bringing communities together with a common objective on natural resources management and livelihoods, which will 
enable the project to integrate c onflict resolution methodologies into the participatory process 
for designing community land use plans. In addition, the AE will develop a security plan, including an initial assessment of potential security risks in target site areas as well as the 
releva nt protocols and structures to manage the identified risk in alignment with UN policy for 
work in the field. The detailed procedures will be integrated within the project’s site specific 
ESIAs and ESMPs and will be updated as needed.  
37. ESS 2: Labour and wor king conditions. The AE has triggered its standard on this as 
the project activities will involve the use of labour. Agroforestry activities could potentially 
involve child labour that can expose children to disrupted physical, mental, moral, and social 
development, extreme weather conditions, injuries, infections, and diseases. Activities to be 
supported by the project on agriculture and agroforestry supply chain, land restoration, and erosion control could potentially involve practices that do not comply with national and/or 
international labour standards or safety standards. The Project will avoid hiring workers below 
the age of 18 and will exclude activities or production of activities that involve child labour 
through the project’s exclusionary criteria . The project and contractor's staff and workers will 
potentially be exposed to occupational health and safety hazards. The project will exclude 
activities involving purchase, application or storage of harmful pesticides and hazardous 
materials. Furthermor e, the ESMF includes an indicative outline for labour management 
procedures, that will be developed as part of the site- specific ESIAs and ESMPs. The procedures 
set out the conditions in which project workers will be employed, engaged, and managed, in 
acco rdance with the requirements of AE’s standard and applicable labour laws, rules and 
regulations. The procedures will be appropriate to the size, locations, and workforce of project 
activities.  
38. ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution preventions. The ESMF  identifies that to a 
limited extend the project activities interventions on agroforestry and reforestation may 
generate waste and litter, such as human waste, food waste, plastic, soiled material, and scrap


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 122 
 
 
equipment around the project areas. Poor managem ent of those waste product and/or its poor 
handling during storage and transport could cause pollution or physical hazards and pose a 
threat to the health of the environment as well as to the workers and community. The AE has 
triggered its standard on poll ution prevention and resource efficiency and will require that any 
material threat related to pollution and discharges of waste be detailed as part of the site -
specific ESIAs. This will be applied to activities that aim to (i) improve existing waste 
management practices; (ii) generate or cause generation of solid, liquid, or gaseous waste; (iii) 
use, cause use of, or manage the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials and chemicals, 
including pesticides; and (iv) significantly consume or cause consumption of water, energy, or 
other resources. AE is suggested to capacitate local communities to identify the related risks and 
incorporate mitigation measures as part of the community land use plan to ensure long -term 
sustainability of the project intervent ions.  
39. ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. The AE has broadly identified that the 
project activities may generate risks to the health and safety of communities and considered the 
health impacts related to the flood risk and associated threat to t he communities as well as the 
impact of the COVID -19 pandemic. As the small infrastructure and/or equipment to be used at 
each project site is yet to be identified, the ESMF requires further assessment to be conducted as part of the site -specific ESIA. The  project will also incorporate community health monitoring as 
part of the project’s wider efforts of implementing regular monitoring and evaluation of water 
resources at the catchment and sub -catchment levels (under Activity 3.3 to support the 
implementati on of IWRM plans). As it is likely that s ome of the small infrastructure projects 
may create noise, dust, or traffic risks for communities, and that if water supply systems are not 
designed or maintained properly, they may create risk of water - or vector -borne diseases. The 
AE is suggested to provide basic guidance on and include a list of standard mitigation measures for the main types of small -scale infrastructures and equipment likely to be deployed during 
project implementation.  
40. ESS 5: Land acquisition  and resettlement. The AE has triggered its own standard on 
displacement and resettlement, noting that the project’s agroforestry or reforestation activities 
(under Activity 1.2, establishing agroforestry systems areas over 17,740 hectares and restoring 
forestation to 7,700 hectares) can potentially lead to the spatial or temporal restrictions on 
lands previously used by local communities and on their livelihoods. This could then create economic displacement and pose hardship on local communities. The proje ct will exclude 
activities that will require any physical displacement of people or changes of land tenure. The ESMF describes the possibility that land acquisition for small infrastructure investments may 
emerge during the project implementation, such as those activities that will involve deploying 
agricultural tracks, developing water infrastructure, and providing upgrades to water 
infrastructure to address decreasing water security caused by the impacts of climate change -
induced flooding. The ESMF also n otes that in such case the project will only work with those 
who are willing participants and seeking infrastructural upgrades, and in areas that are 
dedicated as public lands. The project will ensure that all legislation is followed. The ESMF 
requires that a livelihood action plan (LAP) to be prepared if project activities will cause 
economic displacement, namely where the livelihoods of individuals or communities are 
restricted, partially or fully, and either directly or indirectly, in their access to lan d or resources 
to support their economic well -being. To be developed as part of the ESMP, the LAP will address 
beneficiary participation in economic displacement decision -making, adequate (full and fair) 
compensation and assistance, and risk management to ensure that livelihoods are at least as 
good as prior to the program implementation and that the livelihoods of poor and marginalized 
are improved. The LAP will include independent monitoring procedures, clarification of land 
rights consistent with applica ble law, and outline capacity, training, and development actions 
targeting beneficiaries’ livelihoods. Following the indicative outline for the LAP as annexed in 
the ESMF, project will be required to justify why the land and/or resources to which access wi ll 
be restricted, the necessity of economic displacement to achieve the project objectives, and the


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 123 
 
 
linkage between resettlement implementation and initiation of civil works for each of the 
project components. The AE will ensure that its own safeguards req uirements, best practice 
standards, and the mitigation measures are being met, such that project activities involving economic displacement cannot proceed until completion of the ESIA and the related LAP.   
41. ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. As listed in the project’s exclusionary criteria, the project will exclude project 
activities that will be implemented in areas of critical habitats, unless all of the following are demonstrated. That is, (i) there are no measurable adverse impacts on the criteria or 
biodiversity values for which the critical habitat was designated, and on the ecological processes 
supporting those biodiversity values (determined on an ecologically -relevant scale); (ii) there is 
no red uction of any recognized Endangered, Vulnerable or Critically Endangered species, (iii) 
any lesser impacts are mitigated, and (iv) a robust, appropriately designed, and long -term 
Biodiversity Action Plan is in place to achieve net gains of those biodiversity values for which the critical habitat was designated. The project will exclude activities that involve the 
application of chemical fertilizers or pesticides as a result of the agroforestry and reforestation 
interventions of the project, as well as activ ities that risk the introduction of alien and 
potentially invasive alien species. Despite such exclusion, the ESMF identifies that the project 
could expose substantial risks on biodiversity due to that Port -de-Paix, one of the targeted 
project sites, is a KBA and an Alliance for Zero Extinction (AZE) site. This KBA falls within the project’s AREA 2 encompassing the semiarid areas across Gros -morne, Chansolme, Port -de-Paix, 
and Bassin Bleu. The AE expects that the community land use plan for this area (under  Sub 
activity 1.1.1) may be developed potentially within or adjacent to this KBA. The ESMF requires 
that the decision as to whether project activities will take place within or adjacent to this KBA 
and other critical habitats must follow the mitigation hie rarchy as described in the ESMF. If 
project activities take place within or adjacent to a KBA, those activities must be guided by an appropriately scoped and detailed Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) to create positive impacts on 
biodiversity conservation an d in line with the requirements of AE’s relevant and guidance. The 
project will assess its potential impacts on biodiversity and natural resources more clearly at 
the start of the project implementation, through conducting a SESA and site -specific ESIAs. 
Depending on the scope of the project activities to be designed at the site -level, mitigation 
measures will be formulated as part of the site -specific ESMP or as a standalone Biodiversity 
Management Plan (BMP). The ESMF provides detailed guidance for the development of context 
specific BAP or BMP to ensure that the project will achieve net gains to the biodiversity values 
and underpinning ecosystem services for which the critical habitat was designated.  
42. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peo ples. Based on a review of 
UNDPs’ and other agencies’  programmes in Haiti and field consultations carried out by the AE, 
the AE concluded that the are no sub -group in the project area and area of influence that meet 
the criteria for indigenous peoples (e.g. has pursued its own way or developed distinct group identity, languages or no distinct ethnicity nor group self -identifying as indigenous peoples in 
Haiti or no special connection between Haitian people and their territory other than the national one). Accordingly, the AE concluded that the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and its 
own Social and Environmental Standard 6 were not triggered.  
43. ESS 8: Cultural heritage.  The ESMF identifies moderate risk to cultural heritage that 
may arise from undertaking project activities that will involve the movement of earth over large 
areas. This may lead to the accidental discovery of or damage to cultural heritage. The ESMF 
provi des chance finds procedures to be followed at site - and activity -level in all plans and 
contracts. The procedures will be applied to project -related construction works, including 
excavations, demolitions, movement of earth, flooding, or other changes in th e physical 
environment. The procedures establish how chance finds of tangible cultural heritage shall be 
managed, including notification of relevant authorities and stakeholders, avoidance of further 
disturbance or damage, protection, documentation, and as sessment of found objects by relevant 
experts. Per AE’s own standard, the procedures will be applied in the case of archaeological sites


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 124 
 
 
and materials, built heritage, landscapes and natural features with cultural significance, and 
movable cultural heritag e. This is no baseline information available in the ESMF. The project 
will ensure that through the site -specific ESMPs a chance finds procedure will be implemented 
during all works of the project. The ESMF requires that the community participation, 
stakeho lder consultations and use of experts will be exercised fully and effectively to deal with 
cultural heritage properties, and that all discoveries and any archaeological sites discovered by the project will be immediately reported to local authorities.  
44. Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment (SEAH) safeguarding.  
The ESMF has identified the project’s moderate risks on gender -based violence (GBV) and 
SEAH. The project plans to provide significant support to women through enhancing their access to natural resources and increasing their ability to participate and derive equal benefits 
from project -related outcomes, including the outcomes targeting livelihoods. While the project 
expects to increase women’s income through project -sponsored activities, the traditional power 
dynamics in the household and in a broader societal context could be changed and that the 
gender norms and an existing culture of discrimination can be challenged. Such shifts can lead 
to and exacerbate the existing GBV and SEAH. The AE has conducted an initial SEAH risk 
assessment and identified the risk factors, indicators, and mitigation measures related to 
preventing SEAH (PSEAH). Based on the PSEAH safeguarding approach taken at the project -
level, the ESMF requires that in -depth SEAH risk assessment to be undertaken as part of the 
site-specific ESIAs. S ubsequently, the corresponding PSEAH measures to prevent, mitigate and 
respond to the SEAH risks for each site will be specified in the ESMPs. The project will establish 
a survivor -centred grievance redress mechanism (GRM) for SEAH -related grievances and 
complaints in line with good practices identified in the ESMF. The project will hire a gender and 
safeguards specialist to guide project safeguards compliance on SEAH.  
45. Implementation arrangements.  The Ministry of Environment of Haiti will act as the  
execut ing entity (EE) for this project and will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU). The 
PMU will comprise of a national project manager, who will be supported by specialists in environment, social development, and gender and social inclusion, as well as t echnical 
specialists. The PMU will be responsible for supervising and managing the implementation of 
measures defined in the ESMF, assign specific responsibilities within the implementing partner 
for the ESMF implementation, report to the AE and the Projec t Steering Committee on the 
implementation of the ESMF, and ensure that all service providers are informed of their 
responsibilities for the day -to-day compliance with the ESMF. The AE will provide quality 
assurance for the project, ensure the project’s co mpliance with the AE’s policies and procedures, 
including its own E&S standards, and ensure the implementation of the requirements set forth 
in the ESMF.   
46. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure.  The ESMF outlines the overall 
requirements on stak eholder engagement to be followed during project implementation. The 
details of the existing stakeholder consultations are summarized in a stakeholder consultation 
and engagement plan provided separately by the AE, that includes a stakeholder analysis and 
provides an SEP to be followed at the site- level during project implementation. The SEP outlines 
processes and mechanisms for continued consultations with all the above stakeholders during 
project implementation, with targeted communication methods for dif ferent stakeholders. The 
SEP also includes specific outreach mechanisms for women and disadvantaged/ vulnerable 
groups in the engagement plan. The stakeholders will be assured access to relevant project 
information to understand the potential project -relat ed opportunities and risks and to engage in 
the detailed project design and implementation. The project will disclose information on the 
potential project -related E&S impacts and mitigation/management measures in advance of 
decision -making whenever possibl e. As the project risk has been assessed as substantial, the 
project will follow the disclosure framework specified in the ESMF to ensure that all the E&S 
safeguards documentation will be disclosed and consulted on prior to implementation of 
activities tha t may give rise to potential adverse E&S impacts.


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 125 
 
 
47. Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The ESMF provides the principles for the 
development of a project -level GRM and a compliant register, which will handle community -
related issues during construction works.  Any complaint and/or grievance will be advised to the 
AE and EE within 24 hours of receipt. The ESMF requires a summary list of complaints and/or 
grievances received, and their disposition to be published in a report produced every six 
months. The project -level GRM will be operationalized at the start of the project implementation 
to address all complaints and/or grievances in the project. The stakeholders will be informed of 
the various means for making complaints and/or grievances, including in addition to the 
project -level and national grievance redress mechanisms, the option to access AE’s own 
accountability mechanism that has both the compliance and grievance functions. A social and 
environmental compliance unit hosted by the AE’s office of audit and i nvestigations will 
investigate allegations regarding the AE's standards, screening procedure, or other E&S commitments that are not being implemented adequately, and that harm may result to people 
or the environment. A compliance review is available to any  community or individual with 
concerns about the impacts of the AE’s programmes or projects. The unit is mandated by the AE 
to independently and impartially investigate valid requests from locally impacted people, and to 
report its findings and recommendat ions publicly. The ESMF also include the GCF’s Independent 
Redress Mechanism as an integral of the project’s GRM.  
4.2 Gender policy  
48. The AE provided a gender assessment and action plan with the funding proposal and 
therefore complies with the requirements of th e GCF Gender Policy. The assessment was 
informed by secondary data and outcomes from the consultations during mission visits by the 
project development team.  
49. The c limate change and disaster risk management legislative frameworks in Haiti do not 
adequately  address the issues of gender equality and the empowerment  of women . However, 
flooding and other natural disasters ha ve cumulative livelihood effects that unfairly impact 
women and exacerbate gender inequality. Evidence and impacts we re drawn from the 2010  
earthquake and 2015 Hurricane Matthew. In Haiti, women are disproportionately represented 
among the poor and there is a significant pro portion of women -headed households, so impacts 
such as crop loss, livestock  drowning, destroyed homes or displacement , and health risks  and 
loss of life due to floods ultimately affect women first and foremost. G ender -based violence is 
another issue that normally goes unnoticed and unreported, including police violence targeting 
women and marginalized groups. Of the  cases of violence reported between 2009 and  2011, the 
majority were physical in nature (59.74  per cent ), followed by sexual violence (29.80  per cent ), 
while cases of psychological and economic violence constituted a minority (5.88  per cent  and 
4.58  per cen t, respectively).  
50. From this gender assessment, various gender -responsive approaches have been 
proposed , including building a strong collaboration with public water resources departments in 
ensuring that the design and installation of water infrastructure f acilities are based on gender 
assessments; increas ing the capacity of local government on women’s leadership and 
participation in water management; support ing local municipal authorities and communities to 
develop and maintain gender -equitable distribution  of water resources; and ensur ing that 
partnerships with the private sector include a commitment to gender equality and that women 
receive equal access to technical or management training, peer -to-peer learning and other 
resources. Other gender recommendat ions have been made in the areas of agricultural and 
climate change resilience, reforestation and agroforestry systems , includ ing promotin g land 
ownership and other productive resources in forest management and climate mitigation strategies.


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 126 
 
 
51. A gender and s afeguards expert (at program me management unit level) will be 
responsible for the implementation of the gender action plan  (GAP)  in collaboration with Heifer 
International ( the EE for outcome 2). Gender technical expertise and assistance will also be 
sough t on an ad hoc basis to supplement the available skill set and experience within  the 
programme management unit . The expected outcome of the GAP is improved capacities for an 
estimated 87,780 –146,300 women ( 30–50 per cent  of project direct beneficiaries)  on 
sustainable water and land management as a means to enhance their resilience to climate 
change. Some of the activities outlined in the GAP include  (1) strengthening the capacity of 
community groups, farmer and women’s associations in climate -resilient and land -use 
management; ( 2) inclu ding  gender modules during training sessions for communities and 
farmer associations in the seven targeted communes on the application of community land -use 
plans and implementation of climate resilient land -use practices (50  per cent  of trainers will be 
women); ( 3) establish ing commune -level development councils and multi -sectoral management 
structures to oversee and manage the implementation of project interventions , including  
strongly encourag ing women’ s leadership in these institutions (with a  target of 50 per cent  
leadership and participation  by women) ; and (4) draft ing the provisions of Haiti’s Water Act  for 
the adoption and implementation of an integrated approach to water resources management in 
the TR watershed , including provisions on gender responsiveness  to ensure inclusive water 
governance and other inclusive clauses at the policy level.   
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment ( medium risk)  
52. The GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 22.9 million , which will be invested to 
address climate change -induced flood impacts in  the TR watershed and the impacts on 
population residing nearby. Heifer International Haiti and the AE will provide co -financing of 
USD  8.3 million and USD  0.5 million, respe ctively. The AE is requesting full grant support for 
this project. As an LDC and SIDS, Haiti has been experiencing increases in public debt which is 
placing the country at a high risk of debt distress.  
4.3.2.  Accredited entity /executing entity capability to exec ute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
53. UNDP is the AE for the project. UNDP Haiti country office has been  working in Haiti 
since 1973  and has experiences  implementing water and land use -related  climate change 
projects through policy formulation and strate gic planning. The country office has a track record 
of managing projects with an EbA approach , and these projects  have had  a budget range of 
between USD 2 million  and USD  15 million in recent years.  
54. The Ministry of Environment (MoE) is the EE of this proj ect. UNDP has carried out a 
capacity assessment of the EE,  which concluded an overall moderate risk with a significant risk 
regarding  monitoring and evaluation  (M&E) , and procurement and financial management. 
Requested by the Government  of Haiti , UNDP will provide direct project services by assisting 
procurement process es and making payments to the suppliers and responsible parties at the 
instruction of MoE.  
4.3.3.  Programme -specific execution risks (medium risk)  
55. The AE has identified the weak land tenure and management system as one of the risks 
that could delay or prevent the implementation of the project. The feasibility study stated that 
there are many constrains in terms of obtaining land titles, fragmented land holdings and legal 
provisions limiting the u se of land as collateral , and so on . The current mitigation measure


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 127 
 
 
suggested by the AE is through the community buy -in and implementation of the Water Act. In 
case an agreement is not reached, the project will work with other communities and 
participants nearby who are willing to participate in the project activities. The non -participants 
may continue the unsustainable land use practices and the project does not impose enforcement 
mechanism. Therefore, the AE/EE’s ability to engage communities and establis h the 
participatory community land -use plans will be key to dealing  with the land tenure issue.  
(a) Financial sustainability beyond the project implementation period may be achieved 
through the Village Saving and Credit Association (VSCA) and the budgetary 
contribution from the national government. However, the VSCA under component 2 is 
fully financed by co -financing , which is subject to the completion of the integrated 
approach to climate -resilient flood management in component 1. The Government of 
Haiti is committed to undertaking the operation and management of the project and 
VSCA is expected to increase access to finance for smallholder farmers. Given the 
budgetary constraint s of the Haitian G overnment, its financial commitment is uncertain 
and there is no  co-financing provided by the G overnment. As a soft measure, it is 
anticipated that the strengthened technical and institutional capacity of government departments and communes in terms of  implement ing the land and water resource 
management will help to en hance  the sustainability of the project.  
(b) The AE carried out an economic analysis that identified  an economic IRR of 41  per cent  
and 43  per cent , depending on the choice of flood reduction scenarios , over 25 years. 
The analysis consider ed the benefits from the reduction of water -borne diseases (health 
benefits), reduction of infrastructure damage, and increase in the livelihood income. With regards to the livelihood benefits, a financial analysis has been conducted at an 
individual farmer’s perspective for the agroforestry activity (see paragraph 28 above) . 
The analysis shows that the agroforestry activity cannot be financed with loans and 
farmers will have difficult in  access ing additional financing s uch as credit. Therefore, the 
full grant support is justified. As noted above, the project viability will also depend on the capacity of the national government to tak e over the operation and management of 
the project, and the analysis assumed that there w ould be no additional operation and 
management  cost s beyond project implementation.  
4.3.4.  Compliance risk ( medium risk)   
56. The UNDP, as the AE, confirmed that no individual or entity that is listed on any U nited 
Nations Security Council  sanctions list, including the U nited Nations  Consolidated List, will be 
involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer or beneficiary.  
57. UNDP confirmed that the risks for the project have been assessed and are mitigated in 
accordance with the rules, policies and risk man agement processes of UNDP. This includes risks 
linked to engagement with implementing partners and responsible parties, where specific capacity assessments have been performed and mitigation measures are put in place. These 
measures have been incorporated into the project. 
58. UNDP confirmed that it conducts partner capacity assessments as part of project 
preparation. This is in line with UNDP’s policy on a nti-money laundering and c ounter ing the 
financing of t errorism (AML/CFT) and its f raud and c orrupt practic es (FCP) policy included 
within the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  
59. In the case of both MoE and Heifer, the assessment using the UNDP Partner Capacity 
Assessment Tool included a question regarding a history of fraud, corrupti on, money 
laundering, financing terrorism and the like. For both partners, the assessment did not find


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 128 
 
 
evidence for such past practices. In the case of Heifer, the assessment identified specific policies 
for the prevention of these practices2.   
60. The UNDP Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) assessments for both 
partners also evaluated the existence of policies against fraud and corruption, policies for 
reporting wrongdoing ( including the misuse of funds ) and policies on fair procurement and 
capacity for reporting and monitoring the use of donor and partner funds.  
61. Heifer was evaluated to have an overall low risk in all those factors and a moderate risk 
in the procurement and contract of awards due to the fact that its procurement system is curr ently being computerized under the AGRESSO system ( https://agresso.heifer.org
). 
Nonetheless, the evaluation identified Heifer’s buying process as adequate and responsible , in 
that it follow s specific written policies and procedures for procurement. The evaluation 
highlighted the existence of a supplier database that is updated annually by Heifer and where background checks are done systematically.  
62. The MoE was evaluated with a moderate risk score in the case of governance and 
leadership, operations and management, finance management, programme management, 
accountability and coordination. Its total overall risk rating was assessed as moderate to high . 
The assessme nt of MoE identified the lack of a specific code of c onduct for the m inistry ; 
however , MoE did mention that it is accountable under all public decrees and laws for 
governance and public rules , including the Law of Public Function.  
63. In response to the HACT evaluation, the MoE has developed its Manual of Financial, 
Accounting and Administrative Procedures  in the last year , which includes a specific mention of 
anti-fraud and corruption policies.  
64. UNDP confirmed that the Government of Haiti has put in place a set of institutions to 
fight corruption. These include : 
(a) Central Unit of Financial Information , which  provides information on the laundering of 
assets from drug trafficking and other serious crimes;  
(b) Unit for the Fight against Corruption , which  has the missio n of working to combat 
corruption and its manifestations in all its forms within the public administration;  
(c) National Commission for Public Contracts;  
(d) National Commission for the Fight against Drugs; and  
(e) Superior Court of Accounts and Administrative Litiga tion, which is a financial and 
administrative jurisdiction responsible for judging the accounts of the authorizing 
officers and accountants of the State and the territorial collectives and for ruling on 
disputes between the State and the territorial collec tives, the a dministration and public 
officials, the public services and the citizens.  
65. UNDP informed the Secretariat that the HACT evaluation did identify challenges in the 
MoE’ s procurement processes , including in the integration of a list of suppliers. Ho wever, the 
MoE also demonstrated a positive history of working with partners for project implementation. 
With this in mind, and at the request of the Government of Haiti, the project will work under 
support in the form of a n ational implemen tation modality in which UNDP will provide project 
 
2 These policies include: 1) Code of conduct policy ( https://media.heifer.org/About_Us/inside -
heifer/Procurement/Code -of-Conduct -Policy -Global.pdf ); 2) Conflict of interest policy 
(https://media.heifer.org/About_Us/financial- information/conflict -of-interest.pdf ); 3) Whistle -blower policy 
(https://media.heifer.org/About_Us/financial -information/whistleblower -policy.pdf ); and  
4) Procurement and contracting services policy ( https://media.heifer.org/About_Us/inside -
heifer/Procurement/Procurement -Policy -Global.pdf ).


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 129 
 
 
support services for procurement as well as in the payment of vendors on behalf of the M oE (as 
per the approved workplan prepared by the Mo E and approved by the p roject board). 
66. UNDP confirmed that the processes a nd requirements for the UNDP Partner Capacity 
Assessment Tool  and HACT  require UNDP to carry out thorough due diligence of the risks in 
relation to the programme/project it intends to engage in, as well as in relation to the potential 
partners who will be involved in the implementation of such programmes/projects. Such 
capacity assessments include, among other things, a screening of all entities being considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP against the U nited Nations  Security Council 
Consolidate d List.  
67. On the basis of  the HACT assessment of the MoE, UNDP will process payments to 
vendors and third parties through the “ direct payment modality ”. Payments will be made on the 
basis of a prior approved annual workplan that is prepared by the MoE and is  presented and 
approved by the project b oard. The project will also work with Heifer as a r esponsible party for 
output 1 and implement  all activities under output  2 (fully funded by co -finance funds from 
Heifer). Heifer has been evaluated as a low -risk par tner under the HACT assessment. It should 
be noted that during the HACT assessment  a particular strength was  noted;  namely that project 
and beneficiary monitoring uses a quick response ( QR) code method . 
68. UNDP informed the Secretariat that it applies a zero -tolerance policy in relation to fraud 
and corruption. The guiding principles of UNDP ’s commitment to prevent, identify and address 
all acts of fraud and corruption have been laid out in the UNDP FCP policy , which applies to all 
activities and operations of UNDP, including projects and programmes.  
69. The fundamental principles of the FCP policy serve as the basis for and are integrated in 
the UNDP policy frameworks in relation to procurement, financial management, internal control 
and accountability , and staff rules and regulations. Under the terms of the FCP p olicy and 
related policies, UNDP has a commitment, when developing a new programme or project, to 
ensure that risks related to fraud and corrupt practices are fully identified and considered in the 
programme/project design and processes, and that adequate and effective measures to mitigate 
such risks are put in place.  
70. UNDP confirmed that the UNDP policy for AML/CFT will be made applicable to the 
project during its implementation. The policy includes clear risk -based due diligence processes 
that take into account screening procedures against  international sanctions lists, and also 
includes contractual arrangements with termination clauses for AML/CFT; and monitoring, 
reporting and investigation protocols, including protection against retaliation .3  
71. UNDP confirmed that, during project impleme ntation, UNDP will also provide 
supervisory missions to project areas to ensure that project equipment/technology is not misused.  
72. UNDP also referenced the procurement plan and how this is vetted and approved, 
specifically indicating how all procurement  activitie s are linked to the implementation of 
specific activities under the project.  
73. These stipulations are included within the programme d ocument that will  be signed 
between the MoE and UNDP as well as in the Standard Basic Assistance Agreement entered in to 
by UNDP and the Government of Haiti ,4 which states (in section III , paragraph 7) that “ Technical 
and other equipment, materials, supplies and other property financed or provided by the UNDP shall belong to the UNDP unless and until such time as ownership thereof is transferred, on 
 
3 Available at https://popp.undp.org/  
_layouts/15/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/UNDP_POPP_DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/Pu blic/AC_Accountability%20AML%20
CFT.docx&action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1 . 
4 Available at http://www.ilo.int/dyn/legprot/en/f?p=2200:11002:614574251622::NO:11002:  
P11002_AGREEMENT_ID:101072:NO .


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 130 
 
 
terms and conditions mutually agreed upon between the Government and the UNDP, to the 
Government or to an entity nominated by it. ” As such, ownership of project equipment remains 
with UNDP until it is officially transferred at  the end of the project.  
74. UNDP confirmed that t he project will be providing food vouchers as part of o utput 2. 
This will be fully financed through co -financing funds provided by Heifer. The  HACT assessment  
noted Heifer’s  capacity to provide direct benefits to beneficiaries. This capacity is high enough 
to warrant a low risk assessment, due to Heifer’s monitoring system that provide s QR codes to 
individual beneficiaries. The beneficiaries will include the farming population  residing within 
the project’s target area , prioritized on  the basis of  criteria on social and economic vulnerability. 
This prioritization will respond to an on -site survey , including a wealth assessment. This 
assessment will also undergo a community -based  screening process. UNDP confirmed that  
Heifer is familiar with the intervention area,  having worked through various initiatives , and 
because it has a field office in the TR region. 
75. According to the UNDP  Legal Framework for Addressing Non -Compliance with U N 
Standards of Conduct , the Office of Audit and Investigation is the principal channel to receive 
allegations. UNDP informed the Secretariat that anyone with information regarding fraud 
against UNDP programmes or involving UNDP staff is strongly encouraged  to report this 
information through the Investigations Hotline.  
76. The guiding principles of UNDP ’s commitment to prevent, identify and address all acts of 
fraud and corruption provided in the UNDP  Policy against Fraud and Corrupt Practices , which 
applies to  all activities and operations of UNDP, including projects and programmes. The 
fundamental principles of the policy serve as the basis for and are integrated in to UNDP ’s policy 
frameworks in relation to procurement, financial management, internal control and 
accountability and staff rules and regulations. The policy also refers to UNDP’s Policy for 
Protection against Retaliation  or “whistle -blower protection” policy. People reporting 
wrongdoing to the Investigations Hotline have the option to leave relevant  contact information 
or to remain anonymous.  
77. UNDP confirmed that the progress of all corrective actions will be tracked , and that  
UNDP and the MoE will also release updates on the project on a regular basis to provide 
interested stakeholders with informati on on project status. Updates may be via a range of 
media, for example print, radio, social media or formal reports, and all material must be 
published in English and Haitian Creole (Kreyòl) as appropriate. A publici zed telephone number 
will be maintained throughout the project to serve as a point of contact for enquiries, concerns, complaints and/or grievances. All enquiries, concerns, complaints and/or grievances will be 
recorded on a register and the appropriate manager will be informed.  
78. The project will also have its own GRM , which is described in greater detail within the 
project’s environmental and s ocial management framework. During project implementation, 
information will also be provided regarding the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism  to project 
stakeholders, contractors and consultants.  
79. Risk  rating : The Office of Risk Management and Compliance (ORMC)/Compliance Tea m 
has conducted a review of the project in accordance with relevant GCF Board approved policies 
and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on 
available information for this funding proposal, the ORMC/Complian ce Team have determined a 
risk rating of Medium . 
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)   
80. In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 131 
 
 
4.3.6.  Recommendation  
81. It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.   
Summary risk assessment  
Overall programme  Medium  
Accredited entity (AE)/executing entity (EE) capability  Medium  
Project -specific execution  Medium  
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  Medium  
4.4 Fiduciary  
82. The UNDP will be the AE of the project. It will provide oversight and quality assurance in 
accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the a ccreditation 
master agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with the GCF.  
83. The MoE will be t he EE for the project (also known as “i mplementing partner ” in UNDP 
terminology). The MoE will be accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including M&E of 
project interventions achieving project outcomes and for the effective use of UNDP resources. I t 
will implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, and its POPP 
guidelines , including the g uidelines on the national implement ation  modality . These include 
relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, ESS  and other performance standards. A 
subsidiary agreement (project document) will be established between UNDP and the MoE as per 
article 3 of the UNDP Standard B asic Assistance Agreement, and a ll references in that agreement 
to “executing entity ” shall be deemed to refer to “ implementing partner”. 
84. At the request of the Government of Haiti, UNDP will provide direct project services for 
this project, including procurement of goods and services through UNDP processes, providing 
direct payments to suppliers and responsible parties,  hiring of project staff, and  delivery of 
training services. Under these terms UNDP will only make payments and provide related services at the instruction of the MoE , which will be responsible for the preparation of terms of 
references and selection criteria.  
85. UNDP will also provide implementation support in the delivery of activities included 
within the project’s o utput 3. A firewall will be implemented to separate the work being 
provided for the implementation of o utput 3 and UNDP’s oversight responsibil ities in its role as 
an AE. A Letter of Agreement will be signed between the Government of Haiti and UNDP specifying UNDP’s role in output 3.  
86. Heifer International Haiti will act as  a responsible party for o utput 1. It will execute all 
activities under output 2 through its own co -finance. Once the funded activity agreement is 
signed between UNDP and the GCF and upon indication by the MoE, a r esponsible party 
agreement will be signed between the MoE and Heifer International Haiti for the provision of 
services for the execution of these outputs.  
87. Heifer International Haiti will be overseen by and report to the MoE in its role as EE. As 
such , Heifer International will enter into written agreements with the MoE specifying its role in 
project implementation including deliverables, budgets and workplan. Heifer International will report on the usage of project funds and delivery of the workplan to the MoE.  
88. GCF funding will be received by the administrative agent (UNDP) as the AE based on a 
standard letter of agreement (the funded activity agreement) signed between the GCF and 
UNDP. As funds will be channelled through UNDP, a “d irect payments ” option will be utili zed, 
whereby transfers will be made directly from UNDP to the goods and service providers based on annual workplans submitted by the MoE. Heifer ’s co-financing resources , which are


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 132 
 
 
conditional on the approval of this project by the GCF, will be used for  implement ing the project 
interventions outlined in output 2.  
89. A project board will ensure that activities under all three outputs of the project comply 
with the strategies, principles and overall approach outlined in this proposal. The p roject board 
will be responsible for making decisions by consensus. Its responsibilities includ e 
recommend ing to UNDP and EE/ implementing partner approval of project plans, substantive 
revisions and acceptance of the project progress reports.  
90. To ensure UNDP’s ultimate accountability, decisions taken by the project board will be 
made in accordanc e with standards that shall ensure management for development results, the 
best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition. 
In the case where a consensus cannot be reached, the final decision shall rest with UNDP. 
Project reviews by the project b oard will take place at least twice a year, or as necessary when 
raised by the p roject manager or one of the members  of the project board . 
91. The project manager will provide strategic orientation to the proposed project and 
ensure technical and operational coordination of the p roject management unit, with UNDP 
providing  training to the unit’s staff . Specifically, the project manager will undertake day -to-day 
management and decision -making for the project. In line with thi s mandate, the project 
manager will be primarily responsible for guiding the implementation of adaptation 
interventions to achieve the targets specified in the logical framework of the funding proposal 
and ensuring that these interventions are implemented to the required standards, within the specified time periods and according to the project budget.  
92. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP 
financial rules and regulations. The project will be implemented following th e national 
implementation modality and in accordance with the UNDP’s POPP guidelines. UNDP will 
ascertain the national capacities of the implementing partner by undertaking an evaluation of 
capacity following its Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementin g Partners (part of HACT). 
All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and policies.  
93. UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
proce dures, and any specific requirements in the AMA and project confirmation to be agreed 
with the GCF. This may include, but is not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, 
facilitation and participation in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual 
implementation reviews, and audits at project level or at implementing partner level on the 
resources received from UNDP.  
94. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, 
informed by and together with any specif ic requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the 
current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP, scheduled audits are performed during the project cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, based on the 
implementing partner ’s risk r ating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to 
determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the workplan. A scheduled audit can consist of a 
financial audit and/ or an internal control audit.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
95. As an adaptation initiative, the project aims at generating various adaptation results 
across three GCF result areas. It is expected that 292,600 direct beneficiaries and 441,272 
indirect benef iciaries will receive adaptation benefits in Haiti, representing 3  per cent  and 4  per 
cent  of its total population , respectively . The AE has provided a methodology for estimating 
numbers of direct and indirect adaptation beneficiaries based on expected ada ptation benefits.


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 133 
 
 
The Secretariat provided further guidance of how to disaggregate the beneficiaries against GCF 
result s areas, which can feed into the target setting of GCF c ore indicator 2 and its 
supplementary indicators in the logical framework.  
96. The th eory of change diagram adequately captures various levels of expected changes 
and logical linkages between them from the goal statement to the proposed activities. There was 
an issue on the description of outcomes ; however, it was discussed well with the A E and it was 
agreed to have three project outcomes. The three outcomes are (1) increased resilience in 
ecosystems, (2) improvements to the livelihoods of beneficiaries and (3) strengthened 
governance as an enabling environment.  Co-benefits have also been identified , includ ing carbon 
sequestration. The barriers and risks that may hinder the achievement of these changes are 
identified clearly and linked to pertinent activities.  
97. The logical framework is structured in alignment with the GCF int egrated results 
management framework. It shows how the project can contribute to three GCF adaptation 
result s areas with project outcomes and outputs. Relevant GCF c ore and supplementary 
indicators have been chosen for monitor ing and report ing the key perf ormance of the project. 
The p roject -specific indicators also seem to be adequate to measure the progress of project 
implementation along with project deliverables.   
98. There have been d iscussions on the project M&E plan (annex 11) and project 
implementation t imetable (annex 5). The Secretariat recommended that the AE ensure that all 
M&E -related budgets, including project -specific indicators, are identified in the M&E plan and 
these should  be identical to the M&E budget in the project budget plan. The AE has be en 
responsive and  annex es 11 and 5 have been revised accordingly . 
4.6 Legal assessment  
99. The original AMA was signed with the A E on 5 August 2016, and it became effective on 
23 November 2016. The A E’s first term of accreditation expired on 22 November 2021. The A E 
was re -accredited by the Board pursuant to d ecision B.30/05. The first amendment and 
restatement agreement amending and  restating the AMA (“AMA Amendment”) was signed on 
16 March 2023 and  it became effective on 3 May 2023.  
100. The A E has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implemen t the project.  
101. The proposed project will be implemented in Haiti, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which ri sks need to be further 
assessed. The GCF provided an updated draft agreement on privileges and immunities with a background note to the G overnment  of Haiti  on 25 May 2018.  
102. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
103. In order to  mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B. 36/02/Add. 03 
Page 134 
 
 
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board app roval ; 
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat .


---
*Page 135*
---

G
CF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 135 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP208 
Proposal name:  Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois- Rivières region of Haiti 
through Integrated Flood Management  
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Haiti  
Project/programme size:  Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1. This funding proposal for a small -sized public sector adaptation project in
environmental and social safeguards category B , to be implemented over an 8 -year period and
with benefits accruing over a 25 -year project lifespan,  is submitted by the Government of Haiti
(GoH) through the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as accredited e ntity (AE),
with the Ministry of Environme nt of Haiti (MoE) as the executing entity (EE) . The total cost of
the funding proposal (FP)  is USD 31. 29 million,  of which USD 22.4 3 million is requested from
GCF, with USD 8.86 million in co-finance from Heifer International Haiti (Heifer) and UNDP.
2. The proposed project will contribute to GCF’s paradigm shift objective of increased
climate -resilient sustainable development by enhancing the resilience of Haiti’s Trois- Rivières
(TR) watershed and its communities to the impacts of climate change  intensi fied flooding. This
shift will be achieved by implementing a transformative approach to the way in which the GoH
and farming communities address flood impacts , incorporating ecosystem- based adaptation
(EBA) , and integrated land and water resource planning and management that is informed by
climate risk. Specifically, direct investments from GCF combined with co -financing from Heifer
will be used for:
•output 1: Ecosystem -based flood management solutions implemented in 25,440
hectares of the Trois - Rivi ères watershed:  activities to implement agroforestry system s
an
d rehabilitate ‘water towers’ through reforestation of degraded landscapes at priority
intervention sites ; also including climate change awareness with local government and
communities, an d participatory land -use planning ;
•out
put 2: Climate -resilient agricultural practices, optimiz ed value chains and social
safety nets established to promote sustainable land management and reduce
degradation in the TR watershed  – activities to enhance technical and institutional
capacity for productive climate -resilient land management at the national and local levels ,
including support to tree nurseries, agri -processing cooperatives and v illage savings and
credit associations ( VSCAs) ;
•out
put 3: Strengthened governance and capacity for climate-resilient integrated
water resources management (IWRM)  – activities to establish the required governanc e
f
ramework , to support the climate -resilient land and water management, including
amendments to the Water Act, and establishment of catchment committees and sub -
catchment water user associations across the country.
3. The third component involves capacity -building  at the national level and at catchment
level throughout the count ry, and the other two components will focus only on the TR


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 136 
 
 
watershed  in the country’s north -west , which is highly vulnerable to floods , that are expected to 
become more frequent and severe with the changing climate. This work will be carried out in 33 
communal sections with 118 commun ities. These communities are based in  seven target 
communes, falling into three departments – Port -de-Paix , Chansolme and Bassin -Bleu 
(Northwest ); Plaisance and Pilate ( North ); and Marmelade and Gros -Morne (Artibonite ).  
1.1 Impact potential                                       Scale:  N/A   
4. Climate change basis:  The FP highlights Haiti’s extreme vulnerability to climate change 
impacts, as well as earthquakes (which are  generally  considered natural disasters ). In the past 
two decades, Haiti has experienced 26 floods , 12 of which were catastrophic, 8 hurricanes, and 
num erous other tropical storms and earthquakes , with severe damage and loss caused by 
climate change intensified  flooding  in particular . For example, in 2004, Hurricane Jeanne  caused 
severe flooding in the northern part of Haiti, resulting in more than 2,800 deaths and approximately US D 41 million in damage. More recently, Hurricane Matthew struck Haiti in 
2016, causing 546 deaths and the loss of up to 90  per cent  of crops and livestock in some areas.  
5. The FP and feasibility study (FS) use historical data and future projections to 
demonstrate convincingly that climate change is causing an increase in annual average 
temperatures and creating the conditions for increased frequency and intensity of hurricanes in 
the Caribbean region. C limate change is caus ing a decrease in total annual rainfall in Haiti, but 
also a shortening of the wet season , with  a resulting increase in concentration and intensity of 
rainfall events. These changing climatic conditions are contributing to an increase in the 
frequency and intensity of flooding in the country, particularly in the  north -western  TR 
watershed  of the Massif du Nord,  with its steep topography.  
6. The FP also shows how climate change impacts are compounded by direct human 
pressures on the environ ment, with  degraded landscapes caused by unsustainable agricultural 
practices, and historical deforestation , that involved felling of 99  per cent  of the primary forest 
cover of the country, much of this for charcoal production .1 During heavy rainfall even ts, 
degraded areas experience increased surface run -off, worsen ed by decreased infiltration of 
water into  soil because of reduced vegetation cover. These factors, combined with steep slopes 
and the lack of embankments along the river, increase the flow of water into the low -lying 
plains, causing flooding of downstream  villages. Increased  water flow intensifies erosion and 
causes  sediment deposits in the riverbed and drainage infrastructure, further exacerbating 
flooding, including in the downstream city of Port de Paix. Drinking water contaminated with sewage and pollutants, and pools of standing floodwater increase the spread of water - and 
vector -borne diseases . 
7. Adaptation impact : The project aims to deliver impacts against three GCF adaptation 
results areas in the target communes of the TR watershed:  
(a) Increased resilience of most vulnerable people and communities;  
(b) Increased resilience of health and well -being, and food and water s ecurity; and  
(c) Increased resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services.  
 
 
1 Although 99  per cent o f Haiti’s original  forest cover and its high biodiversity was lost, significant regreening has 
occurred in recent years through smallholder production of  fast-growing tree species for use as fuelwood and  sale 
into charcoal val ue chains – with up to 36  per cent of the country now ‘reforested’ in this  manner, and harvested on 
a sustainable basis  using coppicing techniques . See  
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2021 -06/2021_USAID -ProLand -Haiti -Woodfuel -
Case -Study -Final.pdf


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 137 
 
 
8. Overall, the project will confer direct and indirect adaptation benefits to approximately 
292,600 and 441,272 vulnerable people in Haiti, respectively. By implementing 17,740 ha of 
agroforestry systems and rehabilitating 7,700 ha of forests in priority areas in the TR watershed 
to address the impacts of climate change -induced flooding, it is anticipated that the 
interventions will reduce peak surface run -off and floodplain extents, res ulting in a 35 per cent  
reduction in the number of households at risk from  20-year flood events, and  a more than 50  
per cent  reduction in the number of households affected by 100 -year flood events. This will be 
achieved through revegetation which i ) restor es the ecosystems’ capacity for water infiltration 
and reduces flash floods ; ii) reduces the soil erosion that worsens downstream flooding through 
siltation of drainage structures ; and, although this is less emphasized in the FP , iii) improv es 
groundwater availability and baseflow2 in the dry season . Agroforestry interventions will 
enhance 15,000 vulnerable households’ resilience and improve food security, by diversifying 
and increasing agricultural production and adding val ue through agri -processing support.  
9. Interventions to re duce the extent of flooding are expected to reduce the spread of 
water - and vector -borne diseases, including, inter alia, cholera, diarrhoea and typhoid, with an 
expert hired to monitor disease incidence across the target communes, assisted by water user associations.  The agroforestry and reforestation interventions under this project are also 
expected to result in an important co -benefit of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The 
combined project investments will transfor m Haiti’s approach to land and water resources 
management and create an enabling environment for the uptake of climate -resilient, sustainable 
flood management practices in the public sector and in farming communities. The project aims to create pathways to  scale up and replicate these practices in catchments across Haiti  through 
activating catchment management structures.  
10. Adaptation options and impacts:  The project proponents conducted an options 
analysis to choose between ‘grey’ engineered solutions to flooding , such as embankments, check 
dams, canals and discharge channels on the one hand, and ‘green ’ ecosystems -based solutions , 
such as tree planting, natural regeneration, slope stabili zation, riverbank  vegetation, and 
contour l ine farming, on the other. Green solutions  were selected because they are less costly 
and require less complex and expensive maintenance, and also because of the wide range of co -
benefits they provide – for food security and human heath, ecosystem health and biodiversity.  
11. The justification for the selection of an EBA approach is set out in the FS, though it is 
noted that less  technical detail is provided on the  green solutions  in section 4 in the option s 
analysis . This is true also of  section 7, which prov ides much less detail on  the means of 
catchment reforestation , in comparison with the  technical  guidance  on agroforestry.  In answer 
to a question from the independent Technical Advisory Panel ( iTAP) about how detailed 
protocols would be developed for reforestation, as well as monitoring and community 
engagement, the AE responded that an o perations manual would be developed in y ear 2 of the 
project, in collaboration with participating communities. The  iTAP  welcomes t he planned 
annual monitoring of dry season baseflow at four locations along the main stem of the TR river – 
to provide an indicator of improvements in soil infiltration capacity as a result of upstream reforestation. Technical monitoring pr otocols will be d eveloped  as part of the manual, using a 
low- tech  "infiltration rate tool"  and “ water flow metering
”  techniques to “increase community 
engagement and limit technical dependence/ maintenance without compromising accuracy of 
data ”.   
12. In response to a question about how the project’s actual results in mitigating flood risk 
will be tracked, the AE highlighted the  significant budget allocation (through Heifer and UNDP 
co-finance) for impact analysis, evaluation and studies to monitor results – including, if/when a 
flood does occur, conducting post -flood community surveys in the project intervention sites, 
and integrating this with  official data gathered by government and U nited Nations  disaster risk 
 
2 Water that seeps into the stream from the groundwater, as opposed to from surface run -off.


---
*Page 138*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 138 
 
 
teams . The hydrographic modelling outlined in  the FS w ill be updated, both with  geographical 
information system information to be collected in year 1  as a baseline, and with a full 
hydrographic analysis in year 8 , to be presented to government  for future planning and 
replication in other areas of the country.  
13. Conflict sensitivity analysis:  In response to a query about the potential for project 
impacts to be limited by the country’s fragile security situation, with lawlessness in and around 
Port -au-Prince, and gangs now controlling much of Haiti’s territory, UNDP indicated that the 
activities are located in relatively secure parts of Haiti, with the partial exception of Gros -Morne 
and Bassin -Bleu. Nonetheless , it is acknowledged that “the security issue should be considered a 
destabilizing factor that makes the operating context more prone to conflict and increases risks.  
To mitigate the impact of the security situation and maximise the peacebuilding potential of the 
project, a proactive approach to conflict sensitivity will be adopted and will be promoted by 
UNDP. This will begin with a detailed conflict analysis of project sites3” as outlined in the 
environmental and  social management framework (section 6.1.6 ). A s ecurity plan and a c onflict 
assessment  will be developed for each commune, as part of the community land -use plan ning  
process , that “will map issues and dynamics that bring groups together and divide them, 
particularly with  regard to  natural resources, and assess more deeply how the project may 
interact with local conflict dynamics”. Procurement logistics are planned to circumvent the capital city , and project benefits are not provided in cash, in order to reduce the risk that 
beneficiaries and staff are targeted by criminal gangs in the delivery of project activities.  
14. The iTAP appreciates the conflict sensitivity analys is conducted , and the process to 
continue conflict assessment and mitigation during project implementation . We note that  work 
on the ground  in the north -west (i.e. components 1 and 2 , and o utput s 3.2 and 3.3 ), will be 
supported with supplies from the region or airlifted in by the United Nations  Humanitarian Air 
Service , with no supplies coming by road from Port -au-Prince, which is worst affected by gang 
violence and roadblocks . Having a project management office in the l ocal directorate of the  MoE 
in Port -de-Paix  will also mean that staff do not need to travel from the capital in the south, and 
that they will help to enable effective delivery. It is noted that similar arrangements are in place 
for a number of other rural projects in the MoE –UND P environment portfolio , which currently 
has a 90  per cent  delivery  rate.  
15. We remain concerned , however , about the ability of the project to carry  out the national 
level work of o utput 3. 1 effectively , strengthening the national governance framework for 
IWRM and  scaling up  the approach by establishing  catchment and sub -catchment management 
structures in 31 catchments across the country . This aspect, important for maximizing 
adaptation impact , would appear very difficult to achieve under the current conditio ns, with 
travel by MoE officials from the capital restricted. Even without such restrictions, it would be challenging to establish new structures in other catchments, without the kind of in -depth 
capacity development happening in the TR catchment . Under the current security situation , it 
would seem near impossible.  
16. Overall, the project’s adaptation impact in reducing flood risk is dependent on the 
success of the reforestation and agroforestry efforts, as well as the development of the 
governance fram ework for climate -risk informed land and water management, all of which are 
taking place in a challenging socio -economic and security context. The work on the ground in 
the TR watershed may have a medium to high impact potential , while  the impact potential of 
output 3.1 may be low, given  the anticipated challenges in implementation.  The iTAP  assesses 
the impact potential of the project as medium overall.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                                                                          Scale:  N/A   
 
3 Written responses to t he iTAP  questions received from UNDP on 17 May 2023.


---
*Page 139*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 139 
 
 
17. Overall paradigm shift : The proposed project intends to catalyse a paradigm shift in 
Haiti’s approach to managing climate change  intensified flooding in the TR watershed and 
beyond – by initiating a shift away from the present  fragmented, uncoordinated decision -
making and unsustainable land -use practices towards an integrated approach to land and water 
resource management that takes  into account the current and projected impacts of climate 
change. Without GCF support, the GoH will continue to operate under the existing paradigm of 
reactive recovery from the impacts of climate change intensified  disasters, including severe 
flooding, a nd failure to prepare for slow -onset events like drought . The project aims to 
incentivi ze this shift and make it sustainable through an integrated approach – restoring 
strategic areas of the TR catchment (C1), whil e promoting sustainable incomes based on  
regenerative agroforestry (C2) and building a governance framework that supports rural 
committees to plan land use and manage catchments effectively for climate risk (C3).  
18. The lead role of MoE in executing the project , and the strong emphasis on governance  
and capacity development for local government, national government and community structures , help to embed the integrated land and water management approach to climate 
change adaptation for the long term. A pathway to scaling up is built into the project through output 3.1, although The iTAP  notes the likely challenges that will be faced in carrying out 
national government level work, and work across all catchments nationwid e, given the security 
context. The intended scale- up involves amendments to Haiti’s draft Water Act to include, inter 
alia, provisions for the adoption of IWRM structures across the country , and the subsequent 
establishment of 31 new c atchment IWRM c ommittees, each with  sub-catchment water 
resource users associations.  In terms of sustainability,  the iTAP  notes the commitment of MoE 
to develop and sustain IWRM structures, and its letter to GCF , committing USD 7 .5 million  for 
post -project operation s and maintenance  (O&M) , supporting the “maintenance of the cost of the 
green infrastructure set up by the project” ( annex 22).   
19. Challenges of reforestation : The iTAP  posed a question to the AE about whether the 
intended paradigm shift might be over ambitious, particularly the attempts to reforest the TR 
catchment on a sustaina ble basis. In the context of Haiti’s extreme development challenges, 
many past reforestation efforts have failed to sustain tree growth, and stakeholder structures set up to support these efforts have often collapsed once donor funds dry up. The AE 
acknowl edged the depth of the challenges, but pointed to the systematic analysis conducted by 
UNDP and MoE of 22 past and current related initiatives (as shown in the FS) to understand the 
elements of success and failure, and to design the proposed project accord ingly . Based on the 
written responses and verbal interactions with the AE, t he iTAP  has identified three key 
elements built into the project design that improve the chances of achieving the desired shift, 
despite the difficult circumstances:  
(a) Agroforestry b usiness as an incentive : Despite decades of support to agroforestry , 
many farming communities maintain a focus on annual crops,  because of the short -term 
returns , and a lack of access to finance. In t he proposed project’s o utput 1.2, in addition 
to GCF investment in reforesting 7,700 water towers (USD 5 million), the largest single 
portion of the GCF investment (USD 11 million) will go into best -practice agroforestry 
support on 17,740 ha of farmers’ own land  (including women -headed households) . 
Technical as sistance will focus on maximizing the use of native and exotic tree species 
with value for fruit, medicine  and fodder , in combination with food crops, for which they 
provide shade and soil enrichment , as well as support for  beekeeping and small 
livestock . The Heifer co -finance in o utputs 2.1 and 2.2 will sustain this investment by 
enabling commercial agroforestry as a long -term incentive for keeping trees standing – 
through technical support to farmer field schools, promotion of cooperative nurse ries 
and agri -processing facilities, and access to appropriate micro -loan s through VSCAs . 
(b) A transition model underpinning the paradigm shift for the agroforestry interventions is depicted in the figure below taken from the FP, demonstrating how the propose d eight -


---
*Page 140*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 140 
 
 
year project will allow farmers to bridge the ‘ valley of death ’ of the first years of 
investment in agroforestry, when costs are higher than revenues. By providing initial 
inputs to farmers, the costs of implementing agroforestry are lower ed, enabling the 
farmer to shift to this more sustainable land use and guarantee income from year 1 (through harvests of annual crops  interc ropped with trees ). Over time, with support on 
access to markets and finance, returns are generated from faster -maturing frui t trees, 
and eventually higher returns from high -value tree species, enabling reinvestment and 
upscaling of operations . The diagram below is from paragraph 148 of the FP:  
 
(c) Social capital approach to community engagement:  Whil e many past reforestation 
efforts have worked hard to engage communities in tree planting, and sometimes also in monitoring tree survival, the approach to community engagement has not necessarily 
been a bottom -up approach , driven primarily by communities’ own needs and 
knowledge. As explained by the AE , “[p]ast projects have mainly been guided by top -
down directives that, while taking into account socialization with the communities, have 
not made them co-participants in the  design of interventions that will be made within 
their own lands. This in turn has resulted in lack of ownership and sustainability as well 
as success of the forestry investment themselves”
4.  
(d) By contrast, the proposed project has been designed around a social capital approach ,5 
in which community engagement is focused explicitly on  building social cohesion and 
shared value, as a sound basis for sustaining project interventions. Both reforestation and agroforestry interventions will be designed to take p lace on and in walking distance 
of farming households’ own lands, and will be guided by community land -use plans 
developed through a participatory process , with c ommunity -based agreements to be 
signed governing reforestation plantings and their long -term s ecurity. A diverse range of 
agroforestry species will be used, to be selected by farmers themselves based on 
traditional usage and preferences. Intensive capacity development will focus on 
understanding the tangible benefits of the interventions to the com munities  – in terms 
 
4 Written responses to the iTAP  questions received from UNDP on 17 May 2023.  
5 The AE highlighted a resource  published in Community Devel opment  in 2021,  which guided the project proponents, 
outlining a social capital approach to agroforestry.


---
*Page 141*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 141 
 
 
of soil fertility, crop yields, nutrition, water availability, health and sanitation, and  slope 
stability, in addition to the less direct  benefit of downstream flood prevention.  The 
principles of the farmer field school approach will be built into the reforestation work 
(as well as the agroforestry ), with farmer’s association and women’s groups, guided by 
locally based agronomists and field technicians, learning surveying and monitori ng 
skills, and taking long- term responsibility for  the areas of land designated by themselves 
through the land -use plans as having value through reforestation.  
(e) In answer to the iTAP  question about how restoration work outside people’s own farms 
will be in centivized, the AE explained that t he project will  apply the traditional ‘ Kombit’ 
system to mobilize communal labour  for tree planting, irrigation and agri -processing , 
which, according to the AE “has proven to be effective not only in delivering project 
impacts but also in enhancing social cohesion and ownership”6. This is reinforced by 
Heifer’s proven ‘ Passing of the Gift  (pase kado )’ approach, in which beneficiaries  are 
required to “ pass on the gift ” to their community through capacity -building and support 
for replication. “This system has been used by Heifer successfully in various type of project s and  is a key part of the project’s sustainability strategy , as it will create a sense 
of local ownership, community and appropriation and allowing for the implementation of community best practices that are locally appropriate”
7.  Stakeholder consultati ons 
demonstrated that this approach would be welcomed and would be seen a s less of a  
top-down approach  than that  taken in many past projects. Additional incentive 
measures that have proven to be successful include competitions around environmental 
protect ion and monitoring, and special campaign s with students and women’s 
associations that are involved in the protection of seedlings in public areas.  
(f) Funding enabling conditions , not running costs:  A number of past initiatives in Haiti 
have set up their own project -specific multi- stakeholder structures and funded their 
operations, only to find that these structures have not survived long -term  (see useful 
analysis on this in a May 2021 report  on the USAID Haiti Reforestation Project) . The 
proposed project utilizes structures that already exist, or for which legal provision is 
already made by government. This includes Heifer’s support in o utput 2.1 for existing 
communal development councils in the seven target communes to produce community land -use plans, and GCF  support  in output s 3.1 and 3.2 for a new (but required by law) 
Trois Rivières Catchment Water Resources Management Committee and s ub-catchment 
water resource user a ssociations. Most importantly, the project will not provide for the 
running costs of these organizations, which will largely be expected to be supplied in kind by local government and by community organizations ( e.g. producer associations, 
women’s groups). Instead, the project invests in creating the necessary enabling 
conditions for these structures to operate and bring value to communities, such th at 
their co ntinued existence is enabled.  
(g) As indicated by the AE to t he iTAP : “As evident in the project’s budget, a key part of the 
project’s sustainability approach is in fact not covering the full cost of the community structures that will be supported by the project, rather creating the enabling conditions 
(feasibility studies, supporting the creation of common bylaws, networking, expert 
support, covering costs related to training workshops of their members) to allow these 
to operate and link their work toward s sustainable water and land management as 
evidence [d] by the various benefits that will be created (improved health, food security, 
water supply, access to financial capital, diversified livelihoods) ... The project further 
will follow Mo E rules on the gro und that are applied when there is no project , and avoid 
 
6 Written responses to the iTAP  questions received from UNDP on 17 May 2023.  
7 Written responses to the iTAP  questions received from UNDP on 17 May 2023.


---
*Page 142*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 142 
 
 
paying travel and per diem cost for committee member s that the M oE will never be able 
to sustain ”8. 
(h) This approach also applies to the enabling conditions for VSCAs, selected by the project 
proponent s as the best way to support producers (through Heifer co- finance) t o invest 
continuously in agroforestry, rather than outside microcredit provision, which the AE 
convincingly demonstrates is not affordable in this context. Output 2.2 is focused on 
creatin g the enabling  conditions for VSCAs and de -risking their formation – including 
feasibility studies, market assessment and financial mapping that will inform the establishment and registration of the 150 new structures, and help them shape their 
own rules . According to the AE, “ [p]utting in place the VSCAs will create a culture of 
financial management within the communities as well as creating resources for the 
access to collateral (by providing financial inputs through the pooling of savings that are 
provid ed as peer -to-peer loans that are sufficient to cover the purchase of capital 
goods), while providing capital under terms that are considered to be socially appropriate and sustainable by communities. In time this will also enhance the capacity 
for saving and create a community -validated financial history that may come in use 
when these same producers look towards more formal financial institutions ”
9. 
20. Food coupon strategy:  An interesting element of the project ’s theory of change in 
bringing about the paradigm shift relates to the provision of food coupons (exchangeable for 
produce in local markets) to 934 highly food -insecure families in the project sites, using Heifer 
co-finance in o utput 2.2 for a temporary ( eight -year) intervention. Following a query from the 
iTAP , the AE indicated that this  is planned as a transition measure: “The logic behind the food 
coupons responds to a key driver of deforestation, which is the need to address short term food 
insecurity as a result of flood -related losses, through the selling of charcoal as a livelihood 
option…  providing access to a basket of produce to address immediate food insecurity needs, 
while allowing the space required for the agroforestry interventions to take h old”10. In response 
to concerns about sustainability and potential market distortions, the AE explained  that these 
are addressed by gradually phasing out the coupons from y ear 6, and by designing  the 
mechanism to work in association with local food producers, helping to create a market for the 
newly developed products being  supported by the project.  
21. Excluding charcoal  value chains: the iTAP  notes that the proposed project provides 
agroforestry su pport for a wide range of benefits and income generation opportunities. Tables 3 
and 4 in the FP list useful indigenous and non -invasive exotic tree species that can be used to 
generate income and benefits , including food, shade, soil fertility, fodder, me dicines, hedges and 
erosion control. Timber (poles, planks, fuelwood) for household use is also envisaged.  
22. The iTAP  notes that inefficient charcoal production and consumption contributes to 
greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution, and suggests that it is  preferable that GCF funds are 
not utilized for planting trees  to supply charcoal value chains. It is noted that the environmental 
awareness and capacity -building in activity 1.1 includes training in the 118 target communities 
on “the role of the community in sustainable charcoal production and reforestation, as a 
strategy for increasing climate resilience in the watershed”, which is welcomed. This could 
include awareness of the negative impacts of traditional charcoal production , and the extent to  
which these can be mitigated through the use of improved low -emission charcoal kilns (for 
production) , as well as  fuel-efficient and/or cleaner cookstoves (for consumption) . 
23. The iTAP  proposes inclusion of a covenant in the funded activity agreement, that the AE 
shall ensure that GCF Proceeds under Activity 1.2 of the project are not used for producing 
wood for sale into charcoal value chains. The project’s interventions in this activity should focus 
 
8 Written responses to  the iTAP  questions received from UNDP on 17 May 2023.  
9 Written responses to the iTAP  questions received from UNDP on 17 May 2023.  
10 Written responses to  the iTAP  questions received from UNDP on 17 May 2023.


---
*Page 143*
---

G
CF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 143 
on supporting agroforestry with other benefits , such as  sale of fruits , provision of shade  for 
intercropping with food crops, harvesting leaves with  medicinal benefits, or slope stabilization.  
24. Overall, the project’s paradigm shift potential is significant, and mechanisms have been
put in place to improve the chances of sustainable outcomes on the ground in the project sites .
R
eplication and scale -up may be difficult , however, given the challenges noted in section 1.1
above , around work in other catchments. T he paradigm shift potential of the project is assesse d
as medium.
1.3 Sustainable development potential     Scale: N/A  
25. The proposed project will contribute towards the achievement of at least 5 of the 17
United Nation s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including: i) SDG 2 – Zero hunger;  ii)
SDG 5 – Gender e quality; iii) SDG 6 – Clean water and s anitation; iv) SDG 11 – Sustainable cities
a
nd communities; and v) SDG 15 – Life on l and. In addition, project interventions will generat e
s
everal environmental, social, economic and gender -responsive co -benefits, as described below.
26. Environmental co-benefits: The restoration of degraded forests through targeted
reforestation interventions and expanded agroforestry practices, as well as the implementation
of IWRM practices , will genera te several environmental co -benefits. Reduced surface run -off
and soil erosion will contribute to soil conservation, with increased water infiltration and
storage capacity of the soil . Reduced erosion and flooding will also mean less contamination of
food and water by heavy chemicals and/or pesticides transported by flooding. Water quality
will improve because of reduced sedimentation, including  in near -shore marine environments .
Implementing agroforestry and reforestation activities will contribute to enha ncing  the carbo n
s
equestration potential of the restored landscapes . This expected co -benefit is quantified at
3,639,950 t onnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  over the 25 -year project lifespan, and m onitoring
is planned and budgeted for – see the monitoring and evaluation  plan, annex 11 . Lower -
emission processes for charcoal production and cooking will also be promoted through theproject’s capacity -building interventions.
27. Social co-benefits: Implementing targeted landscape restoration and IWRM, as well as
enhancing the technical capacity of smallholder farmers and communities in the TR watershed
to utili ze climate- resilient agricultural practices will lead to improved food security, social
empowerment, and greater energy security, as well as health benefits. Training communitie s
a
nd individual farmers in climate -resilient agroforestry practices, as well as expanding access to
agricultural markets and credit facilities will improve household nutrition and increase income.Project interventions will al so generate positive social co -benefits for beneficiary communitie
s
i
n the form of greater social empowerment , with revived communal efforts for irrigation, and
cooperation on sustainable use of non -timber forest products. This will be reflected in the
development of community land -use plans and the establishment of communal development
councils, catchment IWRM c ommittees and sub-catchment resource user a ssociations that will
improve the decision -making power of traditionally marginali zed groups , including women and
local communities, on natural resource management .
28. Economic co -benefits:  Flood management interventions are expected to reduce peak
surface run -off and floodplain extents in Haiti’s TR watershed, reducing e conomic damages to
existing infrastructure, generating public savings and indirectly increasing the fiscal spaceavailable for other social and developmental investments. Additional employment opportunities
will be created through  the project  interventions in a groforestry and reforestation, suc h as the
establishment of nurseries, and operation of agri -processing cooperatives . Encouraging farmers
to participate in intercropping of cash crops, timber trees as well as a variety of food crops andfruit trees will provide them with an important econo mic safety net to reduce the economic
impacts of climate change -induced flooding on their production. These impacts will be further
reduced by expanding agricultural markets, which will increase the resilience of the agricultur
al


---
*Page 144*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 144 
 
 
sector to external climate  change shocks, such as flood and hurricane impacts. Increasing access 
to agricultural finance through VS CAs will allow beneficiaries to purchase necessary agricultural 
inputs and improve their yields.  
29. Gender co -benefits: Approximately 52  per cent  of direc t beneficiaries of the proposed 
project are women. Haiti has a high percentage of female- headed rural households 
(approximately 39  per cent ), the majority of whom are smallholder farmers . These women w ill 
benefit from training on climate -resilient agricult ural practices and sustainable land 
management , as well as the extension of agricultural finance and provision of climate- resilient 
agricultural inputs . In addition, implementing an integrated approach to flood management in 
the TR watershed will reduce the rate of displacement, and in turn reduce the amount of 
violence , including sexual violence,  experienced by women. Reduced flooding will result in a 
decline in the spread of waterborne diseases , as the contamination of water  supplies will be 
reduced, with a disproportionately positive impact on women, who are most exposed to 
contaminated water because of gender roles in the hom e. 
30. The iTAP  assesses the project’s sustainable development potential a s high. 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                                                  Scale: N/A  
31. Vulnerability of Haiti:  Ranked 163rd out of 191 countries on the 2021 U nited Nations  
Human Development Index,11 Haiti is both a small island developing State (SIDS) and a l east 
developed country  (LDC) , and  faces multiple development challenges related to food and 
economic security, health, education, political violence and environmental degradation. Poverty is endemic , with approximately 59  per cent  of the population living below the World Bank 
poverty line , and 74  per cent  below USD  5 a day
12. Poverty has  been exacerbated by a  series of 
natural and climate change intensified disasters over the past two decades, including severe 
storms, flooding, landslides, drought, the devastating earthquake that rocked th e country in 
2010, the category 4 Hurricane Matthew ( which left 806,000 people in need of urgent food 
assistance in 2016 ), and an earthquake which devastated the country's southern regions in 
August 2021. On the 2021 Climate Risk Index, Haiti is third amon g countries that were most 
affected by extreme weather events from 2000 to 201913.  
32. The country is currently locked into a reactive cycle of costly disaster response and 
rebuilding that is preventing the adoption and implementation of sustained climate -resilient 
approaches to managing the cross- sectoral impacts of flooding in the country. These impacts are 
further exacerbated by the country’s fiscal challenges and  dependency on neighbouring 
countries for importing critical supplies. For example, approximate ly 50 per cent  of the national 
budget comes from foreign aid, and 60  per cent  of food requirements are imported, despite 
agriculture being the primary economic activity (40  per cent  of the population is dependent on 
the agricultural sector for its livelihood , mostly through small -scale and subsistence farming). 
The FP quotes a statistic from the World Food Programme that 35  per cent  of the population 
faced food insecurity in 201614 – this has subsequently risen to 43  per cent  in 202215. The 
already alarming situation worsen ed in 2022 due to global conflict  and the resulting economic 
and supply crisis, which has caused prices to rise and sharply decreased the purchasing power 
of Haitian s, to the point that an estimated 4.5 million people are currently in need of food 
assistance16. The project addresses these challenges by  employing cost -effective EBA and IWRM 
 
11 https://hdr.undp.org/data -center/specific -country -data#/countries/HTI  
12 World Bank Poverty and Inequality Platform, https://pip.worldbank.org/home  
13 https://www.germanwatch.org/en/19777  
14 Funding proposal, footnote 99  
15 https://www.wfp.org  
16 https://www.wfp.org


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 145 
 
 
approaches to reducing flood risk and aiming to strengthen the governance framework of the 
whole country.  
33. Vulnerability of the Trois Rivières watershed:  Poverty is prevalent in the TR 
watershed, including parts of the Artibonite, North and Northwest departments. The Northwest 
department has the joint highest percentage of poor people  in the country, with an extreme 
poverty rate exceeding 40  per cent , and including the city of Port -de-Paix, which is the third -
most food -insecure area in Haiti. The TR region is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate change -induced floodi ng because of its steep topography and exposure to the impacts of 
hurricanes and tropical storms coming from the north -east. The cumulative negative impacts of 
climate change -induced flooding and extreme events are compounded by land degradation in 
the TR region, resulting from deforestation and unsustainable crop farming on the surrounding steep slopes, including  annual crop cultivation which leaves the soil bare during most of the 
year , contributing to decreased infiltration and increased surface run -off in the catchment. This, 
in turn, has resulted in increased erosion and soil degradation within the catchment area, 
further exacerbating flood impacts  downstream in the catchment.  Outcomes 1  and 2, and 
outputs 3.2 and 3.3, focused on the TR watershed, addre ss these issues.  
34. Current socio -political and economic situation:  The FP quotes 2017 figures on Haiti’s 
high level of public debt. The iTAP  notes that the country’s public debt has nearly doubled since 
then and stood at USD 5.1 billion in 2022 – representin g 25  per cent  of gross domestic product  
and having risen rapidly fr om zero after the 2010 earthquake saw the cancellation of all 
outstanding external de bt. With an external debt to export ratio of 93  per cent , projected to rise 
rapidly in the next decade, the country faces a high risk of external debt distress. The 
government is in no position to take loans for climate change adaptation and even allocating 
funding from the national budget for this purpose is challenging.  
35. The country also faces severe socio -political instability, worsened since the 
assassination of President Jovenel Mo ı̈se in 2021 , followed by a violent 7.2 magnitude 
earthquake a few weeks later, resulting in more than 2,200 deaths and US D 2 billion worth o f 
damage in southern Haiti. Haiti has been hit hard by the recent global food price shock , with 
food inflation reaching  44 per  cent  in September 2022. This shock compounds the hardships of 
an already highly fragile countr y, also suffering a n ongoing  public  health emergency (cholera) 
and serious security risks. With t he country’s small tax and market base as well as its high 
public debt, limited opportunities exist for the public and private sector to access financial 
resources for addressing climate change impacts, which is estimated to have cost the country 
approximately USD 20 million per annum in loss and damage  in recent years , according to 
Germanwatch in 202017. The grant funding by GCF addresses the country’s need for support  in 
the midst of  all these challenges, whilst the Heifer co -finance helps to put agroforestry and agri -
processing on a sustainable business footing, including through access to finance through 
establish ing and empower ing VSCA s through  outcome 2 ( activity 2.2) . 
36. Institution al capacity  needs : Facing myriad environment, climate change, security and 
development challenges, the Government of Haiti is nonetheless committed to implementing 
rural development policies that  improve the quality of life of its citizens , whil e more effe ctively 
managing climate change risks.  The proposed project will help to build the capacity of a number 
of government entities, including the M inistry of Agriculture , Natural Resources and Rural  
Development (MARNDR) and the MoE  to ensure the sustainability of the project’s investments. 
The MoE  has committed USD 7.5 million in kind to cover  the O&M  costs of the reforestation 
investments, ex situ  conservation of genetic resources,  and the continued work of the watershed  
and sub-watershed committees.  
37. The A E has expressed  high confidence in the materialization of the O&M  support , on 
account of UNDP’s own experiences , where various project investments that have been made 
 
17 https://www.germanwatch.org/en/19777


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 146 
 
 
through G lobal Environment Facility  projects  continue to be ope rational 10 years after the 
project’s end (for example, the Centre de P ropagation des Végétaux à Dosmond). S trengthening 
of the governance and technical capacities of institutions,  and the establishment of appropriate 
legal frameworks for integrated land and water resource management  have been  built into the 
project in  outcomes 1 ( activity 1.1), 2 ( activities 2.1 and 2.2) , and 3 ( activities 3.1 –3.3) to 
address these needs. The AE ac knowledges the need to build the capacity of the MoE as EE 
through project implementation, and the iTAP  believes that this is crucial and will need to be 
prioritized , with resources committed to  it. 
38. Overall, based on the above, the needs of the recipient are rated as very high. 
1.5 Country ownership                                                 Scale: N/A   
39. Policy alignment:  The proposed  project is strongly  aligned with Haiti’s national 
priorities, includ ing the revised n ational adaptation programme of a ction  (NAPA)  of 2017, 
focused on soils, agriculture, coastal zones and water resources . The NAPA  itself was designed 
to align with the country’s earlier n ational environmental action plan, Strategic Development 
Plan for Haiti,  interim cooperation framework and poverty reduction strategy paper, including  
their goals to ramp up agricultural production in a sustain able way, preventing land 
degradation , improving access to clean water , and reducing disaster risk . The proposed project 
aims to build on recent results of the national adaptation plan (NAP) process, supported by 
UNDP through a GCF Readiness  and Preparator y Support  project, by strengthening 
institutional and technical capacities and existing frameworks and systems.  In particular , 
the project responds to the identified need to ensure that the NAP is implemented  with a strong 
evidence base for adaptation planning and that priorities are subsequently integrat ed into the 
strategic development plan and d isaster risk reduction plan and s trategy.  
40. The FP was not updated to reflect Haiti’s revised n ationally determined contribution 
(NDC) of 2022. It reflects on the project’s consistency with the 2015 NDC and its adaptation 
priorities, including enhancing the resilience and sustainable manag ement of 15 watersheds; 
and undertaking afforestation and/or reforestation activities of 137 ,500 ha of land. The iTAP  
notes that the new NDC includes in its non -exhaustive list of costed priority actions the 
“Afforestation of strategic hydrogeological plac es”. Haiti’s second national communication on 
climate change to the U nited Nations Framework Convention on C limate Change  highlighted the 
importance of managing watersheds to address the impacts of climate change and emphasi zed 
the need to: i) implement climate -resilient solutions that will address the impacts of climate  
change -induced flooding on vulnerable communities and the main economic sectors (e.g. 
agriculture); ii) promote the adoption of an integrated approach to land and water resource 
management in the country; and iii) strengthen the cohesion between existing and planned 
initiatives focused on landscape and waters hed management, informed by best practices 
generated from past projects and/or programmes across the country and Caribbean region.  It is 
noted that the project’s IWRM interventions build well on this approach, as well as  the 
framework first set out in the 1999 Action Plan for Water Resources Management in Haiti.  
41. Stakeholder engagement: T he proposed project has been designed following extensive 
consultations with members of the Haitian government, public authorities, civil societ y and the 
private sector. Haiti’s national designated authority , the MoE, has been fully involved in the 
development  of this project since inception , through its contributions to the consultation 
process and inputs during field missions. UNDP has facilitated dialogue between the MoE,  the 
MARNDR, and  other relevant institutions, to confirm that the project responds to the adaptation 
priorities of the country. Following technical assessments of flooding risk, s takeholder  
consultations were held  in the North -West, North and Artibonite de partments  of Haiti.  
Discussions  were held with the regional branches of the MoE, Civil Protection Agency, Ministry 
of Economy and Finance, the National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation in the


---
*Page 147*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 147 
 
 
Ministry of Public  Works, Transport and Communications,  the Regional Water Supply and 
Sanitation Off ice and irrigation associations . These discussion s underlined the need for a 
coordinated effort toward improved flood risk management for increasing resilience to climate 
change .  
42. Capacity of entities:  As the EE, the M oE will be part of the project  board a nd will lead 
the Project Management Unit through the designation of a National Director . The project will 
also report to the National Technical Committee for Climate Change. As the AE, UNDP will build 
on its substantial portfolio of  IWRM project s in the La tin America and Caribbean  region , in 
providing supervision and monitoring of the project.  Based on a capacity assessment that 
identified gaps in the ministry’s capacity, the UNDP Haiti country office, at the request of the 
GoH, will also provide some direc t execution support to government in its EE role, using UNDP’s 
financial management and procurement processes. A strict firewall will be maintained between 
UNDP’s  AE role and this execution support role. In practical terms , this means that different 
teams within the AE will be responsible for the two roles, with no overlap allowed. It is noted that the M oE will retain responsibility for drafting and ap proving all terms of reference, and 
approving payment s to vendors and tran sfer of funds. T he iTAP  also notes the AE’s intention to 
use its execution support role consciously to develop ministry capacity . The iTAP  believe s this is 
essential and recommend s that a capacity development plan be developed by the project 
manage r to spe ll out how this will be undertaken . 
43. UNDP’s support to Haiti in adaptation is framed within the NAP process , integrat ing 
diverse initiatives to enhance Haiti’s national adaptive capacity, through the implementation of 
adaptation solutions and  improved capac ity for early disaster alerts. These efforts are 
supported by various projects within UNDP’s portfolio that reinforce each other through a wider portfolio approach that is guided by the GoH. The project will coordinate with ongoing 
donor groups chair ed by UNDP , including the Technical and Financial Partner Group for the 
Environment Sector and the International Community Support Group for Disaster Risk 
Management. In addition, the project will provide regular briefings to the t echnical secretariat 
of the National Committee on Climate Change and ensure alignment with the NAP implementation process . During project  implementation, all target beneficiary groups will 
remain engaged to ensure that the benefits conferred by project  interventions respond directly 
to the needs of these groups.  
44. Country ownership of the project is thus seen to be high. 
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                                          Scale:  N/A   
45. Of t he project’s total proposed budget of  USD 31.29 million, 72 per cent  of funds are 
requested from GCF, with 26  per cent  in co -finance from Heifer and 2  per cent  from UNDP. 
Although there is no government co -finance for the project, the provision of a letter of 
government commitment to financing long -term maintenanc e of green infrastructure is seen as 
positive . The proposed financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the 
proposal’s objectives, and  the iTAP  agrees that a 100  per cent  grant is the most appropriate 
level of concessionality for the GCF funding, given: i) the public good of the project’s activities 
and lack of financial reflows; ii) Haiti’s status as a SIDS  and LDC ; iii) the level of debt of the 
country, with its limited c apacity to repay loans ; and iv) the  fact that the  project beneficiaries 
are poor  smallholder farmers who need grants to make these initial investments.  
46. An economic analysis was conducted , focused on determining costs and benefits 
associated with: i ) implem enting EBA interventions, including agroforestry and reforestation 
activities, to enhance the resilience of the TR watershed to climate change- induced flooding; ii) 
facilitating sustainable catchment management practices with the strengthening of agricultu ral 
value chains; and iii ) supporting the GoH in the development of a national -level policy 
framework to facilitate IWRM in Haiti. The economic analysis estimated the net present value of


---
*Page 148*
---

 
GCF/B.3 6/02/ Add. 03 
Page 148 
 
 
interventions to be US D 376 million , with an internal rate of return  of 40.7 per cent , 
representing a highly cost -effective spend . Project benefits included in the economic analysis 
were  estimated on an annual basis, comparing with - and without -project scenarios in the 
presence of climate change. This included h ealth benefits (avoidance of water -borne disease), 
rural livelihoods benefits (agroforestry income) and infrastructure benefits (avoided flood 
damage to homes and infrastructure) . It is noted that the first two sets of benefits would not 
have accrued, had a ‘gre y’ infrastructure approach to flood mitigation been chosen over a ‘green’ 
ecosystems- based solution.     
47. Although the proposed project is not a climate  information /early warning system 
project,  its efficiency is enhanced by the fact that its design  compleme nts ongoing initiatives to 
build Haiti’s meteorological capacity and strengthen early warning of disasters. In particular, 
the project will build on the past decade of support from the Government of Canada to Haiti to 
rebuild and modernize the national met eorological and hydrological service, implemented by 
the World Meteorological Organization  ( WMO). UNDP is also working with the WMO to improve 
multi -hazard alerts , including for flooding, through : (i) the Climate Risk and Early Warning 
Systems (CREWS) project that will develop an environmental information system ; and (ii) a 
Least Developed Countries Fund  project that will enhance capacity  for the delivery of climate 
information analysis to guide water management planning. As part of o utput 3, where national 
government capacity for climate risk -informed IWRM is being built, hydrologists from the 
Hydrometeorological Unit of Haiti will be consulted and trained through a learning -by-doing 
approach in the recreation of the flood modelling that will be undertaken  by the project to 
gauge its impacts, equipping them to recreate the analysis  in other areas.  
48. The project’s overall efficiency and effectiveness is rated as  medium to  high. 
II. Overall  remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
49. The iTAP  believes that this climate change adaptation project from the Government of 
Haiti, suppor ted by UNDP and with significant co -finance from Heifer, has a well thought 
through and integrated project design, and represents an important initiative to build societal 
and community resilience in a challenging context.  
50. The iTAP  endorses this funding proposal, subject to inclusion of the following covenant 
in the funded activity agreement:  
(a) the Accredited Entity shall ensure that GCF Proceeds under Activity 1.2 of the project are not used for producing wood for sale into charcoal value chains.


---
*Page 149*
---

G
CF/B.3 6/02 /Add.03 
Page 149 
Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP208) 
Proposal name:  Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois- Rivières region of Haiti 
through Integrated Flood Management 
Accredited entity:  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
Country/(ies):  Haiti  
Project/programme size:  Small 
Impact potential  
We appreciate the detailed analysis and considerations of the ITAP in regards to the project’s 
impact regarding its interventions on the ground which have been assessed to have a medium 
to high impact potential. We also recognize ITAPs concerns regarding t he replicability of the 
project’s governance component arising from the current national context.  
To this effect the project will ensure active coordination with the GoH to ensure that project 
actions are streamlined within existing national and local structures and create a basis of 
replication through local and national frameworks and by enhancing capacities. The GoH has informed UNDP that the current project will be a cornerstone to its own National Adaptation Framework and  will serve as a demonstrative experience for adaptation action. While we 
acknowledge the challenging conditions on the ground to deliver results in the project, particularly Activity 3.1, the strong commitment from the GoH and th e above described 
measures will hel p deliver the adaptation benefits expected in the project.  
Paradigm shift potential  
The level of analysis undertaken by the ITAP in its assessment of the project’s approach is highly appreciated. As has been highlighted in the assessment, the project has built i n lessons 
learned from both failed and positive experiences around reforestation and agroforestry in Haiti and will look to put these in action to enable the project’s theory of change focusing on 
sustainable integrated water and land management as an adap tation solution to climate 
induced flooding.  
We recognize ITAP’s concern in regard to the challenging implementation context . However, 
as it is stated within the assessment , measures have been put in place to ensure a paradigm 
shift as a result of a commu nity oriented approach as well as by integrating a strong sense of 
national ownership around the project interventions.  
We also recognize ITAP’s concern in regard to the charcoal value chains and agree to the 
inclusion of the covenant as suggested.  
Sustainable development potential  
We appreciate and are in full agreement of ITAPs assessment regarding the HIGH sustainable development potential of the project  that is in turn related to the project’s ecosystem based 
approach.


---
*Page 150*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 6/02 /Add.0 3 
Page 150 
 
 
 Needs of the recipient  
We appreciate ITAP’s assessment and are in agreement of the VERY HIGH needs of the 
project’s recipients that was e videnced during the project’s preparation and has been 
reiterated at various moments by the GoH.  An initial baseline study will be conducted to 
ensure that the recipient needs are comprehensively assessed.  
 
Country ownership  
We appreciate ITAP’s assessment as it pertains to the project’s HIGH degree of country 
ownership. We confirm that throughout project implementation UNDP will work with the 
MoE and other ministries to ensure that national capacities are enhanced as a result  of this 
project.   
The MoE is fully engaging with its local structures to already put in place an operational 
guidebook that will be finalized  based on additional consultations as part of the initial 
baseline study. This operational guidebook will fix roles and responsibilities of each local 
counterparts under the MoE leadership to ensure proper monitoring and sustainability of the 
project activities on the ground.  
Efficiency and effectiveness  
We appreciate ITAP’s assessment in regards to MEDIUM to HIGH efficiency and effectiveness 
of project intervention. As has been stated by the project’s economic and financial analysis 
and is highlighted by the ITAP, the project’s internal rate of return is calculated at  40.7 % 
taking into account the multiple benefits that will arise through its ecosystem based 
adaptation strategy including a reduction of flood losses, improved livelihoods and health . 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
ITAP’ s full endorsement of the project is appreciated as well as its comprehensive analysis of 
the project’s strategy, its benefits and potential impact. We also believe that the project will 
create an important foundation and model for co mmunity based resilience in Haiti and look 
forward to its implementation.  
 
UNDP recognizes ITAP’s concern regarding charcoal value chains and agrees on the inclusion 
of the suggested covenant.


---
*Page 151*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
Page 1  I 
Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois -
Rivières region of Haiti through Integrated 
Flood Management  
Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
Table of Contents  
1. Objective of the Gender Assessment and Action Plan  ................................ .............................  2 
2. Overview  of the Proposed Project  ................................ ................................ .........................  2 
3. Overview of Gender Issues in Haiti ................................ ................................ .........................  4 
4. Facets of gender inequality in Haiti relevant for the Project design:  ................................ .........  5 
5. Gender -based Violence (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEAH)  ...........  18 
6. Legal, Policy and Administrative Frameworks for Protecting Women and Gender Equality  ...... 20 
The Ministry of Women and Women's Rights (MCFDF)  ................................ ................................ . 21 
The Office for the Fight against Violence Against Women  ................................ .............................  21 
Criminal Code  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  21 
Climate change governance and gender in Haiti  ................................ ................................ ...........  22 
7. Project -specific design consideration resulting from the Gender Assessment  .........................  23 
8. Recommendations from Haiti’s existing on Climate Resilience and Gender Projects and
Programmes ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  24 
9. Gender Action Plan (GAP)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 27 
Activity -level Gender -Responsive Budgeting envisioned for the Project (in USD$)  ..........................  45 
Proposed SEAH Mitigation Measures  ................................ ................................ ...........................  45 
Please refer to Section 6.1.4.within  Annex 6b (ESMF) for proposed actions to be implemented by the 
project mitigate SEAH.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  45 
Appendix 1: Glossary and List of Stakeholders  ................................ ................................ ............  46 
Appendix 2: List of stakeholders consulted  ................................ ................................ .................  48 Gender documentation for FP208


---
*Page 152*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 2 
  I 
1. Objective of the Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
This Gender Assessment and Action Plan (GAAP) – is a supporting document for the design of the 
following proposed Green Climate Fund (GCF) project: Enhanced climate resilience in the Trois -Rivières 
region of Haiti through integrated flood management.  It is the Annex 8 of the Funding Proposal, which 
is being proposed as a full -scale project by the Accredited Entity (AE) – United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) and has been developed in close coordination with the Government of Haiti.  
The main objective of th is Gender Assessment is to screen the gender context which will inform where 
the GCF project  will be implemented , and to subsequently strengthen the gender -responsive actions 
through  the project , to ensure that the benefits of the project accrue equitably to women, men, boys 
and girls in the targeted  projects sites selected with country partners and stakeholders in  Haiti.  
In particular, this gender assessment aims to provide an analysis  of gender equality and women 
empowerment in Haiti, with a specific focus on the gender differentiated impacts of cl imate change 
and how the findings  can be used to  drive the  design of an adaptation intervention , that is gender -
responsive  and (where possible)  gender -transformative . The objectives of the GAAP are as follows:  
• To align the proposed project design  with Haiti's national priorities on gender  as well as GCF’s 
Gender Policy and Action Plan1 and UNDP’s Gender Equality Strategy 2022 - 20252 
• To incorporate information and lessons learned from  the gender assessment conducted for 
this project, and the  previous national gender studies and evaluations in Haiti to both 
understand the context, and ensure that project activities are gender -responsive  and tailored  
• To present  gender -related  results from stakeholder consultations and involving women, men, 
girls an d boys residing in the areas where the Project will be developed from an early stage in 
project design  
• To integrate gender considerations into project indicators, goals and activities, and identify 
ways in which women can act as leaders and decision -makers  in community -based adaptation 
interventions.  
 
 
2. Overview  of the Proposed Project  
The Government of Haiti (GoH) is requesting US$25 million in GCF grant finance to implement climate -
resilient integrated water resources management (IWRM) to respond to the impacts of flooding on the 
Trois Rivières (TR) watershed. This GCF investment will be supported by the Heifer International, which 
has committed US$8.3 million in co -financing for the implementation of project interventions.   
The proposed project will seek to contribute to GCF’s paradigm shift objective of increased climate -
resilient sustai nable development by enhancing the resilience of Haiti’s Trois -Rivières (TR) watershed 
to the impacts of climate change -induced flooding.  
 
1 The GCF adopted a revised version of its 2014 Gender Policy and Action Plan on June 2018 in Korea. The revised Policy 
addresses pertinent issues on gender and climate change: the expansion of gender mainstreaming beyond the preserve of 
‘women’s issues’; a nd the identification of synergies with the in -house Indigenous People (IP) Policy as well as the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)’s Gender Action Plan (GAP), Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) and Convention on the Eliminat ion of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).  
2 UNDP Gender Equality Strategy: https://www.undp.org/publications/gender -equality -strategy -2022 -2025


---
*Page 153*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 3 
  I 
Haiti is particularly affected by the climate change impacts of increasing frequency and intensity of 
floods, tropica l storms and hurricanes. Between 1975 and 2012, such climate change -related  events 
resulted in damages and losses equivalent to 2% of the country’s GDP on average per year.  
 
In 2004, one storm — Hurricane Jeanne — caused severe flooding in northern Haiti. The flooding 
caused by this storm resulted in approximately US$41 million in damages, more than 2,800 deaths and 
the need to remove approximately 592,000 m3 of mud that clogged the drainage networks and 
infrastructure across the country. Si nce 2012, the impacts of climate change have continued to 
negatively affect the population of Haiti. For example, the Category 5 storm — Hurricane Matthew — 
that struck Haiti in 2016 caused widespread damages and economic losses and negatively affected 
more than 2 million people (2 0% of the country’s population) primarily located in the poorest regions 
of the county. The storm also inflicted economic damages and losses estimated at more than 22% of 
the country’s GDP in that year (2016), including the losses  of up to 90% of crops and livestock in some 
areas of the country. In addition, it caused a sharp increase in the number of cholera cases experienced 
throughout Haiti.   
 
The intense rainfall associated with extreme climate events such as Hurricane Matthew also leads to 
severe flooding, which exacerbates these associated negative impacts. Such high -impact flooding has 
been a regular occurrence in Haiti in recent decades. During the period 1993 –2012, for example, Haiti 
experienced 31 floods, causing the death s of approximately 2,870 people and adversely affecting 
approximately 9 million people through livelihood losses and personal damages. Of these flood events, 
10 were directly attributed to hurricanes and a further 16 attributed to extreme rainfall events.  
Implementing a transformative approach by making adaptation investments is crucial to ensure that 
the GoH can improve flood response, and improve watershed management – thus ushering a shft from 
climate impacted -communities towards climate -resilience communities . Specifically, the funds will be 
used to:  
• implement agroforestry systems and rehabilitate ‘water towers’ through reforestation of 
degraded landscapes at priority intervention sites;  
• enhance technical and institutional capacit y for productive climate -resilient land management 
at the national and local levels; and  
• establish the required governance framework for integrated water resources management 
(IWRM) to support the climate -resilient land management systems and facilitate s ustainable 
use and management of water resources over the long term.  
The combined effect of project interventions will result in the adoption and implementation of a 
climate -resilient, integrated approach to flood management that can be readily scaled up and 
replicated nationally and across the Caribbean region.  The Haitian government’s prioritization of flood 
resilience and watershed management, and food security as key elements of building resilience to 
climate change threats is clearly demonstrated by s everal policies and assessment reports, including 
the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) highlight the importance of managing 
watersheds to combat the extreme climate risks. The Risks Disaster Management National Framework 
(PNGRD), which addres ses vulnerability in Haiti, highlights the importance of harmonizing the efforts 
and applying better practices for watershed management. National Watershed Policy, an initiative by 
the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARND R), focuses on building 
resilience through participatory planning.


---
*Page 154*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 4 
  I 
Both UNDP and the Haitian government recognize that s ocial issues  – which include gender  dimensions , 
sociocultural norms and factors affecting the marginalization of particular groups with in communities 
– form an integral part of the  climate change driven flood management process. In addition to extreme 
weather events linked to climate change, factors of vulnerability , exposure  and capacity to anticipate , 
adapt to  and cope with flood risks heavily determine impacts of  flooding.  Therefore, effective 
integrated flood management requires appropriate options for managing flood risks for different social 
groups.  
Social norms and values also determine how well the negative impacts of flooding can be overcome 
and how well the positive effects of flood management use can be utilized and shared 
equitably.  Therefore, the proposed project will give special attention to the gender and social dynamics 
that influence access to flood management decision -making, with emphasis on promoting the 
empowerment of women and other disadvantaged groups.  
 
 
3. Overview  of Gender Issues in Haiti  
Haiti's  Human Development Index – HDI –  value for  2021  is 0.535 , which put s the country in 
the Low human development category , positioning it at  163 out of  191 countries and territories.3  
The Gender Development Index – GDI – measures gender gaps in achievements in three basic 
dimensions of human development: health (measured by female and male life expectancy at birth), 
knowledge (measured by female and male expected years of schooling for children and mean years of 
schooling for adults aged 25 years and older) and living standards (measured by female and male 
estimated GNI per capita). It is the ratio of female t o male HDI.  The 2021  female HDI value 
for Haiti  is 0.506  in contrast with  0.564  for males, resulting in a GDI value of 0.898, placing it in  Group 
5. 
The Gender Inequality Index – GII – measures gender inequalities (the loss in human development due 
to inequality between female and male achievements) in three key dimensions – reproductive health, 
empowerment, and labour market. Haiti  has a GII value of  0.635, ranking it  163 out of  170 countries 
in 2021.  Reproductive health is measured by maternal mortality ratio and adolescent birth rates; 
empowerment is measured by the shares of parliamentary seats held and population wi th at least some 
secondary education by each gender; and labour market participation is measured by the labour force 
participation rates for women and men.   
Similarly, the Social Institutions and Gender Index – SIGI –  of the Organization for Economic 
Coop eration and Development (OECD) calculated a value for Haiti of 0.1466 in 2014, suggesting that 
discrimination against women is medium.4 
This implies that the country faces consistent challenges in the area of health and education, political 
participation,  and employment that by and large unevenly affect women and girls. Persistent 
inequalities across the social, economic and political spheres of life are intricately related to climate 
change vulnerability. Projects that understand and address these through  gender mainstreaming will 
enhance the climate resilience of women and ultimately increase the chances for more effective risk 
prevention and/or mitigation5. The assessment and analysis herein focus on and highlight the 
 
3 https://hdr.undp.org/data -center/specific -country -data#/countries/HTI  (2021)  
4 OECD. Social Institutions and Gender Index 2014. Country Profile http://www.genderindex.org/ranking  
5 The Haiti Gender Shadow Report (A Coalition Gender Shadow Report of the 2010 Haiti Post -Disaster Needs Asses sment 
(PDNA)): https://reliefweb.int/report/haiti/haiti -gender -shadow -report  (2010).


---
*Page 155*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 5 
  I 
differentiated impacts that climate change and flooding have on women, men, girls, and boys, reflecting 
their differential capacity to adapt to climate change and respond to natural disasters.  
Methodology  
This document is based upon available data and information retrieved from a rev iew of literature and 
key documentation from the Government of Haiti , reports from multi -lateral institutions and 
development agencies, and interviews and field visits with relevant stakeholders during several 
missions  by the project development team in Ha iti.  
It includes insight from national gender experts, agronomists, and focus group consultations  with 
community stakeholders , and has also ensured the engagement of  women  in the design phase  to 
understand  potential impacts of the project , and builds on lessons learned from past studies and 
assessments on gender.   
To summarize, the gender analysis and stakeholder participation and consultation, enabled the 
following:  
• A strong participative process and accordingly commitment by both local governm ent officials 
and community members in fulfilling the objectives of the project.  
• Demonstration of the need for gender -disaggregated data and indicators to establish a baseline 
in which to measure improvements and identify areas of interest; and  
• Establishm ent of recommendations to be incorporated into the Gender Action Plan.  
Accordingly, the Gender Action Plan presented in this Annex  has been designed by considering  findings 
both the comprehensive gender assessment presented, as well as the results of the c onsultations.  It 
has been built to tie with the logical framework of the Project, and identifies mainstreaming actions for 
the activities planned, with indicative timeline, means of verification and indicators.  
 
 
4. Facets of Gender Inequality in Haiti  relevant for the Project:  
 
4.1 Climate change  
Haiti ranks third globally on the Long -Term Climate Risk Index6, demonstrating its extreme vulnerability 
to climate change  – to which women are especially  vulnerable . Widespread deforestation and soil 
degrada tion have so severely impacted the island’s environment  that it can no longer provide  critical 
ecosystem  functions , such as mitigating the effects of heavy rain and flooding . This has progressively 
increased human vulnerability to climate change . Extreme weather events such as cyclones and 
hurricanes , are expected to increase in frequency and intensity , while rainfall is expected to become 
more erratic across seasons7. In an already denuded and degraded landscape , this engenders severe 
erosion and landslides, flash flooding, and sedimentation of river channels. The agricultural sector is 
especially vulnerable to climate change, and both women  and men  are central actors in this sector8.  
Climate change impacts are not gender -neutral and many of the consequences of climate -induced 
impacts are more severe for women, and other socio -economically marginalized groups, given their 
specific livelihood circumstances. In relative terms, women lack access to productive resources, and 
 
6 German Watch, Global Climate Risk Index 2016. https://germanwatch.org/fr/download/13503.pdf  
7 Ibid.   
8 IUCN (2011) – ccGAP: https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2011_IUCN_Climate -Change -
Gender -Action -Plan -Haiti.pdf


---
*Page 156*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 6 
  I 
this has impacts on their health, food security and safety in the context of flooding and other extreme 
climate events. The additional socio -cultural barriers limiting participation and movement outside the 
household sph ere, is worsened by phenomena such as flooding, drought and erratic rainfall. These 
constraints cause women to have to work much harder to secure food and water, and generate 
additional income through livelihoods which, in turn, diminishes their ability to  advance out of poverty, 
particularly when they have, for example, lost their land due to the impacts of flooding during cyclone 
events.  
Gender equality and women’s empowerment are not addressed in most of Haiti’s strategy or action 
plan documents for clim ate change and disaster risk management .9,10 Flooding has cumulative 
livelihood effects that unfairly impact women and exacerbate gender inequality. In Haiti, w omen are 
disproportionately represented among the poor and there is a significant  portion of women -headed  
households , so impacts such as crop  loss, animal drowning, destroyed homes, health risks or 
displacement  and loss of life due to floods ultimately  affect women first and foremost . And the evidence 
is clear, recent natural disasters;  such as the 2010 earthquake and 2015 Hurricane Matthew  have 
shown surges in GBV, and food insecurity. Yet, during these extreme events, the importance of 
grassroots organizi ng and mobilization women’s groups during disaster relief efforts was unparalleled 
and critical, demonstrating the resilience of Haitian women in the face of extreme adversity.  
 
4.2 Sociocultural norms and economic sectors  
Women have played a crucial role in Haitian society since the beginning of the nation’s history , 
commanding armies duri ng the battle for independence, contributing to the  1805  constitution, and as 
activists mobilizing for the right to vote in the 1950s. Today they co ntinue to play central  although 
largely invisibilized  roles, especially with respect to home life and family care, agricultural production, 
and grassroots disaster relief. While g ender equality was translated into Haiti’s current constitution in 
1987,  decr eeing a 30 -percent quota f or women  in all levels of public office, gender gap s are  recurrent 
and found in all aspects of Haitian life.  
Over 40% of households in Haiti are headed by women, and this has been on the rise since 2007 .11,12 
Today, there  are more women living under extreme poverty than men, with a large portion residing in 
rural areas .13 In fact most of Haiti’s population is rural, and two-thirds of this population is  dependent 
on agriculture ; among them,  women make up the  majority of lab or force  involved in all aspects of 
agricultural processes .14 
While Haiti has indeed made advances to close gender gaps, persistent challenges remain. Sexist 
attitudes and beliefs that permeate Haiti’s social fabric continue to limit women’s job opportunities and 
meaningful participation in public political life. Women are also socialized to be primary caretakers of 
the household and the burden of this unpaid, invisibilized labor is an additional obstacle. Specific 
legislative reforms are needed t o redress the gender imbalances and eliminate discriminatory 
provisions against women within public institutions, notably regarding domestic and child labor laws, 
penal codes regarding sexual harassment, intimate partner violence, and rape15. Additionally,  legal gaps 
regarding abortion and common -law partnerships hinder women’s ability to exercise and enjoy their 
 
9 USAID (2016)  
10 Shadow Report (201 0) 
11 IHSI, enquête, emploi, économie  informelle, 2010  
12 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
13 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
14 USAID (2016)  
15 IUNC 2011


---
*Page 157*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 7 
  I 
rights16.  
Although Haitian women are active in every economic sector and gender -disaggregated statistics show 
that girls have near equal educatio n opportunities as boys, women are nonetheless underrepresented 
among the higher -paying jobs and there are very few wome n in public positions of power17,18. This 
ultimately  reinforces the gendered poverty gap and women’s disproportionate vulnerability to climate 
change.  Indeed, p ost-disaster inquiries have  consistently  shown that, in times of climate crisis, women 
and girls suffer the most adverse impacts, as victims of violence, facing higher health and sanitation 
risks, and  significant  material losses19. In response, women’s groups have been among the first to 
organiz e and support disaster relief efforts20.   
Intensifying  flood s and other climate changes  threaten  agricultural production and food security  
Women are key players in agriculture, especially the areas of commercialization, transformation and 
processing, so they will be impacted, but this also represents an opportunity for building resilience to 
climate change. From UNFPA, 2017: The UN supports Haiti in reforms aimed at giving women the same 
rights to economic resources, as well as access  to property and control of land and other forms of 
property, financial services, inheritance and natural resources  
Overall, this paints a portrait of Haiti, whereby efforts towards  gender equality are overshadowed by 
the threat of  floods and other  natural disasters linked to climate change  that not only impact the 
country’s institutional capacities and resources, but also directly impact the lives of Haiti’s most 
vulnerable populations , including low -income families, women, and other marginalized groups . The 
experiences and impacts of climate change will be different among Haitian men and women. 
Addressing the underlying drivers of poverty and gender inequality within the broader challenge of 
building climate change resilience is complex, yet critical. The  following subsections further explore the 
gendered dimensions of flood and environmental management and gendered impacts in the context 
of climate change.  
 
4.3 Gender roles, power, and decision -making  
In the household, women generally have decision -making  independence, taking on the majority of 
household decisions related to budgeting and the allocation of financial resources (e.g., small expenses, 
food purchasing and preparation etc.)21. In fact, some 78% of married women have sole or joint 
decision -makin g power for major household purchases22. Nonetheless, prevailing sexist beliefs and 
social norms regarding men and women in Haitian society inform the “acceptable” gender roles at 
school, in the workforce and at home, such that overall, women do not uphold  the social status as men, 
nor the same economic and political independence23,24. Manifested along geographic and class divides, 
the position and expectations of women in society are important barriers that reinforce existing gender 
inequalities in the cou ntry.  
Traditionally, men hold social positions of importance and influence, namely as politicians, spiritual 
 
16 THE MCFBF, 2015 (politique égaltié 2015)  
17 MCFDF 2014 – politique  
18 MCFDF 2015.  Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
19 Post Disaster Needs Assessment, Gender Shadow Report, 2010  
20 Post Disaster Needs Assessment, Gender Shadow Report, 2010  
21 2012 EMMUS/DHS survey (République d’Haïti Ministère de La Santé Publique et de La  Population (MSPP) (2012). Enquête 
Mortalité et Utilisation des Services EMMUS -V Haiti 2012 verify)  
22 2012 EMMUS/DHS survey (République d’Haïti Ministère de La Santé Publique et de La Population (MSPP) (2012). Enquête 
Mortalité et Utilisation des Services EMMUS -V Haiti 2012 verify)  
23 USAID (2016)  
24 MCFDF (2014) politique d’égalité


---
*Page 158*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 8 
  I 
leaders, and school headmasters25, while women  and girls  assume the responsibility  of primary 
caretakers of the househol d and family well-being26,27. Women spend twice as much time on domestic 
tasks compared to men  (15.4 h/wk, vs to 7h/wk)28, and this difference is more pronounced in rural 
areas29. Cooking, cleaning, child rearing are burdensome tasks, and women may additionally spend  up 
to five ho urs per day collecting firewood and  numerous hours per day collecting water30. In fact, over a 
third of households must travel 30 minutes or more to access  potable water supplies31. Moreover, not 
only are women expected manage  social relations and conflict in the home, but they are also called 
upon to do so at the community -level32. Although a main thread in the social fabric and primordial to 
the daily functioning of Haitian life, this work is typically undervalued, invisibilized and non -
remunerated.  
With climate change and the threat natural disasters, women inevitably devote more time and effort 
on these invisibilized yet critical social and family tas ks on a daily basis33. This can affect their 
psychological and physical health, and further limit their capacity to adapt and recover from these 
events. For example, girls (and sometimes boys) are pulled from school to help with domest ic tasks in 
climate c rises .  
Women also play a key role in the rural economy, being the main actors in the  commercialization , 
processing, and transformation  of agricultural produc ts, while men engage in the heavier labor 
activities  and animal husbandry . In rural areas, where s mall -scale agricultural production is a livelihood 
pillar, Both men and women engage in agricultural wage labor, but frequently at different stages of the 
value chain – Men engage in heavy agricultural labor, such as land clearing and plowing, production o f 
export crops (coffee, mangoes, etc.), and large livestock husbandry; they also have wage jobs. Women, 
on the other hand, produce food for local markets, plant and weed crops, and ensure household food 
security, including the supply of drinking water.  In times of recent climate crises and natural disasters, 
women have bee n invaluable to relief efforts , mobilizing resources and organizing activities for the 
security and health of women, girls and other vulnerable groups. This demonstrates t he power and 
pote ntial of grassroots women groups in the fight for gender equity, despite the aforementioned 
barriers.  
 
4.4 Gender and cross -cutting issues:  
Poverty  
Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the world, with 59% of the population living on less than 2.5 USD 
per day (equivalent to about 162.5 gourds)34. Over the last thirty years, there has been a “feminization” 
of poverty35 and today are more women in ex treme poverty than men, living on under USD 1.23 per 
day36. Haitian women earn, on average, 32%  less than men. About a third of this earnings gap can be 
explained by factors such as age, number of children, education, and industry of employment, while 
the remaining two -thirds is unexplained, suggesting some gender discrimination in the labor market 
 
25 USAID (2016)  
26 Bellanca (2007)  
27 USAID (2016)  
28 USAID 2016 gender assessment  
29 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
30 Gardella, 2006 ( primary not found, from Feed the Future)  
31 EMMUS (2012)  
32 Shadow report, 2011  
33 Shadow report, 2011  
34 Haiti Overview: World Bank (http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/haiti/overview)  
35 MCFDF 2014 politique d’égalité  
36 Haiti Overview: World Bank (http://www .worldbank.org/en/country/haiti/overview)


---
*Page 159*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 9 
  I 
(World Bank, 2014c). The gender earnings gap is largest in the urban areas and is greater than in any 
other Latin American or African country. It is important t o note that  most women are employed in the 
informal sector, not only making them vulnerable to labor exploitation.  
The incidence of poverty is much higher among the rural population ( 75% compared to 41% in urban 
areas), especially with a high rate of unemployment and precariousness of production. In fact, the 
highest poverty headcount index is highest in the Northeast (84%) and Northwest (72%) departments37, 
where  project activities will take place . Poverty affects all aspects of life, including housing, nutrition, 
education, and human and environmental health. In fact, t hese spatial disparities closely parallel the 
geographic distribution of health outcomes and access to basic services38. 
Almost  half of the households in Haiti are women -led, yet the per capita income in these  households is 
7% less than those headed by men39. In rural areas, female -headed households (of which 62 percent 
are poor) are much more likely to fall below the indigence poverty line than are male -headed 
households (54 percent are poor).40  With natural disasters and extreme climate events, however, these 
numbers may have shifted with displacement, migration, and casualties41. 
Health  and Sanitation  
In Haiti, acce ss to health care services is precarious, especially for remote rural households, due to cost, 
distance, and quality of facilities. This was already an outstanding issue for the health of women, young 
children, and other vulnerable groups (P ersons with dis abilities , the elderly), but r ecent natural 
disasters have further debilitated the healthcare system  and its infrastructure42. The impact on women 
is evident: maternal mortality rates  in Haiti are  among the highest in Latin America and Caribbean 
region43,44, while limited reproductive agency  and access to contraceptives45 means that unplanned and 
adolescent births have long -term impacts on women’s lives.  
The widespread occurrence of contaminated w ater sources, inadequate sanitation facilities, and low 
access to clean water in rural areas affects the  health of many Haitians, and women are especially 
vulnerable to health risks as they are the primary providers and handlers of water in households46. 
Waterborne diseases are therefore a serious concern; 20% of children under the age of five years are 
affected by diarrhea and, to -date, cholera has killed thousands of people - with severe outbreaks being 
triggered by recent natural disasters. This is parti cularly relevant to young and pregnant women’s 
health and well-being , as c holera can lead to  fetal death , especially in the third trimester .47  
Severe climate events and flooding are associated with an increased risk of infection  of waterborne 
diseases, including typhoid fever, leptospirosis, hepatitis A.  as well as choler a. Moreover, increased 
sedimentation and pesticide run -off due to flooding further contribute to unsafe water. Risks  are 
especially high  when there is significan t population displacement and/or contamination of drinking -
water sources (i .e., flooding of sanitation infrastructure, sewage treatment plants, latrines, etc .)47. 
 
37 Gardella, 2006 ( primary not found, from Feed the Future)  
38 Feed the Future, 2016  
39 DSCRNP, 2007 (primary not found, citing from MCFDF 2014 politique d’égalité)  
40 IMF (2020). Haiti Selected Issues. Available at https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/journals/002/2020/122/article -A001 -
en.xml . Accessed May 2022.   
41 Shadow report (201 0) 
42 Ibid.  
43 UNFPA (2017)  Faits et chiffres clés sur la situation des  femmes en Haïti, Novembre 2017. Available at  : 
http://www.unfpa.org . Accessed May 2018   
44 World Bank, 2015 from USAID 2016  
45 UNFPA Faits et chiffres clés sur la situation des  femmes en Haïti, Novembre 2017. Available at  : http://www.unfpa.org . 
Accessed May 2018   
46 USAID (2016) gender assessment  
47 WHO flooding and communicable diseases fact sheet. Accessed May, 2018. Available at: 
http://www.w ho.int/hac/techguidance/ems/flood_cds/en/


---
*Page 160*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 10 
  I 
Above and beyond the primary risks of injury or drowning, floods can also increase risks of vector -borne 
diseases, such as malaria, dengue, yellow fever, and West Nile Fever, as they may expansion the 
number and range of vector habitats48. 
When cholera, or  other illnesses, affect households and communities, w omen and girls 
disproportionate ly carry the  burden of the work of caring for ill family members  and uphold the 
responsibility of restoring household and collective well -being49.  Consequently, health behaviors 
promoted by education campaigns to reduce the risk of cholera and other communicable diseases often 
end up placing  more  work on the shoulders of women and girls.  
Previous reports on the gendered effects of natural disasters  and disaster relief 50,51 highlight the 
importance of safety and sanitation planning that considers and consults with vulnerable groups, 
including women and girls as well as LGBTI and PWD. The increased incidence of gender -based violence 
during climate crises and population displac ement is significant, and there are security risks of utilizing 
public sanitation facilities  in relief camps52. Coping with  climate uncertainty and extreme events such 
as flooding can therefore engender significant psychological burdens and potentially imp ortant psycho -
social impacts on all Haitians, but especially women  and girls . Yet, these effects are often minimized or 
understood as secondary rather than central in projects and relief efforts53. 
Education  
Nearly half of all Haitian children do not attend school51, highlighting the myriad challenges both girls 
and boys  face in  access ing free, quality  education  - especially those from poor and rural households. 
The public education system faces  shortages of q ualified teachers, limited supplie s and a lack of 
infrastructure – which is has only been further weakened by climate change and  recent disasters. For 
example, h urricane Matthew (2015) damaged  1,633 out of 1,991 schools in the most impacted  
regions54, whil e losses from the 2010 earthquake meant that low -income families had fewer resources 
to send their children to school55. The bulk of functioning schools (85%) are run by private entities, 
many of the elite operated by Canad a, France or the United States, with school fees that are 
prohibitively unaffordable for low-income  families56. Consequently, more than 500,000 children and 
youth remain out of primary and secondary school57, which has created and reinforces an educational 
divide and continual poverty ga p that exists in Haiti.  
Although the  available data suggests that both boys and girls have equal access to education  - with a 
near gender parity in terms of education levels  and similar illiteracy rates  among men and women58 - 
sexist attitudes and gender s tereotypes are prevalent . Consequently,  education tends to favor the  
advancement of boys , while young girls face numerous obstacles59. Indeed, in post -secondary 
institutions, women students are underrepresented compared to men60, and in the job market they  
 
48 WHO flooding and communicable diseases fact sheet. Accessed May, 2018. Available at: 
http://www.who.int/hac/techguidance/ems/flood_cds/en/  
49 USAID (2016) gender assessment  
50 USAID (2016) gender assessment  
51 Shado w report (2011)  
52 Shadow report (2011)  
53 Shadow report (2011)  
54 HRW (2017). Accessed May 2018. available at: https://www.hrw.org/world -report/2018/country -chapters/haiti  
55 Shadow report (2011)  
56 HRW (2017). Accessed May 2018. available at: https://www.hrw. org/world -report/2018/country -chapters/haiti  
57 Shadow report (2011)  
58 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
59 MCFDF 2013. Le rapport de diagnostique des inégalité des genre  
60 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir


---
*Page 161*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 11 
  I 
tend to get lower paying jobs in more “feminized”  niches61,62. Gaps among rural and urban areas also 
highlight the geographic and class distribution of education, where only about 64% of women in rural 
areas are literate, compared to 84% in urb an areas , and this is most acute among poor households63.  
To counteract the gender stereotypes that shape women’s life options, the MCFDF signed protocole 
d'accord  in 2007 with the Ministry of Education, focusing on the issue of the exclusion of girls in the 
education system. Nonetheless, g ender roles and the unequal division of unpaid labor continue to limit 
the opportunities of girls receiving a quality education, by confi ning them to the household and 
burden ing them with domestic chores .  
Enforced child labor is a prevailing risk  in Haiti  in specific sectors , such as domestic work for girls and 
construction for boys, and occurs especially  among uneducated girls from low-income families64 who 
may be sold to more affluent families to work as “ restavèks ” (domestic workers) under unregulated 
and often abject conditions65. Recurrent climate threats  further exacerbate  this gendered  risk, as 
impoverished and highly impacted families may feel they have no other choice but to take children out 
of school to cope with livelihood stress  and, in extreme cases,  sell children for labor  as a survival 
strategy66. 
Political participation  
While women face no legal obstacle s to vote and stand for election,  in the 2015 presidential and 
legislative elections, over 90% of the candidates were men67. While a constitutional amendment in 
1987, decreed a 30 -percent quota for women’s participation in all levels of public office, gender 
inequalities continue to exist, and tis especially evident among the positions of power  that are 
dominated by men68. Furthermore,  representation is regressing, with currently only 3% of women in 
the Hait ian parliament (2017), while in 2003 there was 9% of women69.  
This gender gap is evident at all levels and branches of the government. At the local level, only 3% of 
CASEC  (Conseil d'Administration de la Section Communale ) representatives are women, and 11% of 
mayors are women (data from 2012) 70. Each municipality is governed by a board of 3 members. There 
is a limited number of cities that have a woman at the board level and these women often do  not 
occupy leadership roles.  
In judiciary and prosecut orial positions , only 32 out of 583 judges are  women (5.2 %), while in the 
superior court, there are only 2 out of 9 judges71. Of note, there are no women deputies and senators 
among the current 92 Deputies and 24 Senators recently elected into office72. In Haitian Senate, on a 
staff of 30 (29 active) senators, there is only one woman. For the Chamber of Deputies, there are 3 
women out of 118 (according to information available on the parliament's website), so women 
represent less than 3% at the Legislativ e Power.  Moreover, throughout the history of certain Ministries 
(e.g., Ministry of Agriculture), almost all the important posts have been and are still held by men.  
Rural women are often insufficiently informed, consulted, or included in the design of publ ic policies  
 
61 MCFDF 2013. Le rapport de diagnostique des inégalité des genre  
62 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
63 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
64 HRW (2017). Accessed May 2018. available at: https://www.hrw.org/world -report/2018/country -chapters/haiti  
65 Shadow report (2011)  
66 Shadow report (2011)  
67 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
68 MCFDF 2013. Le rapport de diagnostiqu e des inégalité des genre  
69 UNFPA Faits et chiffres clés sur la situation des  femmes en Haïti, Novembre 2017. Available at  : http://www.unfpa.org . 
Accessed May, 2018   
70 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
71 MCFDF 2015. Statistiqu es de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
72 USAID (2016) gender assessment


---
*Page 162*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 12 
  I 
and, at the national level, few actions have been taken to create a space where women can fully and 
meaningfully participate in environmental management73.  This is even more pronounced in in areas 
outside the capital and in the target regions of this project74.  
Watershed  management is led by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Environment – which 
are primarily composed of men – while groups and associations engaged in management activities (e.g., 
association d’irrigants ) typically include very few women75. With respect to climate change and disaster 
risk reduction and preparedness, women are not explicitly included in policy making processes, despite 
recognition of the gendered dimensions of mitigation and adaptation76. 
MCFDF’s recent inquiry into women’s low rates of political participation77 indicates that primary barrier 
to wider engagement is the burden of family responsibilities that mostly  (somet imes exclusively) 
concern women. Lack of financial resources and sexist stereotypes are additional  obstacles  that are 
especially relevant for poor rural women . While women have historically been highly involved in social 
and political demonstrations78, the  danger linked to these  activitie s is also noted as a limitation , notably 
the fear of losing one's life and leaving children behind79. These obstacles are only compounded by 
climate -related livelihood stress , such as periodic and increasingly intensified flooding , which amplifies  
the burdens of work and care demands on women.  
Recognizing that women have been historically excluded from political debates and decisions on the 
direction of society, the Government has introduced gender aspects to their projects “ to reinforce the 
capaci ty of women and their participation in development projects”80, and four priority areas  have been 
identified in relation to gender mainstreaming in climate change (Agriculture and Food Security, Water 
Resources Management, Disaster and Risk Management, and  Health) . However, policy decisions and 
practi ces are still being implemented, and women are still largely excluded from  in policymaking and 
decisions, especially with respect to disaster risk reduction  and agriculture81. Wide -spread corruption 
with the added impact of climate related natural disasters impede the effective implementation. For 
example, the 2015 elections were postponed due to Hurricane Matthew and election fraud 
allegations82. 
Labor  force  participation  
The work force is segregated by gender, and women have considerably fewer employment 
opportunities than men across all age groups83. The most re cent available data shows that women make 
up only 38.4%  of the active population  (or 47.7% of the working population , although women earn less 
than half of what men earn84. While equal salary policies have been adopted in the public administrative 
positions, women are unrepresented in the higher paying, more influential positions in t his sector85. In 
fact, this is echoed across all sectors, where women  tend to have the  lowest  paying jobs, with 
 
73 USAID (2016) gender assessment  
74 PFS gender assessment  
75 PFS gender assessment  
76 USAID (2016) – CHECK REF 193: Republic of Haiti (2016). Submission for the U.N. Universal Periodic R eview 26th Session 
of the Working Group on the UPR Human Rights Council [31 Oct, – 11 Nov., 2016].  
77 MCFDF (2014) politque d’égalité femme hommes 2014 - 2034  
78 Shadow report (2011)  
79 Myriam Merlet. La participation politique des femmes en Haïti, quelques éléments d’analyse, 2002  (primary not found 
verfy)  
80 REF 193 From USAID: Republic of Haiti (2016). Submission for the U.N. Universal Periodic Review 26th Session of the 
Working Group on the UPR Human Rights Council [31 Oct, – 11 Nov., 2016]. Clima te Change and the Right to Food) . 
(primary not found verify)  
81 USAID (2016) gender assessment  
82 HRW (2016) Accessed May 2018, Available at: From https://www.hrw.org/world -report/2018/country -chapters/haiti  
83 MCFDF, 2013. Le rapport de diagnostic des inégal ités de genre.  
84 Shadow report, 2011 – verify source within report.  
85 MCFDF, 2013. Le rapport de diagnostic des inégalités de genre.


---
*Page 163*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 13 
  I 
particularly high disparities in private sector salary86, and they are underrepresented among 
professional jobs such as engineering , agronomy , and law . In the project’s region of application, the 
level of employment is especially low, with an unem ployment rate of more than 42%. This, among other 
influences, promotes out -migration, particularly of young people looking for opportunities to other 
countries , namely in Dominican Republic  or North America – many  working  as undocumented 
immigrants . 
Women predominate in the informal sector (75.1%) , where w ork conditions are unregulated  and 
undocumented , so exploitation  and income stability are  relevant gender concern s87. This also means 
that, in socio -economic crises, women will be the primary victims  and it will be largely undetectable or 
unreportable as this work is invisibilized88. The prevalence of child domestic workers is also common; 
in fact, pre-earthquake data indicates that almost all Haitian girls between the ages of 5 and 9 work in 
the informal market89. Often, this is to help low-income families  with domestic tasks , however , the 
prevalence of “ restavèks” – children sent/sold to wealthier families to perform chores in exchange for 
room and board - is a major concern, especially for the rights of young girls90. According to some  
estimates, there may be as many as 300,000 child ren work ing as restavèks  in Haiti91. Although the 
minimum age is set to 15 for work in industrial, agricultural, and commercial enterprises, there is 
currently no labor code that sets a minimum age domestic work92.  
Women also hold  a majority (70%) of jobs in trade in the primary sector , especially in agriculture where  
they are t he primary actors working in  commercialization as well as processing and transformation97. 
The work of women farmworkers is often undervalued, and they tend to suf fer wage discrimination . 
This means that they have little access to stable income sources, that are dependent on the changing 
environmental conditions , contributing to gender -specific vulnerability to climate change . This also 
indicates that there is a lot of potential for projects to support women’s role in agriculture and to 
benefit w omen as part of climate change resilience -building initiatives.  
Agriculture  and food  security  
Agriculture has been the backbone of Haiti’s economy and an architect of Haitian society since the 
colonial area. Today, a majority of agricultural production occ urs on small farms, primarily oriented 
towards subsistence production in a variety of micro -climates and altitudes (USG, 2011, from Feed the 
Future). Both women and men participate in the cultivation of subsistence crops (namely of tubers and 
beans) as wel l as staple crop production that is marketed nationally (such as maize and rice)93,94. 
Although these crops (beans, rice, corn) are most vulnerable to crop loss from climate change95, 
demonstrating the disproportionate impacts incurred by women and rural, low-income households.  
Women make up a majority of the labor force in agriculture, yet income generating activities in this 
sector are skewed by gender. While women primarily work with domestic trade and commerce96, the 
lucrative export commodities, such as essential oils, mango, cacao and coffee, tend to be controlled by 
men97.  Women face additional income generating obstacles  in this sector: with limited  access to private 
 
86 MCFDF, 2013. Le rapport de diagnostic des inégalités de genre.  
87 MCFDF 2015. Statistiques de Genre: Comprendre pour mieux agir  
88 MCFDF 2014. Politique d’égalité femmes hommes 2014 -2034  
89 Shadow report (2011)  
90 HRW (2018) Accessed May 2018, Available at: From https://www.hrw.org/world -report/2018/country -chapters/haiti  
91 HRW (2018) Accessed May 2018, Available at: From https://www.hrw.org/world -report/2018/country -chapters/haiti  
92 MCFDF 2014. Politique d’égalité femmes hommes 2014 -2034 (CHECK, also HRW website)  
93 FAOSTAT  
94 Feed the future (2016)  
95 USAID 2016  
96 MCFDF – which one?  
97 FAOSTAT


---
*Page 164*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 14 
  I 
transportation they are more likely to use public services to undergo  transactions98. This not only 
contributes to the time poverty Haitian women already face, but also highlights their livelihood 
vulnerability to extreme flooding, which decreases transportation options and limits their ability to 
actively engage in the com mercial transactions that many depend on.  
Not only do domestically consumed crops generate less income, but they also receive  less attention in 
agrarian development agendas compared to cash crops of coffee, cacao and mango99. Given the gender 
distribution of agricultural production and sales , a prioritization of cash crop s risks  directly excluding  
women and their access to development program benefits. Indeed, export commodity value chains are 
often promoted a favorable pathway to generating more income in the country, however, over -
investment in export crops may ultimately widen the economic gap between men and women100. 
Furthermore, there has been minimal support and regulation from the state for women in agricultural 
value chains, nonetheless women have in novated by establishing expansive information and trade 
networks 101. In the fields, men are often responsible for large livestock (cattle, horses, etc.) and heavier, 
machine labor, while women assist with tasks such as harvesting and weeding or tending to smaller 
livestock (chickens, goats, etc.)102.  
Over the last 50 years, agricultural production , processing and marketing have decreased , and today it 
accounts for  about  25% of gross national product103; given women’s central role in agricultural t his has 
implications for their well -being and livelihoods. With climate change and continual  land degradation, 
productivity is often low  on farms; compounded by population  growth , Haiti’s agricultural sector is 
struggling to meet the national food demand  (WFP, 2008 USG, 2011 from FTF ).  
For rural farming families,  production does not often generate enough income to meet basic dietary 
and household needs. I n fact , only a quarter of the ir cash income originates from farming, so livelihoods 
must be supplemented by additional  income sources104. At the same time, malnutrition affects over 
half the population , while Haiti  impor ts as much as 60% of its  food , making it especially vulnerable to 
global economic and food crisis105. Trade liberalization has exposed farmers to competition from 
subsidized U.S. rice exports and made consumers vulnerable to volatile global food prices. Food aid has 
also disrupted local markets and agriculture (USG, 2011 fr om USAID 2016). As such, access to nutritious 
and stable food supplies depends more on household purchasing power than on household farm 
production , and this is only exacerbated by climate change . In fact, among the communes most acutely 
affected by recent droughts, food insecurity affected between 300,000 and 560,000 people106. Food 
security is a  thus  central , cross -cutting  component that is relevant to any climate resilience intervention  
for both men and women. G iven women’s role in the production, d istribution, and provision of food to 
their communities and families, it is an opportunity ripe for gender -transformative actions . 
Land access  
Notwithstanding their central role in agriculture  and food security , women’s  access to and rights over 
productive  land remain limiting factors that contribute to gender gaps and poverty107. Women often 
 
98 Shadow Report (2011)  
99 Shadow Report (2011)  
100 Shadow Report (2011)  
101 Oxfam. (2012). PLANTING NOW: Revitalizing Agriculture for Reconstruction and Development in Haiti. Briefing Paper. 
Port -au-Prince, Haiti. Oxfam. Retrieved from https: //www.oxfam.org/en/research/planting -now -2nd-edition  
102 USAID (2016) – citing gardella, 2006  
103 Feed the future (2016) – check original reference, ALSO ref 54 from Shadow report – seems to be from World Bank 
(2010) data.worldbank.org  
104 shadow report (2011) – see if they refer to original data?  
105 Shadow report (2011) – see if they refer to original data?  
106 Republic of Haiti (2016) – UN report to HR Council  
107 MCFDF 2014. Politique d’égalité femmes hommes 2014 -2034


---
*Page 165*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 15 
  I 
face difficulties obtaining legal titles and do not often gain  equal land inheritance; as such, they rarely 
own land or tend farm  on land that belongs to their male relatives108,109. Exacerbated by climate 
extremes  and population growth , low -income families and women -led households are thus often 
relegated to farming on the most unproductive, infertile lands  for subsistence production , namely 
denuded, steep slop ing terrains110. 
Article 36 of Haiti’s Constitution recognizes and guarantees the right to private property. In practice, 
however, customary law governs rural land rights and use. Customary rights are less evident in urban 
areas (Smucker et al. 2000; Howard 199 8). 
Rural land ownership is generally governed by customary law and traditional practice as opposed to 
formal law. Land is largely individualized; rural communities in Haiti do not have a tradition of 
communal land management although land held by families  may remain undivided (Smucker et al. 
2000).  
Haiti’s formal laws pronounce principles of nondiscrimination. The 1987 Constitution (Article 18) 
mandates the equality of all Haitians. Women achieved equality under the law in 1982, when a decree 
was passed th at established the equality of the sexes, particularly within marriage (GOH Constitution 
1987; De Ferranti 2002).  
In practice, the formal law often does not impact the reality faced by Haitian women. A majority of 
couples in Haiti have common law marriages  that are not registered with the state. Common law 
marriage and cohabitation create insecurity for women because the law does not recognize their 
inheritance rights to their husbands’ land (De Ferranti 2002).  
Under both formal and customary law, all recog nized children have equal rights to the land owned by 
their deceased parents, although female heirs tend to receive smaller shares of land. Customary law 
favors the possessor of land. Heirs who remain on the land assume control of absentee shares and 
conso lidate adjoining shares, which can deprive daughters who have married outside of the community 
of their access to inherited land (Smucker et al. 2000; Gardella 2006).  
Married -out daughters usually lose their shares of land to relatives because unregulated customary 
practice restricts selling land to outsiders. Thus, they will not sell their inherited share and will not 
personally farm it. Instead, they give the land to a relative (Smucker et al. 2000).  
In general, women’s property rights derive from their s tatus as wives, mothers, or wards, and thus 
women often lose their land rights when their status within the household changes. The customary 
laws that are prevalent in rural areas exclude women from land ownership. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that the land  rights of women who are household heads are more secure than the rights of 
women in households headed by men (De Ferranti et al. 2002).  
Even though a woman doesn’t hold the title to property – it’s rare to find one who has a title. Women 
usually work the land that her husband owns. They  live with, supports, and collaborates with the 
[husband or father’s] family to make sure that they  and their children can eat, that the children can go 
to school, that they  can pay for their health needs, etc. 
Community and peasant groups need to make a strategic plan for what will be the priorities and 
objectives for merging women’s issues and land rights, and then launch a program that all the women’s 
organizations can par ticipate in.  There should be more training for women, and more support to 
augment their technical, political, social, and economic capacity.  What’s most important, 
consciousness -raising, training and action. It is necessary for community and peasant groups  to raise 
 
108 USAID (2016)  
109 Oxfam (2012)  
110 Feed the future (2016)


---
*Page 166*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 16 
  I 
women’s consciousness of these issues.  Unfortunately, r ural Haitian women face challenges in 
organizing around gender at several levels. First, women suffer from high levels of illiteracy and lack of 
education, so even when they’re in peasant org anizations, there are a lot of decisions in the women’s 
movement that they can’t make.  Second, women don’t have economic means in Haiti. They don’t have 
the resources to advocate for their rights or to address problems related to land.  
Forest resources  and charcoal production  
Haiti is infamously known as one of the most deforested areas in the world, with population growth, 
and growing demands for energy and arable land being commonly cited as direct drivers of extreme 
forest loss and degradation over the l ast century. While the FAO statistics of 2% - 4% forest cover are 
often used as a reference111,112, more rigorous, local land cover classifications show that forested area 
is between 19.5% - 32.4%, depending on the data and methods used113. This incites a re -evaluation of 
the predominant narrative about environmental degradation and the use of forest resources in the 
country. Of the forested areas, coffee and cacao plantations represent a large portion of this cover 
(50% in the case of coffee)114. 
The majority (over 90%) of Haitian households meet their energy needs by charcoal and firewood, as 
only about a third have access to electricity – primarily in urban areas115. In fact, about 10,000 sacs of 
charcoal are used a day116. Both men and women are actively involved in the production of charcoal, 
while women are the main traders and users of this wood -based energy source (for cooking and 
cleaning)117. As such, this is an issue of relevance to both gender and environmental management.  
With a stabl e national demand for charcoal, it is often a supplementary or primary source of revenue 
for poor rural families118. While charcoal production has long been painted as unsustainable, practices 
involving the cutting of fast growing trees such as cassia and a cacia  (that coppice and regrow within 4 
– 6 years) , are bringing into question this assertion that prevails across  green development 
narratives119. As such, interest is surging on how to integrate, rather than eliminate, charcoal 
production and use into programs and projects.  
With differentiated gender roles and responsibilities in the household and the economy, the  intended 
use and preferences  of forest resources are often distinct between men and women. For example, 
recent reforestation initiatives in Haiti lead by the CCAF found that men tended to favor tree species 
for charcoal production and construction, while women expressed preferences for f ruit trees and 
vegetable crops to integrate into home gardens120. In some regions of Haiti, there may also be  taboos 
around  the use, planting or cutting of certain tree species121. With the prevalence  of men in spiritual 
leadership positions122, the ir power a nd control over belief systems that shape  these  practices may  be 
particularly relevant, yet it  is a largely unexplored and overlooked aspect of climate resilience building 
endeavors and gender -mainstreaming  that involve reforestation efforts . Indeed, evaluation of previous 
reforestation attempts in Haiti indicate that interventions are most success ful when there is a strong 
 
111 FAO (2010) – FRA 
112 FAO (2015) – FRA 
113 Churches et al. (2014)  
114 CIAT (2011) – coffee value chains  
115 EMMUS (2012) – from USAID (2016)  
116 FAO (check référence from http://www.haitilibre.com/article -17656 -haiti -environnement -l-onu-appelle -haiti -aux-
bonnes -pratiques -environnementales -et-agricoles.html  
117 UNEP (2016) Charcoal report  
118 UNEP (2016) – charcoal report  
119 See: https://haitiliberte.co m/charcoal -is-not-the-cause -of-haitis -deforestation/  
120 Canada -UNDP (2017)  
121 See for example: Tarter (2015)  
122 USAID (2016) – gender assessment


---
*Page 167*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 17 
  I 
incentive for local populations to ensure the survival of seedlings and maintain tree -cover 123. 
Access to  productive land  
In Haiti, women make up a majority of the labor force in agriculture, contributing to all aspects of 
production and especially commercialization and trade124, yet ownership and rights over productive 
land resources is highly skewed by gender.  The national statistics are a testament to this, with only 9% 
property owners  in the  country being women, while 20% of women have joint -ownership of  a 
property125. Land tenure is regulated by a civil code (enacted in 1962), that requires tenure registration 
for all land, yet a third of parcels do not have a legally recognized title, while 19% of land ownership is 
de facto  declared by a sales receipt126, indicating that the land tenure situation is uncertain and fragile 
across many Haitian households.   
Most rural households (80%) have access to at least one hectare of land127, with climate change and 
soil degradation however, the productivity of land is declining. Fertile land may have decreased by as 
much as 70% since the 1970s128; in fact, estimates put loses of 10,000 to 15,000 fertile hectares per 
year due to erosion linked to a combination of land use practices and climate change129. 
Haiti has a partic ular and highly informal  land ownership  scheme  rooted in traditional family relations 
that are structured around the family patriarch, or “lakou”130, 131. Land is  typically passed through 
inheritance  and distributed among children , which has contributed to the fragmentation of land into 
smaller and smaller parcels over time. With each generation, the inheritance situation is re -evaluated, 
such that relationships to home and land may be impermanent and  unstable for families from one 
generation to the next132.  
For women  and girls , these tenure customs are a  serious  obstacle regarding their access to and securing 
their rights over productive land.  Although i nheritance is bilateral, with both daughters and  sons being 
included in the division of land and home s, daughters traditionally receive smaller inheritances133,134. 
Haitian marriage law recognizes  that both  men and women have equal  inheritance rights, yet women 
have little  legal and intuitional recourse to affirm these rights, as common law relationships and 
unofficial unions  are extremely common135. In the case of a dopted  children, those born of wedlock and 
“restaveks” ( child domestic workers, who ar e often young girls), th ey are not recognized in informal 
hereditary arrangements; moreover, they retain their original family names and consequently  have no 
legal rights  to inherited land136.  
For landless households, s harecropping is common, particularly under informal agreements of the “mèt 
té” system, whereby up to half of the agricultural production is collected by the property owner137, 
most of which are men . Moreover, t hese parcels  are often the most remote and degraded lands138,139. 
 
123 UNEP (2016) Charcoal report  
124 MCFDF   
125 UNFPA (2017)  
126 FAO (n.d.) – land rights database  
127 FAO (n.d.) – landrigh ts database  
128 USAID (2015) – ICTP report  
129 Arias, Brearly and Damais (2006)   
130 CIRAD (2016) – prob fonicer  
131 FAO (n.d.) – land rights database  
132 CIRAD (2016) – prob fonicer  
133 Gardella (2006) – from USAID (2016)  
134 Feed the future (2016) – landscape evaluation of USAID not oxfam.  
135 Feed the future (2016) – landscape evaluation of USAID not oxfam.  
136 FAO (n.d.) – land rights database  
137 FAO (n.d.) – land rights database  
138 FAO (n.d.) – land rights database  
139 Feed the fu ture (2016)


---
*Page 168*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 18 
  I 
Within Haitian polygamist practices – which account for up to one -third of unions140 – secondary wives 
do not have the same family status, yet men may still collect yields and thus revenue from their farms  
or gardens141. 
Overall, the  situation of tenure  rights and land access is especially precarious for women -led and poor , 
landless  farming households, and this  deeply interconnected to climate vulnerability. Being constrained  
to farm ing on small, unfertile plots and steep slopes, the  livelihood security and well -being of these 
marginalized families is especially at risk with the intensification of prolonged droughts , extreme 
tropical storms , and natural disasters142. In fact, conflict over increasingly s carce productive  resources 
has multiplied  in recent y ears143,144. Further land conflicts may emerge from natural disasters, as post -
earthquake inquires found that urban populations moved back to rural areas to farm or claim land145. 
Access to extension services and finances  
With the prevalence  of rural aid projects  from donors, NGOS and the private sector, agricultural 
extension services  are readily  available  in Haiti – although the portion of public extension services has  
diminished in the last decades146. According to a World Bank (2013)  study , both men and women are 
equally likely to receive agricultural extension services in certain regions of Haiti , although this is 
probably due to women’s higher demand and active seeking out these services, rather than an outcome 
of gender equal access147. More over,  the report found that there are fewer  positive outcomes of  
agricultural training among women -led households .  
In terms of credit,  the MCFDF highlights that eligibility criteria of microfinancing institutions create  
barriers for women to access suffic ient funds to  effectively implement agrarian projects  or transition to 
other economic sectors148,149. With women as key actor s in agricultural value chains, particularly the 
commercialization and sale of produce,  low access to credit is a missed opportunity to build their 
climate resilience and increase livelihood security.  
 
5. Gender -based Violence  (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment 
(SEAH)   
In Haiti, gender -based violence (GBV) is a pervasive problem, and current legal and ju diciary structures 
do not adequately address this vulnerability. It is a major obstacle for the empowerment of women and 
girls, as it reduces their ability to fully participate in the public and private spheres of life. One in three 
Haitian women aged 15 -49 has experienced physical and/or sexual violence, and the rate of intimate 
partner violence has risen since 2005150.  
Climate and natural disasters only increase the incidence, as violence and sexual assault in displaced 
persons and relief camps has been reported to be widespread 151,152. The World Bank summarizes 
that research indicates that women and girls are up to  14 times more likely to be harmed during a 
 
140 http://www.rebuildingrespectforwomen.org/haiti.html  
141 FAO (n.d.) – land rights database  
142 USAID (2016)  
143 USAID (2016)  
144 Shadow report (2011)  
145 Shadow report (2011)  
146 Feed the future (2016)  
147 The World Bank (2013 ) 
148 MCFDF 2014. Politique d’égalité femmes hommes 2014 -2034  
149 USAID (2016)  
150 EMMUS (2012)  
151 Shadow report (2011)  
152 HRW (2018) - https://www.hrw.org/world -report/2018/country -chapters/haiti


---
*Page 169*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 19 
  I 
disaster . For those who survive, climate -induced disasters can amplify gender inequalities, making them 
more vulnerable to GBV, even when life for others may go back to normal.  
Solidarite Fanm Ayisyèn (Haitian Women’s Solidarity – SOFA) – Haitian feminist organization of 
approximately 10,000 members nationwide, 80% of whom are peasant women – along with the Global 
Justice Clinic and the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti have also presented a compelling case 
on how land grabbing is a sour ce of violence against women and other human rights violations in th 3 
country.153  
A majority of GBV cases go unnoticed and unreported – as the most recent surveys indicate that 43.1% 
of women never told anyone, while  65% percent of women did not seek help of any kind154. When they 
do seek help, it is most commonly among family members and neighbors155, as official reporting 
accompanies a fear of revenge violence from abusers and the perception that official avenues are 
ineffective in terms156. Indeed, the prevalence of police violence targeting women and other 
marginalized groups is inevitably deters the denouncement of aggressors or making formal complaints 
regarding conflicts of any kind157.  Among cases of violence reported in 200 9 – 2011, th e majority were 
physical in nature (59.74%), followed by sexual violence (29.80%), while cases of psychological and 
economic violence constituted a minority (5.88% and 4.58% respectively)158. Although very few of these 
cases are investigated or prosecuted159. See data below from UN Women’s Global Database on Violence 
against Women:160 
 
Even when cases that are reported, justice for victims of GBV is hindered by the significant gender 
imbalance in Haiti’s  legal system. In 2016, there were only 32 women judges out of a total of 615161 and 
today the percentages remain about the same. Moreover, with women disproportionately represented 
among the population with low education and living in poverty, they generally have lower access to 
legal aid and justice sys tems162.  
 
153 https://chrgj.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/04/220331_SOFA_GJC_IJDH_Submission -to-Special -Rapporteur_ -
English.pdf   
154 EMMUS (2012)  
155 EMMUS (2012)  
156 USAID (2016)  
157 Republic of Haiti (2016) – UN report on HR commission  
158 FROM PFS GENDER ASSESSMENT: Kay Fanm and SOFA - which mainly receive abused women and girls - Gheskio and 
Médecins sans Frontières / MSF  France  
159 Shadow Report (2011)  
160 https://evaw -global -database.unwomen.org/en/countries/americas/haiti  
161 FROM THE PFS: the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, Legal Service, 2013, cited in" Diagnosis of gender 
inequalities" 2016 by UN Women  
162 Shadow Report (2011)


---
*Page 170*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 20 
  I 
Currently, there is no specific legislation to deal with domestic violence or sexual harassment, and while 
rape was criminalized just over a decade ago, alarmingly the law still does not recognize spousal rape 
as a crime. Although the Government h as made efforts to combat violence against women and girls, 
with the support of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) 
and other agencies, recent political crises and natural disasters have obstructed the effective refo rm 
and adoption of gender protective legislations 163,164. 
Considering this context of GBV in Haiti , there is a risk that any shifts in power balances that the 
project could cause and might exacerbate GBV, including sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment 
(SEAH), and therefore, the Project has identified t his as a moderate  risk ( Risk 08 – see Annex 6[a] – 
SESP; see also Annex 6[b] – ESMF, which includes a  preliminary SEAH risk assessment completed 
during the design phase and an initial list of mitigation measures) .  
 
It should be noted that during the ESIA, the Project will carry out in -depth SEAH risk assessment. The 
Project will then update the mitigatio n measures and include them in the ESMP, in order to prevent, 
mitigate and respond to these SEAH risks. The Project will adhere to UNDP’s as well as GCF’s policies 
for protection against Harassment, Sexual Harassment, Discrimination and abuse of Authority,  as well 
as special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.  UNDP will request that 
contractors, suppliers, and partners adhere to zero tolerance for SEAH conduct and commit to taking 
adequate action if faced with SEAH allegation s, in the absence of which, contractual arrangements 
can be terminated. Other mitigation measures will include, but not limited to:  
• Conducting training and sensitization sessions for project staff and the target population on SEAH 
issues in collaboration w ith the Ministry for Women's Affairs and Women's Rights.  
• Establish a separate Grievance Redress Mechanism that is survivor -centered to adequately 
respond to SEAH incidents.  
• Integrate the Ministry for Women's Affairs and Women's Rights.into the project's te chnical 
implementation committee  
• Encourage competent authorities to legally address SEAH -related issues.  
 
6. Legal, Policy  and Administrative Frameworks  for Protecting Women and 
Gender  Equality  
Several constitutions have succeeded each other and the first to establish a turning point for the 
situation of women was the 1950 Constitution, guaranteeing them the right to vote. The Constitution 
in force, adopted on 10 March 1987 by a Constituent Assembly, which was approved in a referendum 
on 29 March 1987 , as amended, unequivocally enshrines the principle of equality of men and women 
before the law and equal rights in the protection and enjoyment of human rights (articles 17, 18, 19, 
28, 32.1 and 32.6) .  
Thus, at the level of national legislation, the nume rous laws published between 1825 and 1826 
contained discriminatory provisions that were maintained until the 20th century: the Civil Code (27 
March 1825) and the Criminal Code (19 May 1826), inspired by the French Napoleonic Code, were 
amended much later, in 1982 and 2005, largely eliminating discriminatory aspects against women; on 
the other hand, the Code of Civil Procedure of 3 May 1825 and the Code of Criminal Instruction of 12 
April 1826 did not recognize the right of a married woman to take legal acti on. For the Commercial 
Code of 28 March 1826; (art. 4) a woman cannot have the status of trader without her husband's 
consent. Only the Labour Code of 1961 affirms the equality of the sexes in terms of access to 
 
163 HRW (2018). Accessed May, 2018; updated in 2018; available at: https://www.hrw.org/world -report/2018/country -
chapters/haiti  
164 USAID (2016)


---
*Page 171*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 21 
  I 
employment, salary and wages3. The principle  of a 30% quota for women in all decision -making 
positions in national life, particularly in the public services, was recognized in 2012 in the so -called 
amended version, in article 17 -1, of the 1987 Constitution.  
 
The Ministry of Women and Women's Rights (MCFDF)  is tasked with ensuring that signed 
agreements and conventions (domestic and international) are implemented, as part of its broader 
mission to guide the formulation, implementation, and enforcement of equitable public policies. 
Recently, the adopti on of the Gender Equality Bill as well as the implementation of the National Plan 
for Gender Equality and the National Plan for the Fight Against Gender Equality (2017), attests  to Haiti's 
continued efforts to protect  the rights of women165. The ministry’s operations are divided across four 
areas: Women's Rights Promotion Directorate (DPDDF), Gender Analysis Directorate (DPAG), the 
Directorate of Administrative Affairs (DAF), and Direction of coordination of the departmental offices.  
MCFDF representatives (or Gender Focal Points/  Point Focal genre ) are in place across ministries and 
state structures to coordinate and collaborate on women's rights and gender equality in the public 
sphere. Notably, a key function of this department is the prod uction of national gender analyses and 
awareness -raising and training activities. However, the MCFDF faces insufficient budget allocation, as 
well as limited human resources human resources and technical capacities to carry out its intended 
mission , while a lack of regulation for the functioning of this strategic institution means that it s level of 
authority and influence in orienting governance activities is weak166.   
 
The Office for the Fight against Violence Against Women  (Bureau de Lutte contre la Violence 
Faite aux Femmes ) created in  2014,  brings together three ministries  (Women ’s Rights , Health and 
Justice) was created. Its management is formalized according to a Protocol signed by the three 
ministries . The Office is a public service office offeri ng support and quality care to women and girls who 
are victims of specific violence and  ensuring  access to information and quick response to cases.  
 
Criminal  Code  – Under Haitian law, rape is classified as a crime and therefore it is subject to a 10 -
year statute of limitations. Rape is not considered as being a “crime de sang ”, meaning a crime which 
resulted in the death of a person or a political crime . The maximum pe nalty for rape in Haiti is a ten  
years prison sentence if the victim is an adult and 15 years maximum if the victim is a minor under the 
age of 15.  The Decree of 6 July 2005 modified article 278 of the Criminal Code regarding rape. The 
decree changed the c ategorization of rape from a crime against morals to a crime against the person. 
Whilst bringing some positive change, the decree did not properly address the issue of rape and sexual 
violence as it failed to accurately define the crime of rape and to list  its elements. Judges and 
prosecutors  are therefore required to resort to definitions of rape found outside of the code15 thus 
leading to an inconsistent application of the decree and a generally low level of predictability in how 
cases will be treated.  
Incorporating gender and gender -responsive  policy and planning is an essential part of effectively and 
strategically dealing with climate change impacts. Overall, Haiti’s mechanisms and reform plans for 
gender equality are based on a number of international agreements and conventions for women's 
rights. Several such instruments have been ratified in Haiti, including:  
● The Convention for the Suppression of Human Trafficking and Exploitation of the Prostitution 
of Others September 2, 1952  
 
165 Shadow report (2011)  
166 UNDP (2016) - Projet de Renforcement des capacités adaptatives des c ommunautés côtières aux changements 
climatiques en Haïti (ACC - PNUD/FEM/MDE)


---
*Page 172*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 22 
  I 
● the Convention on the political Rights of Women, July 31, 1957 (Please note that the Haitian 
woman has the right to vote since 1950)  
● the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination with regard to Women 
(CEDAW), 7 April 1981  
● the Convention on the fight against discrimination in the field of Education, October 15, 1984  
● the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights, 23 November 1990  
● the Convention on Children's rights, December 23, 1994  
● the Inter American Convention on the prevention, punishment and eradication of violence 
against Women, 3 April 1996  
Climate change governance and gender in Haiti  – There  are few links between Haiti’s climate 
change governance structures and the established frameworks for gender equality and women’s 
empowerment (i .e., MCFDF, National Gender Equality Policy)167. The National Adaptation Programme 
of Action (NAPA, 2006, revise d 2017) and the National Climate change policy (PNCC, 2017) – both 
aligned with the UNFCCC Paris Agreement – promise gender integration in all aspects of its 
implementation, however details on specific measures to address gender inequalities are lacking168. In 
the Second National Communication on Climate Change (DCNCC), gender considerations were taken 
into account in four priority areas linked to climate change adaptation: agriculture and food security, 
water resources management, disaster and ris k management, and health. The Direction des 
Changements Climatiques  in the Ministry of the Environment (MDE) is primarily responsible for national 
climate change strategies and ensuring the inclusion of gender its initiatives. This department 
participates in a Climate Change Consortium along with the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, 
and Ministry of Agriculture.  
A National Disaster Risk Reduction System  is in place, with coordination across 10 ministries, 
and a Disaster Risk Reduction Plan has been  developed. While change adaptation plans do  note  disaster 
risks as a priority area , there is limited coordination and information sharing among the two169. Day - to-
day disaster risk reduction activities are overseen by the Department of Civil Protection (DPC), which is 
managed by the Ministry of the Interior and Territorial Communities. Women are highly vulnerable to 
the livelihood  impacts of extreme climate events and natural disasters, while the high incidence of GBV 
in emergency shelters is a serious concern170. The Natio nal Contingency Plan (2015) for emergency 
planning  does give some consideration to  the specific vulnerabilities of women ( and other vulnerable 
groups such as people with disabilities), however the inclusion of women in planning committees is 
inconsistent  and weak  across all administrative levels171. Donor agencies are supporting the 
development of gender protection practices at t emporary emergency shelters and there are on-going 
capacity building and training activities to support gender -responsive disaster and emergency 
responses in the country172.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
167 USAID (2016)  
168 USAID 2016  
169 UNDP (2018) – NAP lessons  
170 Shadow report (2011)  
171 USAID (2016) -(check refs: 189, 190)  
172 USAID (2016)


---
*Page 173*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 23 
  I 
7. Project -specific design consideration resulting from the Gender Assessment  
Although Haiti faces challenges with respect to  its capacities and  resources for watershed governance  
and climate change adaptation and mitigation173,174, the country is attempting to make  advances  in 
improved and integrated water management  despi te significant setbacks related to recent natural 
disasters  and political corruption . There is a wide variety of support  from  donor agencies , foreign 
governments, international NGOs, and researchers  that aim to strengthen capacities and support Haiti 
in its commitment to building climate resilience and priori tizing gender equality within its policies and 
planning.   
The gender assessment  carried out highlights the complexities of gender relations in H aiti and identifies 
barriers to gender equality. The analysis is a foundation, supporting the identification of opportunities 
to improve gender -responsive approaches to management activities and risk reduction in the context 
of climate change adaptation.  
Building on this  analysis, the following  challenges  and opportunities  for gender -responsive integrated 
flood management  and development of green and grey infrastructure in the context of climate change 
adaptation in Haiti  are highlighted :  
I. Women are disproportionately vulnerable  to flooding and climate change , with impacts on  
their livelihoods, health and safety , and of unpaid labor  burdens : 
- A majority of women and women -led households depend on agriculture for their 
livelihoods  making them vulnerable to climate change and flooding. They tend  to 
produce some of the  most vulnerable crops and are more likely to face obstacles  of 
unproductive land and insecure land tenure.  
- Health risks associated to flooding and climate change are higher for women (especially 
pregnant and lactating) as well as other vulnerable populations (e.g., children and 
elderly). Women also undertake the primary care labour within the household, 
therefore, increased health burdens impact women’s existing time po verty.  
- Women face high risks of violence during  and in the aftermath of disasters: in rapid 
analyses  post the 2021 Eart hquake conducted by humanitarian organizations, for 
example – it was revealed that gender -based violence became a post -disaster crisis. 
70% of women and men surveyed said their fear of sexual violence had increased since 
the earthquake. 43% of community le aders and 75% of youth say GBV has increased 
since the earthquake. 70% of organizations say women and girls are most at risk of 
GBV.  
- Climate changes such as flooding or drought , place an additional burden of unpaid 
labor on women, as they are p rimarily res ponsible for family/community water 
use/provisioning . 
Through the Activity 1.1, that aims to capacitate farmer’s groups as well as women’s cooperatives 
and associations, specific gender -transformative sub -activities have been designed  to ensure the 
above challenges are addressed. Further, the food coupon distribution  (Activity 2.3) will also target 
vulnerable households, with a specific focus on women -headed, female -led, widow -headed households.   
 
 
 
173 Stoa (2017)  
174 UNDP (2018) – NAP  : lessons from Haiti


---
*Page 174*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 24 
  I 
II. There is an institutional and policy -making gender gap.  Gender equality is not fully addressed 
in Haiti’s climate change, disaster risk, and water resource management strategies or action 
plans ; as such,  measures to promote gender -responsive adaptations and mitigate gender 
specific impacts are lacking . Women  and women’s associations do not fully participate in 
policymaking and decisions related to water resource management, disaster risks, and climate 
change across all levels.  
Through the Activit ies 3.1 and 3.2 , this challenge will b e addressed. These activities  aims to improve 
Haiti’s Water Act, build national capacities, as well as catchment -level governance framework,  with 
a focus on  improved gender and social inclusions .  
 
8. Recommendations from Haiti’s  existing on Climate Resilien ce and Gender  
Projects and  Programmes  
 
Lessons Learnt  
Lessons learnt from previous programmes and projects in the country and elsewhere can be drawn 
upon to improve the transformative potential of integrated flood management and effective flood 
control through soil conservation in the Trois Rivières  region an d ensure equal participation and benefit 
sharing  among men and women.  
A recent cross -review of policies, institutions, and interventions in water resource governance across 
several countries conducted by UNDP (2017)175 found that gender -responsive approach es should:  
- Build strong collaboration with public water resources departments, ensuring that designing 
and installing water infrastructure and facilities are based on gender -responsive assessments   
- Increase the capacity of local government representatives  to ensure the effective participation 
and leadership of women in water management mechanisms   
- Support communities in upholding principles of gender equity when establishing water -user 
groups  
- Support local municipal authorities and communities to develop  and maintain social 
mechanisms for gender -equitable distribution of water resources   
- Ensure that partnerships with the private sector include a commitment to gender equality and 
women receive equal access to technical or management training, peer -to-peer  learning, and 
other resources.   
With respect to the agricultural sector and climate change resilience, UNDP (2016) recommends that 
gender -responsive initiatives176: 
- Close the gap in access to land: Eliminate discrimination under the law; Recognize the 
importance and power of customary land rights; Educate officials and evaluate them on gender 
targets; Educate women regarding land rights; Ensure that women’s voices are heard; Adjust 
bureaucratic procedures; Gather sex -disaggregated data for policy design an d monitoring  
- Closing the gap in rural labor markets: Target women’s multiple trade -offs; Reduce gender 
inequalities in human capital; Capitalize on public work programmes; Strengthen women’s 
 
175 Canada -UNDP (2017)  
176 UNDP (2016) – gender, climate change and food security training module 3


---
*Page 175*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 25 
  I 
rights and voice   
- Closing the financial services gap; Promote fi nancial literacy; Design products that meet the 
needs of women; Promote a women -friendly and empowering culture  Close the gap in social 
capital through women’s groups; Use technology and innovative delivery channels  
- Closing the technology gap; Develop tech nologies and environments that address women’s 
needs Improve extension services; Scale up farmer field schools  
With respect to the reforestation and agro -forestry systems in the context of climate change, IUNC 
(2008) recommended that gender -responsive ini tiatives177: 
- From the onset, ensure full participation and integration of women, from local communities  
and p romote systematic attention to the participation of women in forestry development in 
policies, strategies and capacity -building efforts related to t he conservation and sustainable 
development of forests and trees and their use.   
- Programmes should promote equal access of women to land ownership and other resources 
necessary for effective socio -economic participation in forest management and climate 
mitigation strategies (e.g., land, capital, technical assistance, technology, tools,  equipment, 
markets and time).  
- Both women and men must be trained in methods and forestry technologies, including nursery 
techniques, site selection, and selection of species, land preparation, planting, weeding, and 
maintenance.  
Project Design and Imple mentation  
Gender benefits through this Project have been optimized by promoting the full involvement of women 
in decision -making regarding integrated flood management at the community and institutional levels, 
as well as the stewards of agroforestry system s, playing key roles in the selection of species and 
transformation of products . In addition, as during the design of the project, during implementation, 
strong efforts will continue to be  made , in order to ensure the equitable  participation of women. 
Addi tionally, going forward beyond the implementation phase, equ al participation of women will  be 
pursued and achieved in ongoing management and water governance especially on the Water 
Governance Committees.  
Addressing gender dimensions within the project de sign and implementation, this proposal works to 
identify and integrate interventions to provide gender responsive and transformative results . 
The project design and implementation will take  into consideration the following gender implications:  
 
• Specific strategies to include / target female -headed households ; 
• Differing conservation incenti ves faced by women ; 
• Identification of gaps in gender equality through the use of sex -disaggregated data enabling 
development of a gender action plan to close those gaps, devoting resources and expertise for 
implementing such strategies, monitoring the results of implementation, and holding 
individuals and institutions accountable for outcomes that promote ge nder equality.  
• Advocacy and awareness  is adjusted to most effectively reflect gender -specific differences. 
Strategies used in the project are then tailored, taking into account such difference s; 
• Inclusion of a Gender Specialist position  / provision of advice within the project to implement 
gender related activities.  
 
 
177 IUNC (2008) – Reforestation, afforestation, deforestation, climate change and gender


---
*Page 176*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 26 
  I 
During project implementat ion, qualitative assessments will  be conducted on the gender -specific 
benefits that can be directly asso ciated to the project.  This will  be incorporated in the annual Project 
Implementation Report, Mid -Term Report, and Terminal Evaluation. Indicators to quantify the 
achievement of projec t objectives in  relation to gender equality will  include men and women who had 
access to affordable solutions , number of men and women employed from the jobs created by the 
project, training opportunities, knowledge management and information dissemination . 
 
Stakeholder engagement  
The stakeholder consultations and engagement of women’s organizations promote gender equality at 
the local as well as the national level. The involvement of women’s o rganizations in the project  design , 
aided in identifying relevan t gender issues within the country’s social context, and implementing and 
monitoring the gender aspects of the project.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation  
Through onset analysis, data will be  collected and collated in the project’s inception phase to 
establish a baseline. This data shall be monitored against throughou t implementation and evaluation . 
In order to monitor  and evaluate progress of the project, the following indicators can be measured:  
 
Quantitative outco mes:  
• Female -headed households  as beneficiaries;  
• Improvements in health and well -being;  
• Improved livelihoods ; 
• Business development services component targeting rural women entrepreneur groups.  
 
Qualitative outcomes:  
• Opportunities to generate additional income. Women are more likely to respond to incentives 
that address their family’s basic needs, such as better health and nutrition  
• Time -saving for women as a result of lower hours in labour required for agricultural an d water 
management practices prior to the implementation of the project;  
• Contribution to improved self -esteem and empowerment of women in the community;  
• Expanded involvement in public and project decision -making as a result of initiation of women 
into acti ve participation in income generating activities;  
• Support for training and educational activities which may include activities related to climate 
change, agriculture, leadership, business, finance, entrepreneurship and decision -making, 
thereby enabling emp owerment and involvement (or increased involvement) of women to 
participate with c onfidence in community meetings;  
• Effectiveness of awareness  raising .


---
*Page 177*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 27 
  I 
9. Gender Action Pla n (GAP)  
 
This Gender Action plan provides suggested entry points for gender -responsive actions to be taken under each of the Activity areas of the project , based on 
the Logical Framework of the Project (Section E – full Funding Proposal) .  In addition, specific indicators are also proposed to measure and track progress on 
these actions at the activity level.  This can be incorporated into the detailed M&E p lan which will be developed at the start of implementation, and provides 
concrete recommendations on how to ensure gender (including disaggregated data) continues to be collected and measured throug hout implementation.  
 
UNDP – as the Accredited Entity – will be responsible for the implementation of this GAP, and the responsible parties column (see below) lays down the 
architecture at the activity -level.  A Gender and Safeguards Expert  will be part of the Project Management Unit (PMU) with the remit to deli ver the GAP, in 
collaboration with Heifer International, which is the Executing Entity for Outcome 2. Gender technical expertise and assistance may be sought on an ad -hoc 
basis to supplement the available skill set and experience on the PMU – this has been mentioned (indicative)  where necessary in the Action Plan below.   
 
The expected impact of this GAP is: Increased resilience to climate change of vulnerable communities, includi ng women and girls; gender -equitable 
participation in territorial planning and household food and water security for increased climate change resilience.  
The expected outcome of this GAP is: Improved capacities for an estimated 87,780 -146,300  women/ 30 -50% of project direct beneficiaries for sustainable 
water and land management as a means to enhance their resilience to climate change .  
 
 
OUT PUT 1: Ecosystem -based flood management solutions implemented in 25,440 hectares of the Trois -Rivières watershed  
ACTIVITY 1.1: Strengthen the capacity of community groups, including farmer and women’s associations, for climate -resilient land -use planning in seven target communes in the 
Trois -Rivières watershed  solutions  
SUB -ACTIVITIES  
 
There is a mention of 
additional/follow -up 
gender assessments in the 
previous section, where is  
this reflected in this GAP?  GENDER MAINSTREAMING 
OPPORTUNITY  INDICATORS  BASELINE  TARGET  M&E 
TIMELINE  REPONSIBLE 
PARTIES AND 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION  GENDER TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE AND 
BUDGET  (in USD)  
1.1.1 Develop 33 
community land -
use plans.  Under this activity, community 
members and farmer and 
women’s associations in 33 Gender -inclusive 
stipulations in the 0 33 community land -
use plans  Annual 
document 
review (33 PMU (Project 
Manager and 
Gender Expert)


---
*Page 178*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 28 
  I 
 
 communal sections within the 7 
target communes in the TR 
watershed (Port -de-Paix, 
Chansolme, Bassin Bleu, 
Plaisance, Pilate, Marmelade, 
Gros Morne) will be trained on 
climate -resilient land -use 
management.  
Through this activity, the Project 
will develop  land -use plans , co-
developed with communities, 
and include clear delineation of 
roles and responsibilities, and 
ensure women’s concerns and 
needs are mainstreamed into 
these pl ans.  land -use plans178 
(qualitative 
indicator)  land use 
plans 
expected 
by Y5)   
Community land use 
plans developed 
through the project  Total: 220,050179 
 
 
  
 
 
1.1.2 Train 
communities, 
farmer and 
women’s 
associations in 
the seven target 
communes on the 
application of the 
community land -
use plans and 
implementation 
of climate -Through this Activity, 
communities within the 33 sub 
communes w ill be reached by 
these plans and the associated 
training. The training will be in a 
ToT format to ensure continuity 
and sustainability of these 
investments.  
The Project will  include gender 
modules / sensitization modules 
(where relevant) in this Activity 
to ensure that groundwork for # of women and 
men trainers with 
improved 
understanding of 
climate resilience 
and the role of 
communities in 
reforestation  
 0 50% trainers trained 
(ToT) are women,  
 
14,153 farmers 
trained are women 
(accounting for all 
associated farmers 
that are women 
identified within 
target area per 2008 
Agricultural Census)  Annual 
review  PMU  
 
Heifer  
 
Training 
participation 
logs/records and 
training reports  
 
 
 
178 UNDP has extensive experience and expertise and delivering projects and programmes around LUPs, as well as developed guidance  on integrated spatial planning. Please review: 
file:///Users/deby1605/Downloads/UNDP -GEF-Integrated -Spatial -Planning -Workbook.pdf   
179 Accounts for 1 community mobilizer per BN 1B (84,000), 30% of the time of the KM Officer in the design of the worksho ps (25,200) per BN 1B, 30% of the internal travel costs for the delivery 
of the campaigns per BN 1C, 20% of stationary costs for the delivery of the campaigns per BN 1 D (15,400), 40,000 for the wor kshops dedicated to ensuring gender participation in the 
awareness  per BN 1I, , 25,200 for the awareness campaign with a gender focus BN 1H, 30% of the time of the ME officer who wil l monitor the effectiveness of these campaigns (25,200) per BN 
1ME1


---
*Page 179*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 29 
  I 
resilient land -use 
practices.  
 increased women’s participation 
is accepted and driven forward 
by communities.  
1.1.3 Conduct one 
awareness 
campaign in each 
of the seven 
target communes 
in Haiti.  
 To support these capacity -
building initiatives, awareness -
raising campaigns will be 
designed and implemented in the 
seven target communes through 
city hall meetings and community 
radio broadcasts.  
 
The Project will encourage 
equitable participation of men  
and women in these campaigns, 
as well as target  men and 
women  equitably through these 
campaigns.  # of female and 
male participants, 
per awareness 
campaign  
 
 0 7 communes, with 
equitable 
participation (50% 
male and 50% 
female) in each  Annual 
review  PMU  
 
Heifer  
 
Minutes (Official 
Summaries) of City 
Hall Meetings  
 
Radio campaigns  
 
Participation lists   
 
  
ACTIVITY 1. 2: Implement ecosystem -based flood management solutions in the Trois -Rivières watershed


---
*Page 180*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 30 
  I 
1.2.1  Establish 17,740 
ha of 
agroforestry 
systems in 
priority areas the 
TR watershed, 
including: i) 
agrisilvicultural 
systems — which 
are a 
combination of 
crops and trees, 
such as alley 
cropping; ii) 
silvopastoral 
systems — which 
combine forestry 
and grazing of 
domesticated 
animals; and iii) 
agrosilvopastora l 
systems that 
combine trees, 
crops and 
animals.  This sub -activity will focus on 
reducing the impacts of climate 
change -induced flooding in the 
TR catchment and Port -de-Paix. 
This will be achieved by 
implementing 17,740 ha of 
agroforestry systems.  
 
This is the ecosystem -based 
investment, which form the 
continuum of actions that the 
Project will invest in, and 
therefore, gender -sensitive.  # of direct 
beneficiaries, 
disaggregated by 
male and female  0 At most 7 0% male 
and at least 3 0% 
female participation , 
prioritizing the 
participation of 
women farmers that 
account for 14,153 of 
the 54,714 total 
associated farmers in 
the region  Annually  PMU  
 
Heifer  
 
Agroforestry logs 
and project 
participation logs  2,731,840180 
 
1.2.2  Restore 7,700 ha 
of forests in 
priority areas the 
TR watershed 
through planting 
indigenous tree 
species in This sub -activity will focus on 
rehabilitating 7,700 ha of forests 
in priority areas in the watershed.  
 
This is the ecos ystem -based 
investment, which form the 
continuum of actions that the # of participants in 
conservation/restor
ation activities, 
disaggregated by 
gender  0 At most 70% male 
and at least 30% 
female participation, 
prioritizing the 
participation of 
women farmers that 
account for 14,153 of Annually  
 PMU  
 
Heifer  
 
Project logs and 
participation lists  
 
180 Accounts for the 15% work dedicated to ensure that women are well benefitted  within the EBA interventions, including targeting, support in the establishing of these plots per BN 1O and 
30% of the time of the ME specialist  per 1ME2 to ensure that the gender target is well monitored and the strategy is adjuste d accor dingly


---
*Page 181*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 31 
  I 
degraded areas 
within the seven 
target 
communes.  Project will invest in, and 
therefore, gender -sensitive.   the 54,714 total 
associated farmers in 
the region  
1.2.3  Hold 8 
engagement 
workshops with 
community 
leaders, farmer 
and women’s 
associations to 
facilitate the 
implementation 
of Sub -activities 
1.1.2 and 1.1.3.  This sub -activity will be 
conducted in tandem with 1.1.2 
and 1.1.3.  
 
These engagement workshops 
will complement the awareness 
and traini ng components of the 
previous activity, and ensure 
that women’s associations, 
community groups and other 
farmer associations are 
adequately engaged and their 
stakeholder buy -in is ensured for 
the proposed interventions of 
the Project.  # of female and 
male  participants, 
per engagement 
campaign  0 7 communes, with 
equitable 
participation (50% 
male and 50% 
female) in each  Annually  PMU  
 
Participation lists  
 
 
OUT PUT  2: Climate -resilient agricultural practices, optimised value chains and social safety nets established to promote SLM and reduce degradation in the Trois -Rivières 
watershed  
ACTIVITY 2.1: Strengthen institutional capacity at the commune, inter -commune and department levels in Haiti’s Trois -Rivières watershed for productive and sustainable 
land -use management  
SUB -ACTIVITIES  GENDER MAINSTREAMING 
OPPORTUNITY  INDICATORS  BASELINE  TARGET  M&E 
TIMELINE  REPONSIBLE 
PARTIES AND 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION  GENDER TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE AND 
BUDGET  (in USD)  
2.1.1 Conduct capacity 
gap/needs Under this broader activity and 
through the sub -activity, a Inclusion of gender 
questions/conc erns 0 Capacity gap/needs 
assessments are Year 2 of 
the project Heifer  
 159,865181 
 
181 30% of the time by the project staff to ensure gender monitoring and targeting per BN CoF2 , 50% of the training and workshop for farmers and audiovisual materials that will include 
targeting for women farmers


---
*Page 182*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 32 
  I 
assessments for the 
agricultural sector in 
seven priority 
communes in the TR 
region.  
 capacity needs assessment will 
be conducted for the agricultural 
sector to identify the technical 
and institutional requirements 
for transitioning the sector from 
unsustainable land -use practices 
towards a sustainable landscape 
management (SLM) approach to 
land and water resources 
management that is climate 
resilient.  
 
Gender considerations and 
further analysis will be 
mainstreamed into the 
assessment structure.  in assessment 
structure 
(qualitative 
indicator)  conducted with 
gender assessments 
mainstreamed into 
the overall structure.  and 
annually 
verified to 
ensure 
maintream
ing within 
the 
implement
ation  Capacity gaps 
assessment 
(document review)  
 
Meeting minutes 
and summary of 
socialization of the 
capacity assessment 
as well as of the 
meetings held 
within its 
development  
 
Meeting/ workshop 
participation list   
2.1.2 Establish communal 
development 
councils and multi -
sectoral 
management 
structures to oversee 
and manage the 
implementation of 
interventions 
designed to address 
priority areas 
identified in Sub -
activity.  
 
 Through this sub -activity, the 
project will also establish multi -
sectoral governance structures 
will be established to oversee and 
manage the implementation of 
interventions designed to address 
priority areas identified under the 
capacity needs assessment  
conducted in the previous sub -
activity .  
 
Women’s leadership will be 
strongly encouraged in these 
institutions. The target will be  
50% both in leadership, and also 
in participation.  
 # of women (in 
ratio to men) 
participating in 
communal 
development 
councils  
# of women (in 
ratio to men) 
participating at CDC 
and FSN meetings  
 0 50% of councils led 
by women,  
50% of all 
participants / 
trainees are women 
(prioritizing women -
headed households)  Annually  Heifer  
 
Statutes of the 
Communal 
Development 
councils or similar 
origination 
documents that 
specify leadership 
positions  
 
Participation lists of 
FSN meetings


---
*Page 183*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 33 
  I 
to reflect realities of Haitian 
society, where women may be 
too time -poor or may not always 
be able to ascent traditional and 
faith -based norms to participate 
fully.  
2.1.3 Train 
representatives from 
appropriate 
government entities, 
including MARNDR , 
NCFS and MSAL, on 
the implementation 
of climate -resilient 
agricultural 
techniques and SLM.  Through this sub -activity, 
representatives will be trained 
from across different governance 
levels to ensure implementation 
of climate -resilient agricultural 
techniques and SLM are done 
successfully, with the requisite 
institutional and capacity -
building.  
 
Modules on gender will be made 
part of the curricula to ensure 
there is buy -in on gender -
responsive climate -resilient 
agricultural techniques and SLM.  # of representatives 
trained, gender 
disaggregated  0 50% of all 
participants / 
trainees are women 
(prioritizing women -
headed households)  Annually  Heifer  
 
Participation lists of 
trainings  
 
ACTIVITY 2.2: Enhance the technical capacity and access to finance of national and local representatives involved in agriculture in the Trois -Rivières watershed for adopting 
climate -resilient sustainable land -use practices  
2.2.1.   Strengthen the 
technical capacity 
of farmers and 
communities in the 
seven target 
communes to This broader  Activity will increase 
the technical capacity of farmers 
to implement climate -resilient 
agricultural techniques and land -
use practices, using the findings 
from the capacity needs # of trainer of 
trainers  trained, 
disaggregated by 
gender  0 50% trainers trained 
(ToT) are women 
thus allowing to 
empower t he existing 
under representation 
of women in farming  Heifer  
 
Participation records 
and logs  585,000182 
 
 
182 10% of the work regarding the capacity and social capital development to ensure gender is well reflected within the capacity gaps, 315,00 for gen der and capacity building initiatives, 20,000 
for trainings for women related to the strengthening of the fina nce mechanisms , 20,00 for trainings on community awareness  per CoF3


---
*Page 184*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 34 
  I 
implement 
climate -resilient 
agricultural 
practices and SLM.  
 
 assessments being conducted 
under Activity 2.1.1.  
 
Trainings conducted under  this 
sub-activity will be gender -
responsive and target vulnerable 
farming communities – as well as 
marginalised groups within them 
such as women agricultural 
worker s. In general, in many of 
these communes, women are 
heavily involved in each part of 
the agricultural processes and 
value chains.  associations 
(currently identified 
at 30%, from the 
stakeholder 
consultations )  
 
2.2.2.  Provide climate -
resilient 
agricultural inputs 
(e.g. climate -
resilient seeds and 
infrastructure 
upgrades) to 
households in the 
TR watershed.   
 
 These interventions will be 
supported by the provision of 
climate -resilient agricultural 
inputs (e.g. climate -resilient seed 
varieties) to vulnerable 
households that depend on 
subsistence agriculture for their 
livelihoods.  
 
Inputs provided through this 
sub-activity will be equitably 
distributed, in line with the 
findings of the gap assessments 
conducted in the previous 
Activity , and in proportion to the 
farmers identified in the region.  
 # of direct 
beneficiaries, 
disaggregated by 
gender  0 At most 70% male 
and at least 30% 
female, considering 
that identified 
associated women 
farmers currently 
only account for 
14,153 of the 54,714 
total associated 
farmers in the region  Annually  Heifer  
 
Project logs 
regarding the usage 
and access of the 
input s provided  
 
Site visits


---
*Page 185*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 35 
  I 
2.2.3.  Enhance access to 
finance for 
smallholder 
farmers through 
the VSCA.  Actions (feasibility and risk 
analysis) to promote the creation 
of community finance 
associations to enhance access 
and mobilize savings to be used 
for investment in the capital 
goods required for the and 
implementation of sustainable, 
climate -resilient ag ricultural 
practices.    
 
The Project will aim to include 
women in the project -supported 
savings groups, by ensuring 
requisite mechanisms and 
conducive environments to 
ensure favourable lending 
conditions, in light of the 
assessment findings that women 
may  lack access to 
collateral/with limited financial 
literacy.   Number of 
feasibility and risk 
analysis developed 
to enable VSCAs 
that look to 
promote the access 
of women into the 
project supported 
saving groups   0 100% of 
risk/feasibility/scopin
g analysis developed 
by the project take 
into account how to 
promote women’s 
access and 
participation within 
savings groups   
 
60% of village agents 
will be women  Annually  Heifer  
 
Document review of 
the risk/ feasibility/s 
coping analysis 
developed under 
this activity  
 
ACTIVITY 2.3: Implement a social protection system to support vulnerable households at risk to food insecurity because of cli mate change  
2.3.1.  Conduct a site 
survey/assessment 
to determine 
eligible households 
to receive food 
coupons  to be 
developed under 
Sub-activity 2.3.2  
 This sub -activity  will provide the 
required immediate relief to 
vulnerable people affected by 
climate induced flooding events , 
concomitantly reducing further 
pressure on the environment by 
providing an alternative option to 
resorting to unsustainable 
charcoal production.  Inclusion of gender 
questions/concerns 
in assessment 
structure 
(qualitative 
indicator)  0 Capacity gap/needs 
assessments are 
conduc ted with 
gender assessments 
mainstreamed into 
the overall structure.  Y2 and Y3 
of the 
project 
(when the 
assessmen
t is 
expected 
to take 
place and Heifer  
 
Document review of 
the Capacity 
gap/needs 
assessments  200,000


---
*Page 186*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 36 
  I 
 
 
 
 This s ub-activity will conduct the 
requisite site surveys and 
assessments to pinpoint the 
households. To determine eligible 
households for these coupons , 
vulnerable households will be 
identified through a site survey 
and/or assessment, with their 
details capture d in a database for 
future reference.  
 
Gender considerations will be 
mainstreamed into the 
assessment structure. Increased 
spotlight will be on female -
headed or widow -headed 
households, which may not be 
performing at the level of male -
headed households – the 
scoping  exercise  for the food 
coupons  will isolate and identify 
the most vulnerable and in -
neeed households.  is 
completed
) 
2.3.2.  Establish and 
operationalise a 
food coupons 
mechanism  in the 
TR watershed.  
 Food coupons will be distributed 
through this sub -activity, 
targeting vulnerable and 
marginalized households  
prioritizing those that are 
headed by women  (female -
headed households, widow -
headed households) .  # of households, 
disaggregated by 
household head 
gender (ie. # of 
MHHs and # of 
FHHs )  
 
# of direct 
beneficiaries, 
gender 
disaggregated  0 At least 60% of 
households 
prioritized are 
headed by women  
 Annually 
starting Y3  Heifer  
 
Beneficiary 
monitoring system


---
*Page 187*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 37 
  I 
2.3.3.  Engage and train 
934 households  on 
the implementation 
of the food coupons 
mechanism  
established under 
Sub-activity 2.3.2.   
 A total of 934 households  will be 
selected to participate in the 
operation of the food coupons 
mechanism.   
Participating households  will 
receive training on inter alia  
hygiene, modalities of exchange 
and personal security.  There will 
be focus on capacitating women -
headed household s. 
 # of households  in 
the food coupon 
mechanism, 
disaggregated by 
gender   At least 561  women 
headed households  Annually 
starting Y3  Heifer  
 
Participation longs  
2.3.4.  Create 150 new 
VSCAs in the TR 
watershed to 
enhance the food 
security of 
vulnerable 
households.  
 To support the efficient and 
effective implementation of the 
food coupons mechanism , 
existing VSCAs will receive 
operational improvements under 
this a ctivity, supplemented by the 
creation of 150 new VSCAs in the 
TR watershed.  - No gender -specific indicator required  however participation of women in the VSCAs 
will ensured through a favorable enabling environment and will also be monitored by 
the project  
2.3.5.  Establish a network 
of village agents to 
monitor existing 
VSCAs and 
establish new 
ones, as well as to 
monitor market 
performance 
contributing to 
food coupons 
mechanisms.  
 To ensure that this system 
remains operational throughout 
the lifetime of the  project, a 
network of village agents will be 
established, with their primary 
responsibilities being  the 
monitoring of existing VSCAs and 
creation of new ones  - No gender -specific indicator required however participation of women in the VSCAs 
will ensured through a favorable enabling environment and will also be monitored by 
the project


---
*Page 188*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 38 
  I 
OUT PUT  3: Strengthened governance and capacity for climate -resilient integrated water resources management (IWRM)  
ACTIVITY 3.1: Strengthen national capacities for the implementation of the Water Act  
SUB -ACTIVITIES  GENDER MAINSTREAMING 
OPPORTUNITY  INDICATORS  BASELINE  TARGET  M&E 
TIMELINE  REPONSIBLE 
PARTIES AND 
MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION  GENDER TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE AND 
BUDGET  (in USD)  
3.1.1.  Draft provisions to 
Haiti’s Water Act 
for the adoption of 
an integrated 
approach to water 
resources 
management and 
implement the act 
in the TR 
watershed.  
 
 
 Under Activity 3.1, provisions will 
be drafted to the Water Act to 
ensure that it promotes an 
integrated approach to water 
resources management, including 
considerations for the coordinated 
development of water, land and 
related resources. This will 
contribute towards: i) maximising 
economic and social welfare in an 
equitable manner without 
comprom ising the sustainability of 
vital ecosystems under future 
climate change conditions; and ii) 
facilitating efficient, integrated 
adaptation responses to the 
impacts of climate change in Haiti.  
The provisions will include gender -
transformative and gender -
responsive stipulations, to ensure 
water governance in Haiti 
incorporates gender and social 
inclusion -related clauses at the 
policy level. As evinced in the Inclusion of 
gender 
questions/concer
ns in assessment 
structure 
(qualitative 
indicator)  0 1 Water Act prepared 
for adoption  Annually  PMU  
 
Text of the Draft 
Water Act presented  135,200183 
 
 
 
183 10% of effort dedicated to including gender considerations within ESMP and ESIA per BN 3A, 30% of the efforts of the policy specialist to ensure inclusion of women within the draft water act 
provisions and IWRM  per 3C


---
*Page 189*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 39 
  I 
assessment, climate and 
environmental governance in Haiti 
does not adequately address 
gender concerns yet.  
3.1.2.  Establish 
Catchment IWRM 
Committees 
(Committes de GIRE 
des Bassins 
Versants, CGBVs ) 
within each of the 
31 catchments in 
Haiti, as per the 
provisions drafted 
in Sub -activity 3.1.1.  
 IWRM Committees will be designed 
to increase women’s leadership, 
and ensure women’s equitable 
participation.  The target is being 
kept at 30% to reflect realities of 
Haitian society, where women may 
be too time -poor or may not 
always be able to ascent trad itional 
and faith -based norms to 
participate fully.  # of women 
participating in 
communal 
development 
councils  
# of women 
participating at 
CDC and FSN 
meetings  
 0 30% of  committees  
led by women,  
50% of all 
participants / 
trainees are women 
(prioritizing women -
headed households)  Annually  PMU  
 
UNDP (Project 
Support)  
 
Statutes of Creation 
of the Committees  
 
Published 
Committee 
Agreements  
Participation log 
included within 
meeting minutes  
3.1.3. Establish Sub -
Catchment Water 
Resource Users 
Associations 
(Associations 
d'Usagers des 
Ressources en Eau du 
Sous -bassin versant; 
AssURES) within the 
sub-catchments of 
the 31 catchments in 
Haiti, as per the 
provisions drafted in 
Sub-activity 3.1.1 . Sub-Catchment Water Resource 
Users Associations will be designed 
to increase women’s leadership, 
and ensure women’s equitable 
participation.  The target is being 
kept at 30% to reflect realities of 
Haitian society, where women may 
be too time -poor or may not 
always be able to ascent traditi onal 
and faith -based norms to 
participate fully.  # of 
representatives 
trained, gender 
disaggregated  0 30% of associations  
led by women,  
50% of all 
participants / 
trainees are women 
(prioritizing women -
headed households)  Annually  PMU  
 
UNDP (Project 
Support)  
 
Statutes of Creation 
of the Committees  
 
Published 
Committee 
Agreements  
Participation log 
included within 
meeting minutes


---
*Page 190*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 40 
  I 
Activity 3.2 : Develop an integrated, climate -resilient water management governance framework targeting the catchment and sub -catchment levels in the Trois -Rivières 
watershed  
3.2.1.  Establish the 
Catchment Water 
Resources 
Management 
Committee 
(CWRMC) to 
manage water 
resources in the TR 
watershed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Under this activity, an inclusive and 
equitable water management 
governance framework will be 
developed for the TR catchment, 
namely the Catchment Water 
Resources Management 
Committee (CWRMC). This 
committee will work with 
representatives from productive 
sectors (e.g. agriculture), land users 
at sub -catchment level and Sub -
Catchment Water Resources User 
Associations (SCWRUAs) to achieve 
two main goals.  
 
Increased women’s leadership will 
be encouraged in the Committee, 
as well as gender parity in 
participat ion of members.   # of participants, 
disaggregated by 
gender  0 50% of all 
participants / 
trainees are women  Annually  PMU  
 
UNDP (Project 
Support)  
 
Statutes of Creation 
of the Committees  
 
Published 
Committee 
Agreements  
Participation log 
included within 
meeting minutes  443,124184 
 
 
3.2.2.  Develop climate -
resilient IWRM 
plans for end users 
at the sub -
catchment and 
catchment levels in 
a participatory, 
gender -responsive 
way with The IWRM plans will define roles 
and responsibilities of institutions 
and civil society stakeholders for 
water resources management 
(complementary to the 
decentralised management of 
water resources to be established 
in the Water Act under Activity 
3.1).  Inclusion of 
gender 
questions/concer
ns in IWRM plans 
(qualitative 
indicator)  0 31 IWRM plans  Annually  PMU  
 
UNDP (Project 
Support)  
 
IWRAM Plans 
(document review)  
 
184 30% of the time allocated to the IWRM adviser to provide gender considerations in the IWRM plans and ensuring participation within the committees  (87,477) per 3I, salary of the gender 
specialist per 3I (185,247), 82,2 00 travel costs for gener monitoring travel per 3J, 72,200 per workshops focused on women per 3M, 30% of stationary and audio visual costs per 3K and 3L for 
use in the delivery of the workshops towards women (16,000).


---
*Page 191*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 41 
  I 
representatives 
from CWRMC and 
productive sectors 
(e.g. agriculture), 
land users and Sub -
Catchment Water 
Resources User 
Associations 
(SCWRUAs).  
 This will also include stipulations 
on increased women’s 
participation and leadership, with 
the aim to making a business case 
of how gender -responsive IWRM 
yields improved results. Lessons 
learnt and best practices for other 
contexts ( https://cap -
net.org/genderiwrm/ ; 
https://www.fsnnetwork.org/reso
urce/why -gender -matters -iwrm -
tutor ial-water -managers ) may be 
brought in and tailored.  
3.2.3.  Promote a climate -
resilient, integrated 
landscape 
management 
approach in the TR 
watershed that  
considers gender 
dynamics, using the 
community land -
use plans (Activity 
1.1).  
 - As above.  
3.2.4.  Train the CWRMC 
(established under 
Sub-activity 3.2.1) 
and representatives  
from productive 
sectors (e.g. 
agriculture), land 
users and Sub -
Catchment Water Training on the climate -resilient 
IWRM plans will also be delivered 
focusing on the application of 
these plans in decision -making. The 
combined result of these actions 
will be the establishment and 
operation of an integrated 
governance fram ework that will 
contribute to preserving climate -Inclusion of 
gender modules 
(qualitative 
indicator)  0 Gender module 
included in the 
training provided to 
all of the 31 Sub -
Catchment Water 
Resource Users 
Associations  Annually  PMU  
 
Gender modules 
developed  
 
Training plans  
 
Training reports


---
*Page 192*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 42 
  I 
Resources User 
Associations 
(SCWRUAs) on the 
application of 
climate -resilient 
IWRM plans in 
decision making.  resilient, sustainable land and 
water resources management 
beyond the lifetime of the project.  
  
During the implementation of 
Activity 3.2, considerable efforts 
will be made to securing equitable 
representation, participation and 
leadership of women. To that end, 
training will also contain modules 
/ informally highlight (in the 
context of traditional 
communities/stakeholders) the 
importance of women’s incr eased 
leadership roles and participation 
in water governance bodies at 
local and sub -local levels.  
 
Activity 3.3:  Implement regular monitoring and evaluation of water resources at the catchment and sub -catchment levels to support the implementation of integrated 
water resources management (IWRM) plans  
3.3.1.  Commission an 
expert to undertake 
the health 
monitoring and 
impact evaluations 
of the EbA flood 
management 
solutions (Activity 
1.2), supported by 
WHO.  
 
 
 From project inception (Year 1), 
continuous health monitoring and 
impact evaluations will be 
undertaken and will continue 
throughout the implementation 
phase. By monitoring the 
evolution, frequency and location 
of flood -related illnesses from the 
start of the project, the impact of 
the project will be assessed once a 
sufficient time series of 
observations is completed. UNDP 
will commission an expert to Inclusion of 
gender 
considerations  0 1 overall study  Annually  PMU  
 
UNDP (Project 
Management 
Support)  
 
ToRs developed for 
the study  
 
Study itself  156,800


---
*Page 193*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 43 
  I 
 
 
 
 
 undertake the health monitoring 
and impact evaluations of the EbA 
flood management solutions.  
 
The World Health Organisation 
(WHO) will provide technical 
support to this expert, as they are 
currently monitoring cases of 
water - and vector -borne diseases 
in Haiti and therefore have a pre -
defined methodology that would 
allow comparison studies to be 
undertaken a cross watersheds.  
As with all assessments that will 
be undertaken during the project 
life cycle, gender considerations 
will be made a part of the 
evaluation structure to ensure 
data and information (on which 
there is a paucity currently) on 
differential impacts on men and 
women, regional disparities, 
between different households can 
be captured.   
3.3.2.  Undertake a 
baseline 
assessment of the 
prevalence of 
water - and vector -
borne diseases — 
as well as  monitor 
dry season 
baseflow — within 
the TR watershed, The contracted expert will 
undertake a baseline assessment of 
the prevalence of water - and 
vector -borne diseases within the 
TR watershed and analyse the 
impact of climate change -induced 
flooding on the spread of these 
diseases.  - As above


---
*Page 194*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 44 
  I 
assisted by local 
representatives 
from SCWRUAs.  
 
3.3.3.  Assess the 
effectiveness of EbA 
interventions 
(Activity 1.2) in 
reducing the spread 
of water - and 
vector -borne 
diseases.  
 - As above.  
3.3.4.  Generate lessons 
through the 
implementation of 
all project 
interventions and 
disseminate these 
lessons through the 
committees and 
councils established 
under Output 2  
 Lessons generated through the 
implementation of all project 
interventions will be  shared 
through the relevant committees 
and associations at the catchment 
and sub -catchment levels to inform 
adaptative management of these 
interventions under future climate 
change conditions. Gender and 
social inclusion learnings will be 
captured and mai nstreamed to 
ensure gender -responsive design, 
planning and implementation of 
future programming.   Inclusion of 
gender -
responsive case 
studies/lessons 
learnt/best 
practices 
(qualitative 
indicator)  0 1 overall study  - As above


---
*Page 195*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 45 
  I 
Activity -level Gender -Responsive Budgeting envisioned for the Project  (in USD$)  
 
Activity 1.1  220,050  
Activity 1.2  2,731,840  
Activity 2.1  159,865  
Activity 2.2  585,00  
Activity 2.3  200,00  
Activity 3.1  135,200  
Activity 3.2  443,124  
Activity 3.3  156,800  
 
Total: USD 4,846,879  
 
Proposed SEAH Mitigation Measures  
Please refer to Section 6.1.4.  within  Annex 6b (ESMF)  as well as its appendices  for proposed actions to be implemented by the project mitigate SEAH.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please see next pages for Appendix 1  and 2.


---
*Page 196*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 46 
  I 
Appendix  1: Glossary and List of Stakeholders  
To ensure a common understanding, the following UNDP definitions apply to key terminology used throughout the document. m185 It should be noted that UNDP operates in 
line with the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development call on all United Nations en tities to improve interagency coordination and 
maximize impact. At the country level, UND P supports the integration of gender equality in all common country analyses and United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Frameworks.  
Gender  “Refers to the social attributes and opportunities associated with being male and female and the relation ships between women and men and girls and 
boys, as well as the relations between women and those between men. These attributes, opportunities and relationships are soc ially constructed and 
are learned through socialization processes. They are context/time -specific and changeable. Gender determines what is expected, allowed and valued 
in a women or a man in a given context. In most societies there are differences and inequalities between women and men in res ponsibilities assigned, 
activities undertaken, acce ss to and control over resources, as well as decision -making opportunities. Gender is part of the broader socio -cultural context. 
Other important criteria for socio -cultural analysis include class, race, poverty level, ethnic group and age.”  
Gender Equali ty “Refers to the equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities of women and men and girls and boys. Equality does not mean t hat women and men will 
become the same but that women’s and men’s rights, responsibilities and opportunities will not depend on whether they are born male or female. 
Gender equality implies that the interests, needs and priorities of both women and men are taken into consideration —recognizing the diversity of 
different groups of women and men. Gender equality is not a ‘women’s issu e’ but should concern and fully engage men as well as women. Equality 
between women and men is seen both as a human rights issue and as a precondition for, and indicator of, sustainable people -centred development.”  
Gender 
Mainstreaming  “Mainstreaming a gender perspective is the process of assessing the implication for women and men of any planned action, incl uding legislation, policies 
or programmes, in all areas and at all levels. It is a strategy for making women’s as well as men’s con cerns and experiences an integral dimension of the 
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes in all political, economic and societal spheres so that women and men 
benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated. The ult imate goal is to achieve gender equality.”  
Women’s Rights  “The human rights of women and of the girl child are an inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal human rights.  The full and equal participation 
of women in political, civil, economic , social and cultural life, at the national, regional and international levels, and the eradication of all forms of 
discrimination on grounds of sex are priority objectives of the international community.”  
 
185 Annexes to the UNDP Gender Equality Strategy 2014 -2017: The Future We Want: Rights and Empowerment: 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/file s/publications/Annex%201%20Terminology.pdf


---
*Page 197*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 47 
  I 
“As defined in Article 1, ‘discrimination against women’ shall mean any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect 
or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of  men 
and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field.”  
Women’s 
Empowerment  “Women's empowerment has five components: Women’s sense of self -worth; their right to have and to determi ne choices; their right to have access 
to opportunities and resources; their right to have the power to control their own lives, both within and outside the home; a nd their ability to influence 
the direction of social change to create a more just social an d economic order, nationally and internationally.”  
“The concept of empowerment is related to gender equality but distinct from it. The core of empowerment lies in the ability o f a woman to control her 
own destiny. This implies that to be empowered women mu st not only have equal capabilities (such as education and health) and equal access to 
resources and opportunities (such as land and employment), they must also have the agency to use those rights, capabilities, resources and opportunities 
to make strategi c choices and decisions (such as are provided through leadership opportunities and participation in political institutions. A nd to exercise 
agency, women must live without the fear of coercion and violence.”  
Gender Parity  “…equal numbers of men and women at all levels of the organization. It must include significant participation of both men and women, particularly at 
senior levels. Gender parity is one of several integrated mechanisms for improving organizational effectiveness.”  
Gender -based 
Violence  “Gender -based violence is a form of discrimination that seriously inhibits women’s ability to enjoy rights and freedoms on a basis of  equality with 
men…Gender -based violence, which impairs or nullifies the enjoyment by women of human rights and fundamental fr eedoms under general 
international law or under human rights conventions, is discrimination within the meaning of Article 1 of (CEDAW).”  
 “…any act of violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, 
coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.”10  
“…any harmful act that is perpetrated against a person’s will and that is based on socially associated differences b etween males and females. As such 
violence is based on socially ascribed differences. Gender -based violence includes, but it is not limited to sexual violence. While women and girls of all 
ages make up the majority of the victims, men and boys are also bot h direct and indirect victims. It is clear that the effects of such violence are both 
physical and psychological, and have long term detrimental consequences for both the survivors and their communities.”  
Sexual Abuse  
 Actual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under unequal or coercive conditions.


---
*Page 198*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
 
 
 
Page 48 
  I 
Sexual 
Exploitation  
 
Sexual 
Harassment  Any actual or attempted abuse of position of vulnerability, differential power or trust, for sexual purposes, including , but not limited to, profiting 
monetarily, socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of another.  
Sexual harassment is not SEA. Sexual harassment refers to prohibited conduct in the work context and can be committed against  UN staff and related 
personnel. In context of the United Nations, sexual harassment primarily describes prohibited behaviour against another UN st aff or related personnel, 
which may also include nationals of the host state. It is defined for UN staff by ST/SGB/2008/5 and simil ar directives for uniformed personnel and involves 
any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favour, verbal or physical conduct or gesture of a sexual nature, or any oth er behaviour of a sexual 
nature that might reasonably be expected or be perceive d to cause offence or humiliation to another, when such conduct interferes with work, is made 
a condition of employment or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment. Conduct or behaviour of a sexual  nature is considered SEA 
when this c onduct or behaviour amounts to either sexual exploitation or sexual abuse as defined in ST/SGB/2003/13.  
 
Appendix 2: List of stakeholders consulted  
Department  Commune  Organisation/Stakeholder  Date of Consultation  
Artibonite  Gonaives  MDE (Government)   January 2018  
Artibonite  Gonaives  Delegation (Government)   August 2018  
Artibonite  Gonaives  MPCE (Government)   August 2018  
Artibonite  Gonaives  MARNDR (Government)   August 2018  
Artibonite  Gros -Morne  CASEC (Government)   August 2018  
Artibonite  Gros -Morne  Mayor's Office   August 2018  
Artibonite  Gros -Morne  BAC (Government)   August 2018  
Artibonite  Gros -Morne  Farmers   August 2019  
Artibonite  Gros -Morne  Women   August 2020  
Artibonite  Marmelade  Mayor's Office   August 2018  
Artibonite  Marmelade  BAC(Government)  September -18 
North  Cap MDE (Government)   August 2018  
North  Cap MCFDF (Government)   August 2018  
North  Cap MPCE (Government)   August 2018  
North  Cap MARNDR (Government)   August 2018


---
*Page 199*
---

Annex VIII – Gender Assessment and Action Plan  
Page 49  I 
North  Pilate  CASEC (Government)   January 2018  
North  Pilate  BAC (Government)   January 2018  
North  Pilate  Women   August 2018  
North  Plaisance  CASEC (Government)   January 2018  
North  Plaisance  BAC (Government)   January 2018  
North  Plaisance  Women   August 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix MDE (Government)   January 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix MCFDF (Government)   July 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix Delegation (Government)   July 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix MPCE (Government)   July 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix TPTC (Government)   July 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix MARNDR (Government)   July 2018  
North West  Chansolme  CASEC (Government)   January 2018  
North West  Chansolme  Mayor's Office   July 2018  
North West  Chansolme  BAC (Government)   July 2018  
North West  Chansolme  Farmers   July 2018  
North West  Chansolme  Women   July 2018  
North West  Bassin Bleu  CASEC (Government)   January 2018  
North West  Bassin Bleu  Mayor's Office  December -18 
North West  Bassin Bleu  BAC (Government)   January 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix Mayor's Office   August 2018  
North West  Port-de-Paix NGO   July 2018  
National  Port-au-Prince  NGO   July 2018  
National  Port-au-Prince  Bilateral donor   July 2018  
North  Cap Bilateral donor   July 2018  
National  Port-au-Prince  Bank  December -18 
______________