=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/ContentTypeId: 0x01010000979F12F22C9E4F9273E32F354CEDB7
/CreationDate: D:20230313094814+09'00'
/Creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 22 for Word
/ModDate: D:20230313095218+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 22.3.20322
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
13 – 16 March 2023  
Songdo, I ncheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 11  GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
13 March  2023 
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendu m I 
Funding proposal package f or FP19 9 
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Public -Social -Private Partnerships for Ecologically -
Sound Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin (PEARL)";  
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;   
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel ’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.  
 
It is noted that some modifications have been made in gender documentation to reflect the 
revised language.


---
*Page 2*
---

 
       GCF/B.35 /02/Add.01/Rev.01  
Page b 
    
 
Table of Contents  
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  98 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  99 
Secretariat’s assessment  104 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   118 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment  134 
Gender documentation  137


---
*Page 3*
---

 
 
 
  
 
  
 Project/Programme title:  Public -Social -Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound 
Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap 
Basin (PEARL)  
Country(ies):  Cambodia 
Accredited Entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
Date of first submission:  [2022/04/11]   
Date of current submission  [2022/08/07]  
Version number  [V.08]


---
*Page 4*
---

 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE b  
 
Contents 
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK 
 Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS
 
 
Section H ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name]- [Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2  
   
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or programme  Project  A.2. Public 
or private 
sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)   
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   GCF  
contribution Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Adaptation t otal 100 % 100 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and 
communities  50 % 48 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and 
water security  34 % 35 % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  16 % 17 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided 
or removed / sequestered)  Project has no expected 
mitigation outcome. 
Mitigation impact is considered a co-benefit 
(see B 2 (b)).  A.6. 
Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core 
indicator 2: 
direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached)  Direct:  
• 450,000 farmers with improved access 
to tailored agrometeorological advisory services, including,  smallholder farmers 
and other local value chain actors with improved financial and technological 
access.  
Indirect : 
• 1 million farmers and other value chain 
actors  
(See Section D.1)  
Direct:  ca.3% of 
Cambodia’s  population  
(50% female 
beneficiaries)  Indirect: ca.6% of 
Cambodia’s population  
(50% female 
beneficiaries)  
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  42,850,231 USD  A.9. Project 
size Small (Upto USD 50 million)  A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  36,231,981 USD  
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  ☒  Grant  36,231,981  
A.11. Implementation 
period  6 years  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of AE 
internal approval  5/4/2022  A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐  A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☒    No ☐  
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☐    No ☐  A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3  
   
 A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Table 3 under Section B.1 elaborates the complementarity between the proposed 
project and the following three parallel investments/activities.  
 
Parallel investment/activity  Area  of Complementarity  
• FAO-led project, "Promoting Climate -Resilient Livelihoods in 
Rice-Based Communities in the Tonle Sap Region," with 
funding from the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) 
under the Global Environment Facility (GEF)  • Scaling up the impact at the landscape 
level with the GEF  
• ADB-led GCF  project, "Climate -Friendly Agribusiness Value 
Chains Sector (CAVS)."  • Replicating the experience and lessons 
of another GCF project and scaling up 
the impact at systemic and institutional 
levels.  
• IFAD -led project, "Sustainable Assets for Agriculture Mark ets 
Business and Trade (SAAMBAT)."  • Building on the parallel investment for 
complementary investment results.  
 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information - Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
- Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), acting through the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), and the Ministry of Environment (MoE) (NDA) . 
(Note: HACT Micro Assessment Reports on MAFF and MoE are finalized ) 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The proposed project, "Public -Social -Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in 
Northern Tonle Sap Basin (PEARL)," aims to enhance the climate change resilience of smallholder farmers and local 
communities in the NTSB by increasing their access to growing premium market segments while using their improved market access to incentivize their transition to climate -resilient practices, mainly through effective public -social -private 
partnerships.   
  
The Northern Tonle Sap Basin (NTSB) is one of Cambodia's most important agricultural regions. A fifth of the country's cereal and grain production comes from this region. The NTSB has some of the highest poverty rates in the country and 
experienced severe environmental degradation. The anticipated impacts of climate change will compound these 
socioecological vulnerabilities. Changing precipitation patterns and extreme weather events have already been observed. They are expected to significantly impact traditional rice production, relying on rainfed systems, with limited irrigation potential due to the region's generally hilly topography. At the same time, there are growing market opportunities  for the 
NTSB  in higher -value and niche product segments with mango, cashew, organic rice, and leafy vegetables, which have 
been identified as the country's priority crops for further development and expansion by the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry, and Fisheries (MAFF)  (2019) . However, these segments are currently inaccessible to most smallholder farmers 
and local value- chain actors due to several limitations, including a lack of access to finance, technologies, and market 
knowledge. These segments must also adapt to the impacts of climate change to develop. With the promotion of climate-
resilient practices and technologies, capacity development, and enabling conditions, these segments should offer 
significant potential to increase the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and local value- chain actors, who would 
otherwise experience downward trends in agricultural productivity and livelihood.  
 
These challenges have also been highlighted by a recent assessment of COVID -19 impact on the agriculture sector 
(MAFF, CARD and FAO, 2020) . The assessment also identifies several opportunities, including the increased use of the 
internet of things (IoT) for capacity development and improving market access. Increased d emand for domestic 
horticultural production in lieu of reduced import capacity in light of the pandemic also suggests a significant opportunity 
for vegetable farmers in the NTSB. The projected impact of climate change and recent experience with the global 
pandemic thus cast light on the needs and opportunities for smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors in the 
NTSB, where production capacity is limited by its unique geography and topography, to adopt climate- resilient, high-
value and inclusive agriculture to reduce their vulnerability.   
  The PEARL project will deliver the following three interdependent outcomes to address these chall enges.   
  
1. Farmers' capacities are enhanced to manage climate impacts and related risks;  
2. Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly vulnerable women farmers, is increased through market incentives that promote climate- resilient, higher -value, diversified, and 
sustainable production and processing,  and  
3. Regulatory and institutional frameworks and capacities for climate- resilient agricultural certification, cross -
sectoral coordination for increased PSPPs and smallholder financing, and climate -informed investment support 
are strengthened.


---
*Page 7*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4  
   
  
These outcomes will achieve the project's goal that: IF the project increases the capacity of smallholder farmers and other 
local value chain actors and institutional support mechanisms in the NTSB to generate and apply crop- specific 
agrometeorological information to reduce climate risks and impacts, and adopt market -informed climate- resilient and 
sustainable production and processing practices and technologies through improved PSPPs, THEN Cambodia will be 
able to place this climate- vulnerable and agriculture- depende nt region on a sustainable development pathway through 
strategic alignment between climate foresight, market incentives and enabling environment, BECAUSE the smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors will have developed the necessary means and capacity to take advantage of 
relevant market opportunities and instruments to reduce and cope with climate impacts and continue improving their 
agricultural production and livelihoods sustainably.  
 
The project will leverage increased private and public i nvestments for building the climate change resilience of 
smallholder farmers and local value- chain actors in the NTSB and benefit approximately 450,000 farmers and other local 
value chain actors (ca. 3% of Cambodia's population).  
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
I. Background  
 
1 The proposed GCF project, "Public -Social- Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound Agriculture and Resilient 
Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin (PEARL)," aims to enhance climate change resilience of smallholder farmers 
and local communities in the Northern Tonle Sap Basin (NTSB) by promoting climate- resilient, higher -value, inclusive 
and sustainable agriculture through a value- chain approach built on effective public -social -private partnerships  
(PSPPs) . 
 
2 Cambodia remains one of the few Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in Asia (UNDESA, 2018) . The country has 
nonetheless made steady economic development progress. In 2018, Cambodia's gross national income (GNI) per 
capita reached US$ 1,380, which had more than tripled since 2004 (WB, 2019) . Much of this growth was due to 
favorable macroeconomic policies and developments (i.e., increased lending, investments, and exports) in the 
agriculture sector, which accounts for nearly a third of the country's GDP (CIB & CSEZB, no date; WB, 2015; Cramb, 
Sareth and Vuthy, 2020) . Among the main crops produced in Cambodia, rice is the staple and single most important 
crop in the country, providing nearly 70% of nutritional needs and accounts for nearly 80% of Cambodia's crop 
production, followed by cassava, maize, soybean, mung bean and other crops (MoE, 2015; MAFF, 2017) . The 
agricultural expansion, supporting the country’s economic growth in the past decades, has also come at the cost of 
environmental degradation, mainly through deforestation to make way for crop production.  
 
3 Despite the overall growth and expansion of the agriculture sector, smallholder farmers in rural areas have notably 
lagged behind this progress due to their limited capacity and access to finance, technologies and information. Roughly 
45% of the country's labor force is directly engaged in agriculture, and over 60% of which is found in rural areas where poverty rates are often higher than 20%, compared to 10% in Phnom Penh (RGC, 2014, 2018b)
. While Cambodia's 
rural agrarian population plays an essential role  in the country's economy, persistent poverty makes many farming 
communities and households vulnerable to extreme weather events and natural disasters. The environmental 
degradation resulting from rapid agricultural expansion has also exacerbated the effec ts of these extreme weather 
events and contributed to increased natural disasters.  
 
4 The vulnerability of farmers and farming households to the increased climate variability poses a significant threat 
to the country’s sustainable development as it affects not only the country’s main economic engine but also its food 
security and social cohesion. The COVID -19 pandemic, which has disrupted agricultural supply chains and demand 
due to the restrictions on the movement of people and goods, has also elucidated th e critical linkages between the 
market and underlying socioeconomic vulnerabilities of Cambodian farmers, particularly the poor, women and other  
socially excluded minorities (MAFF, CARD and FAO, 2020). This pandemic has also underscored the need to address 
these vulnerabilities of farmers and farming households by building more resilient and sustainable relationships between farmers and agricultural markets to cope with both economic and natural shocks.  
 
II. Agriculture in NTSB  and Underlying Vulnerabilities   
 
5 NTSB is defined as the areas north of the Tonle Sap Lake, including Oddar Meanchey, Kampong Thom, Preah 
Vihear, and Siem Reap provinces. The region is home to approximately 20% of the country’s population. It 
encompasses a total land area of 2.5 million he ctares  (ha) with evergreen and deciduous forests, covering hilly areas


---
*Page 8*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5  
   
 in the north, vast swaths of cropland in the middle (mainly for rice production) and flooded forests and grassland areas 
along the Tonle Sap Lake in the south (see Annex 16  -maps ). The average annual rainfall in the region varies from 
1,000 to 1, 500 mm. There are ten main soil types and five main watersheds, including Stung Sen and Stung Staung, 
vital sources of water for rice production and livelihoods in the region (Oeurng et al., 2019). Over 20% of the country's 
aromatic rice production, among others such as cassava (35%) and sugarcane (27%), comes from this region (NIS, 
2019) . The region has also been identified as one of the most vulnerable regions in the country to floods and droughts, 
which are expected to occur more frequently with increased intensity due to climate change (Rai et al. , 2015b; ADB, 
2016)  
 
6 The production of cashew, mango, aromatic ric e, and vegetables has expanded in recent decades in Cambodia 
as demand for these crops has increased domestically and internationally (ResponsAbility Investments AG, 2015; Duong and Khin, 2016; Bunthoeun, 2019; Vannak, 2019) . The NTSB was responsible for 31% and 14% of the country’s 
total harvested volumes, respectively, for cashew and mango in 2018 and 2019 (NIS, 2019) . Cashew yields were 
approximately 20 % higher than the national average in Kampong Thom and Preah Vihear, and similarly, for O ddar 
Meanchey, its mango yield was 30% above the national average (ibid.). In terms of planted areas, the production of 
aromatic rice, cashew, mango and vegetables had increased both nationally and in the NTSB between 2013 and 2019 
while the production of non- aromatic rice had decreased during the same period. While the production areas for 
vegetables had decreased nationally, the NTSB had expanded the production areas in the same period.  
 
7 Aromatic rice, cashew, mango and vegetables have emerged as alternative agricultural commodities and value 
chains in the NTSB with the potential to access premium price markets through meeting quality control and food safety standards such as organic certification, the Cambodian Good Agricultural Practices (CamGAP)
, Geographical 
Indication (GI)3, Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP), Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP), and ISO 22000 
(Burn et al., 2018; ICEM, 2020). For instance, although the yield for aromatic rice in Preah Vihear was 20% lower than the national average in 2019, agricultural chemical input for aromatic rice production in the province was notably lower than the national average, and compared to the other NTSB provinces. This indicates the province’s prevailing tren d 
towards organic rice production (IFC, 2015; SARAN, 2017) . In 2018, organic rice (both aromatic and non- aromatic) 
production accounted for 12% of the province's total rice production (Burn et al., 2018). The price premium for organic rice was up to 30% compared to non- organic rice (ibid.).  
 
8 These segments of agriculture in the NTSB present considerable sustainable expansion and diversification 
opportunities for smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors(Burn et al.,  2018) . These crops have also been 
identified as the country's priority crops for further development by the MAFF (2019) . However, most smallholder 
farmers in the NTSB are unable to take advantage of these opportunities and practice low -value and low -quality 
agriculture due in part to several structural and capacity challenges.  Table 1 provides an overview of such opportunities 
and challenges associated with these emerging segments of agriculture in the NTSB.  
 
Table 1: Overview of Key Crops in NTSB  
Alternative Crop/ Area 
Grown  Opportunities  Challenges  
Cashew/ Kampong Thom 
and Preah Vihear  • Most cashew farmers grow a variety called M23  (to a lesser 
degree, H09, M10, and M04), which gives a higher yield and market value than traditional varieties.  
• Most mango farmers grow a variety called Keo Romeat, which is well regarded for its quality.  
• Premium price markets exist for quality -controll ed products.  
• Growing market trends offer opportunities to access premium price markets by adopting relevant international quality and production standards.  
• Perennial nature provides agroforestry potential for rural 
livelihood diversification, increased fuelwood supply, forest 
conservation, mitigation, and catchment protection.  • Moderate use of pesticides with insufficient control 
measures.  
• Most smallholder farmers, agricultural cooperatives (ACs), and farmers associations (FAs) and producer groups (PGs)  sell to wholesale buyers with limited 
value addition opportunities.  
• Lower profit margins give little incentive for adopting climate- resilient and sustainable practices, including 
integrated pest management (IPM).  
• Smallholder farmers, ACs, FAs, PGs and other  local 
value chain actors lack the necessary resources  (i.e., 
knowledge, finance, technologies)  to access higher -
value markets.  
• Weak self -governance capacity  for mobilizing 
organized support for value chain access and development.  
• Lack of postharvest stor age and processing capacity . Mango/ Oddar Meanchey  
Organic Rice/ Preah 
Vihear  • Combination of labor shortages, increased climate variability 
and market trends have encouraged farmers to adopt the • Lack of favorable  contract farming and direct market 
access opportunities .  
 
3 An intellectual property tool, protecting products with a specific  geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation 
that are due to that origin (https://www.wipo.int/geo_indications/en/).


---
*Page 9*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
   
  
9 According to the ID Poor (ca. below the poverty line) data collected between 2017 and 2020 (RGC, 2020b) , the 
NTSB was home to 14.5% of the country’s ID Poor households. Poverty rates in the NTSB were among the highest in 
the country during the previous decade. Oddar Meanchey had the second- highest poverty rate (28%), followed by 
Preah Vihear (25%), which was the 4th highest in the country (RGC, 2014) . This has led to noticeable labor migratio n 
by men to urban areas and abroa d, especially from the remote northern sections  of the NTSB . The number of female-
headed households in all four provinces had increased between 2013 and 2019 (NIS, 2019) . This trend was particularly 
noticeable in Oddar Meanchey  with one of  the highest poverty rates, located in the remote northern section,  bordering 
Thailand (RGC, 2014, 2018b) . Key drivers of poverty include limited employment and market opportunities for this 
region's primarily agriculture- dependent population.  Factors such as a lack of access to finance, technology, and 
knowledge prevent smallholder farmers and other small -scale local value chain actors from moving away from low -
value and low -quality production, which reinforces these drivers . Such factors are partly due to the country's limited 
agricultural extension capacity, lack of effective PPPs with solid representation by agricultural unions and associations, 
and weak  regulatory conditions and enforcement capacity to derisk  such partnerships.  These underlying socioeconomic 
vulnerabilities in the NTSB are further exacerbated by the severe impacts of climate change, making them the most 
vulnerable population groups in Cambodia (Rai et al. , 2015a) .  
 
III. Climate Baseline: Drought, Flooding and Crop Pest and Diseases  
 Temperature 
 
 
10 Analysis of observed historical data shows annual mean temperature anomaly has increased by 0.8 degrees 
Celsius ( °C) since 1950 with a rate of 0.023 °C per year (Thoeun, 2015) . The rate of change is most rapid in the dry 
season (December, January  and February) and followed by the spring season (March, April and May) and slowest in 
the wet season (June, July and August).  
 
11 FAO’s analysis of bias corrected data from the Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment (CORDEX), based 
on CMIP5 global clima te projections and RCP scenarios shows notable changes in maximum and minimum 
temperatures across Cambodia under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 in the near (2011- 2040), medium (2040- 2070) and far 
(2070- 2100) future (FAO, 2022) . Maximum temperature is expected to increase consistently from the historical baseline 
(1980- 2005) into the future, in particular in the NTSB. Maximum temperature will increase to a larger degree under 
RCP8.5, up to 3.6 °C by the far future period.  
 
12 Temperature minimum across Cambodia shows similarities in spatial and temporal distribution to temperature 
maximum, increasing into the future with a larger magnitude for RCP8.5 as compared to RCP4.5. In both minimum and 
maximum temperatures, the NTSB, particularly its northern sections show the highest increase from the baseline (see 
figure 1). 
 
13 The number of days with temperature >33 °C also increases into the medium and far future, with larger increases 
observed under RCP8.5. Geographically, it is observed that the number of days >33 °C is  higher in the 
southwestern  and northeastern (i.e., NTSB)  regions of the country and will be exacerbated into the future.  production of short -duration aromatic rice (key organic rice 
segment), shifting from longer duration non- aromatic rice.  
• Price gain through organic production could offset the 
anticipated decline in yield for farmers in these remote hilly 
areas.  
• Organic rice in Preah Vihear is certified in the US and EU markets, and further value addition opportunity through GI.  
• Topography keeps paddy fields small and fragmented with 
natural buffers to maintain rich agroecosystems.  • Limited mechanization.  
• Limited access to finance and quality supplies and extension services.  
• Limited capacity of ACs, PGs and FAs to provide 
structured and strategic  support to individual farmers.  
• Lack of IWM to ensure water quality and availability at the landscape level.  
• Limited integration of agrometeorological and market 
advisory services to optimize production.  
Leafy Vegetables/ Siem 
Reap and Preah Vihear  • Several  champion vegetable farmers networks4 with expanding 
access to local markets (retailers, hotels, and restaurants) in 
Siem Reap and Phnom Penh.  
• Growing demand for safe and sustainably produced vegetables offers higher prices.  
• Horticultural innovations enable climate- resilient production for 
income generation and household consumption.   • Lack of resources (knowledge, finance, and 
technologies) to increase product varieties and quality 
and overcome seasonality.  
• Lack of market access.  
• Limited quality control measures ( e.g., postharvest 
storage, handling and transportation).  
• Lack of organized support through e.g., unions for 
value chain development.  
 
4 Champion farmers , who are mainly women,  have extensive experience in farming and mastered the knowledge and skills, and diffused 
them to other farmers.


---
*Page 10*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7  
   
  
Figure 1: Average temperature maximum (left) and temperature minimum (right) during the rainy season May-October  over 
the period  1987-2016 from the reanalysis dataset  W5E5  (FAO analysis).   
 
Precipitation  
 
14 Analysis of historical precipitation observations  (Figure 2) highlights significant interannual and intra- seasonal 
variability in precipitation during all seasonal periods throughout the year. Historical data show general decreasing 
trends, with large interannual variability in particular in the rainy season (Thoeun, 2015). The trend in decreasing precipitation is largest in September to November with a smaller rate of change during other periods. During the period June- August, the trend over the historical period shows little change over the period 1960- 2000.  
 15 The rainy season, which lasts from May to early October, accounts for 90% of annual precipitation in the NTSB . 
The dry season, from November to April, brings drier and cooler air from November to March, and then hotter air in 
April and early May. The maximum mean temperature in Cambodia is about 28 °C  and the minimum mean 
temperature is about 22°C.  
 
Figure 2 Historical mean precipitation change  over the period 1960 -2000 by season 
December -February (top left), March -May (top right), July through August (bottom 
left) and September -November (bottom right). Red, indicating regression lines, and 
blue indicating mean value.


---
*Page 11*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8  
   
 16 Although projections from the Climate Information Platform5 based on CORDEX South Asia Ensemble Mean 
suggest an overall increase in annual mean precipitation in the medium to far future, FAO's downscaled analysis from 
the same CORDEX data indicates an overall  decrease in annual cumulative precipitation into the future. There is an 
upward  trend in rainfall between June and August in the northwest, and a downward trend in the northeast of the 
country. The projected increases in wet season rainfall will be  partially offset by projected decreases in dry season 
rainfall . Precipitation deviation from the historical average baseline (1980- 2005) shows an  increase in the near future, 
with subsequent decreases in annual  cumulative  precipitation in the medium and far future, with variation 
geographically.  
 
17 Many agricultural producers rely on rain fed  production in the wet season, and  FAO’s  downscaled analysis of the 
CORDEX data  suggests  decreasing wet season precipitation into the future, with some pockets of increases in the 
coastal regions, to a higher degree under RCP8.5 and with changes up to -500 mm/year in the NTSB.  At the same 
time, the number of heavy rainfall events or days with heavy precipitation (>50 mm/day) are expected to increase in 
the near and medium- term future, up to 9 days, and in the longer term by fewer days (5- 6 days) compared to the 
baseline period (1980- 2005 ). An increase in heavy precipitation days with an overall decrease in cumulative 
precipitation suggests that rainfall events will be more intense and infrequent, and the rainy season will become shorter  
(Figure 3) .  
 
 
Dro ught, flooding and crop pest and diseases  
 
18 Drought in Cambodia occurs regularly and is driven by extended dry periods and the level of water resources in 
the terrestrial water bodies. The frequency of drought varies from province to province with many parts of the NTSB 
significantly affected according to the drought vulnerability index  (Rai et al. , 2015a) . 
 
 
5 https://climateinformation.org  
Figure 3: Deviation in number of days with heavy precipitation (50 mm/day) from historical baseline period (1980 -2005) 
under RCP 4.5 (top row) for the period 2011 -2040 (left), 2040-2070 (middle) and 2070- 2100 (right) and RCP8.5 (bottom 
row) for the same time periods. T he deviation highlights the projected change into the future in days based on 
projections from bias corrected regional CORDEX data  (FAO, 2020).


---
*Page 12*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9  
   
 19 For instance, in Kampong Thom, the 3 -month standardized precipitation evapotranspiration index ( SPEI)  in Figure 
4 shows an increasing trend over the last 15 years, and very severe droughts continue to occur periodically in recent 
years . The SPEI takes into account  both precipitation and potential evapotranspiration, therefore capturing the impact 
of increased temperatures on water demand than a simple precipitation index in its estimation of drought. During the 
2019 drought, water shortage was reported for most of the provinces cultivating dry season rice.   
 
20 The major rice growing areas of the Mekong-
Tonle Sap basin are exposed to flooding every year but in recent years have often been exposed to extreme 
flooding. Generally, floods in Cambodia are not entirely 
a loc
al climatic problem as the water level is highly 
affected by the hydrology in the entire Mekong River 
Basin. Extended periods of flooding in the Mekong River 
and Tonle Sap Lake have ruined many deep- water rice 
crops. In La- Nina years, up to one- fifth of th e total 
cultivated area (0.5 million  ha) of wet season rice has 
suffered from flooding. In agriculture areas where 
temporary flooding occurs, floods result in severe 
challenges for germination for some direct -seeded rice 
and most upland crops, including legumes.  
 
21 From 2000 to 2019, on average,  4.1% and 
5.2% of the total rice- cultivated land were affected by 
drought and flood in the four NTSB provinces, 
corresponding to about 6,000 ha (Figure 5) . While 
Kampong Thom was the most flood- affected province, farmers in Oddar Meanchey faced yield losses due to drought 
stress. FAO’s assessment of affected and damaged areas due to drought and flooding in the target provinces show that the percentage of damaged areas was higher for flooding compared to drought, indicating that flooding poses a major risk when farmers lack adaptive capacity in the face of major flooding events. This challenge is particularly relevant for rice and cashew production in Kampong Thom province, and also for vegetable production in Siem Reap.   
 22 Another critical  challenge 
identified by agricultural producers and value chain actors , through a 
survey, conducted for the preparation of this project, is the occurrence of pest and diseases, particularly due to changes in climatic drivers. Flooding 
and excessive water can result in increases in pest and disease infestation. For rice produc tion, s ome 
major pests in the NTSB include gall midge, stem borer, brown plant 
hopper, green leafhopper, 
grasshopper, leaf folder, rice bug, case worm, armyworm and rats. The populations of some of these pests are likely to increase significantly under extreme climate conditions . 
Mango and cashew producers also note the increasing occurrence of severe pest and disease infestations 
as a major challenge for production, storage and transpor tation. Further  
details can be found in the feasibility study (Annex 2).  
 
23 Droughts and pest and diseases are the most common types of shocks in the NTSB (NIS, 2019) . Farming 
households in the region face these risks, and a large proportion of the farming households (20- 60%) experienced 
moderate to severe food shortages due to crop loss and damage on an annual basis (NIS, 2015). Between 37 and 
57 % of the households claimed that they often experienced these shocks consecutively, thus having little time to make 
Figure 4: Three months SPEI for Kampong Thom weather 
station (computed by ClimPACT2)  
 
Figure 5: Percentage of rice cultivated areas affected (A) and damaged (B) by 
drought and flood. Data shown represent 20 -years’ average values.


---
*Page 13*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
   
 a full recovery from such shocks, while many of these households (30 -50%) also reported increasing coping capacities 
as they had built some level of familiarity with dealing with such shocks almost annually (NIS, 2019) . 
 
24 Their high susceptibility to droughts stems largely from their heavy reliance on rainfed systems (NIS, 2015) . 
Particularly in the northern sections of the NTSB (i.e., Oddar Meanchey and Preah Vihear) farming activities often take 
place in relatively hilly terrains, which make irrigation not an option. In Siem Reap and Kampong Thom in the lower sections of the NTSB, irrigation is more common with nearly 50% of farmers using irrigated systems (ibid.); however, with increased uncertainty in water availability due to more frequent droughts observed in recent years, such systems are also becoming less viable in some areas.   
 
IV. Anticipated Climate Impacts on Key Crops in NTSB  and Market  Opportunities   
 
25 These anticipated impacts of climate change will likely affect the key crops and the associated market opportunities 
and challenges discussed above differently. Table 2 shows how these changes in rainfall patterns and increased temperatures will affect the production and postharvest handling of cashew, mango, organic rice, and vegetables, 
respectively, in the NTSB.  
 
26 The analysis of observed and anticipated crop- specific impacts of climate change in the NTSB elucidates the need 
to increase the adaptive capacity of agriculture- dependent, vulnerable households. While rice remains the predominant 
crop, the production of cashew, mango, and leafy vegetables has increased in the NTSB. The projected erratic rainfall 
patterns during the wet season, prolonged droughts during the dry season, and increased pest and diseases will affect 
the production of rice and these emerging crops. Such climate- induced impacts will disproportionately affect crops such 
as conventional rice more than the others like cashew, mango, organic rice, and vegetables . 
 
Table 2: Key Crops and Their Climate Exposure and Impacts in the NTSB  
Key Crop/ 
Areas Grown  Climate Exposure and Impacts  
Cashew/ 
Kampong Thom 
and Preah 
Vihear  Production (yield) – Food losses:  
• Heat stress: occurs >34°C and cashew trees are particularly vulnerable to the delayed onset of winter and a cool dry period at 
flowering;  
• Droughts and low humidity: relatively tolerant;  
• Strong winds and storms: damage to trees and flowers;  
• Pest/Diseases: during the flowering and fruiting season; and  
• Heavy rain: As per impact from heavy rainfall during cashew’s flowering season, farmers face no significant issues as the flowering 
period starts from November, which is at the end of the rainy season.  
Affected Quality ( yield):  
• Developing mold due to high humidity at fruiting, spoiled nuts, kernel deterioration, bacterial attack; and  
• Heavy rains cause the spread of mold and fungal diseases, pests and diseases at flowering and fruiting.  
Post-harvest Losses:  
• Increased mol d, fungal attacks, damage and loss during transport without proper storage and processing capacity.  
Mango/ Oddar 
Meanchey  Production (yield):  
• Shifts in seasonal patterns: early -onset of the dry season and drier and longer dry season, combined with increased temperatures, 
increasing pests at flowering and fruiting;  
• Heat stress: >46°C, at the flowering stage, beginning of fruiting;  
• Droughts at flowering and fruiting;  
• Pest and disease: increased pest and insect -related damage during the flowering seasons in October and November and April and 
May. Also driven by drier conditions, increased temperatures and erratic rainfall patterns, insect pests can lead to 40- 80 % of fruit loss 
and damage when poorly managed;  
• Heavy rains and late- onset of the wet season: affect hormone- induced off -season flowering process; and  
• River Floods: not a major challenge due to the higher elevation of the region.  
Affected Quality (yield):  
• Food spoiled, damaged by heavy rains and pests and diseases, rust/fungus attack.  
Post-harvest Losses:  
• Increased mold, fungal attacks, damage and loss during transport without proper storage and processing capacity.  
Organic Rice/ 
Preah Vihear  Production (yield) – Food losses:  
• Droughts: severely affected organic rice production in Kampong Thom from 2000 to 2019 (>10,000 tons of yield losses). Higher 
resilience to drought conditions in upland where organic rice is produced;  
• Pest/Diseases fungal attacks: armyworms, rice blight, rice blast. Number of days with optimal temperature for rice blast and bacterial 
rice blast development shows a downward trend. Significant yield losses reported in 2016 due to armyworm;  
• River Floods: a major threat to organic rice production. Yield losses are double compared to yield losses due to drought, par ticularly in 
lowland areas around the Tonle Sap Basin;  
• Heavy Rains: Yields losses due to heavy rains (e.g., consequent floods in 2017 led to 20 -30% lower yields than 2016); and


---
*Page 14*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
   
  
27  At the same time, the increased public awareness of healthy eating and food safety in the country and the growing 
international tourism market drive consumer demand for higher -quality agricultural products (Ngon, 2019) . Premium 
price markets, which have been established with organic rice and are emerging for cashew, mango, and vegetables in 
the NTSB, offer opportunities for smallholder farmers, who are particularly vulnerable to the impact of climate change 
due to their heavy dependency on small scale agriculture. These market -led opportunities can incentivize and afford 
them the adoption of climate -resilient and higher -value practices and technologies to increase their adaptive capacity 
through improved livelihood options and income.  
 
28 Furthermore, with the observed increase in drought conditions and unpredictable wet season, many rice farmers 
in the NTSB have shifted from long- duration varieties to shorter duration fragrant varieties to reduce their exposure to 
the risk of crop loss during the production stage (NIS, 2020) . This trend has been helped by increased domestic and 
international market demand for fragrant rice and associated market opportunities. This example demonstrates the strength and speed of adaptive response to risks when the response makes economic and financial sense. Thus, this makes it essential for the project to identify climate risks and shifts in crop suitability over the short, medium, and long terms (see Annex 2) and ensure that the adaptive responses the project promotes are effectively tied to economic and financial enablers to expedite the transition. The transition must also be sustainable and equitable.  
 
29 The approach, focusing on premium price market opportunities for the climate change adaptation of smallholder 
farmers and other local value chain actors,  is particularly suited for the northern sections of the NTSB with relatively 
well-kept agroecological conditions and predominantly small -scale agricultural practices. The premium markets’ 
tendency to favor quality over volume matches the region’s relatively small- scale production capacity and limited use 
of agricultural chemicals compared to other parts of the country (NIS, 2019) . Their remoteness and relatively hilly 
topography make large- scale commercialization, mechanization, and intensification challenging and costly. At the same 
time, areas along national and provincial roads hold significant potential to increase smallholder farmers’ market access through this approach (see Annex 16 - maps). Many smallholder farmers in these areas produce cashew, mango, 
organic rice, and vegetables in relatively small quantities  and lack the necessary capacity and resources to access 
such market opportunities (Burn et al., 2018; ICEM, 2020) . By integrating various certification schemes, including 
CamGap, GI, SRP and organic certification, which are already operational in the country, smallholder farmers and other 
local value chain actors in the region can improve their production and processing quality based on t heir unique 
strengths to take advantage of the current market trends.  Therefore, the project wi ll harness the region’s  growing 
capacity to produce cashew, mango, organic rice, and leafy vegetables  to instigate transformational  change towards 
climate -resilient agriculture  through this particular approach.  See Section D.1 for the beneficiary informati on. 
 
30 In addition to the climate exposure and impacts on these crops, the agriculture sector is responsible for 17.5 % of 
greenhouse gas emissions (27.1 MtCO2e) (MoE, 2020b). According to the Biennial Update Report (BUR) (2020a) , the 
sector is the second- largest source of emis sions in the country, mainly through rice cultivation, including cropland 
expansion, crop residue and biomass burning, fertilizer use, animal waste, and wetting and drying regimes. However, except for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degrad
ation(REDD+), Cambodia is currently reporting 
CO 2, CH 4, and N 2O at the Tier 1 methodology  level from the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
guidelines. Therefore, it is currently not possible to provide accurate emissions baselines for C O2, CH 4, and N 2O from • Heat stress: Exposure to temperatures above the relatively high temperature thresho ld of 36°C  can cause sterility and if daytime 
maximum temperatures exceed 40°C production will decline.  
Post-harvest Losses:  
• Losses due to humid or hot conditions in storage and limited drying and milling capacity at the farm level.  
Vegetables/ 
Siem Reap and 
Preah Vihear  Production (yield) – Food losses:  
High seasonality of production (from November to January, early dry season), heavily dependent on natural resources and therefore vulnerable to climate hazards:  
• Droughts - combined with limited or no irrigation systems, can pose risks to crop failures;  
• Floods - minor problem;  
• Heat stress;  
• Pest/Diseases - e.g., flea beetle, cutworm, leaf folder, armyworm, aphid, lady beetle, snail, butterfly, root rot, bacteria wilt;  
• Shifts in seasonal patterns; and  
• River flow reductions.  
Affected Quality (yield):  
• vegetable degradation;  
• variations in vegetable size at production level;  
• inappropriate timing for harvesting, resulting in over or under maturity; and 
• short -duration of vegetables storage prone to degradation.  
Post-harvest Losses:  
• short -duration storage due to lack of cold storage infrastructure, capacity of products, rapid damaging.


---
*Page 15*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
   
 the agriculture sector in  the NTSB or monitor changes on a site -specific scale. Therefore, the project will report any 
mitigation impact as its co -benefit, linked to relevant existing and planned initiatives (see Section B2 (b)) that are 
dedicated to enhancing Cambodia’s climate change mitigation capacity in the agriculture and forestry sectors.  
 
V. Baseline Investment: Complementarity and Coherence  (See Annex 2 for further details)  
 
31 Having justified the specific approach under this proposed PEARL project in the NTSB, commercialization, 
mechanization, intensification, and infrastructural improvement efforts are also crucial, especially in the lowland areas 
of the NTSB around the Tonle Sap Lake, where such interventions would be highly  effective and appropriate. Therefore, 
an array of agricultural enhancement and climate change adaptation options are necessary to increase the adaptive 
capacity of agriculture in the NTSB.  
 
32 From this perspective, the efforts under the PEARL project must coordinate with other regional and national 
initiatives, supporting agricultural adaptation from various angles. Table 3 shows recently launched and planned 
initiatives supporting sustainable agricultural expansion, climate- smart  agriculture, and the nexus between sustainable 
land management and food security. Their geographical and strategic linkages will make these initiatives highly 
complementary to the PEARL project and comprise parallel fi nance6 amounting to over USD 551 million. With those 
initiatives currently under development (i.e., ASPIRE -AT and EU -funded deforestation- free agriculture projects), the 
PEARL project will coordinate closely with the relevant development partners to explo re ways to build programmatic 
and operational linkages. Such linkages  will ensure the project's sustainability, replication, and scale- up potential  to 
comprise part of its exit strategy.  The PEARL project will also coordinate with other initiatives by IFC,  USAID, JICA, and 
others  (see Annex 2 for a detailed map of baseline investments) to ensure its additionality and complementarity in 
relevant areas.  
 
33 Across these initiatives, the importance of rice production as the country’s main staple will continue. For rice and 
other crops, increasing their production capacity while addressing their climate vulnerability is critical. The need for 
better, more efficient and accessible agricultural infrastructure, including road networks, power grids, and pos t-harvest 
storage and processing facilities are all fundamental enablers that these initiatives work together to provide. Having a 
programmatic approach to ensuring effective coordination and synergies with these initiatives is, therefore, crucial and ensures that a wide range of adaptive options is available to the sector to meet its specific needs and priorities.  
 
Table 3: Relevant Projects under the Programmatic Coordinatio n 
Relevant Project  Investment Size  
(~million USD)  Type of 
Synergy  Complementarity with the premium market -based approach  
FAO-led project, 
“Enhancing 
sustainability of the 
Transboundary 
Cambodia - Mekong 
River Delta Aquifer”, 
under the  under the 
Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) at 
inception.  15 Scaling up the 
impact at the 
landscape level 
with the GEF  The project will stren gthen environmental sustainability and water security in the Lower 
Mekong Basin by focusing on improved governance and sustainable utilization of the 
Cambodia- Mekong River Delta Transboundary Aquifer. The project will support transboundary 
consensus -buildi ng by assessing the current state of groundwater resources, recharge, 
extraction dynamics, and groundwater -related dependencies of related ecosystems and 
developing standard measurement methodology and indicators. The project will also 
demonstrate innovati ve groundwater management and utilization approaches. The PEARL 
project will consider and integrate the methodology , indicators, and groundwater management 
approaches into its IWM and groundwater budgeting and management efforts, particularly in selecting and promoting specific climate- resilient and high- value techniques and technologies  
that impact groundwater .  
FAO-led project, 
"Promoting Climate-
Resilient Livelihoods 
in Rice -Based 
Communities in the 
Tonle Sap Region," 
with funding from the 
Least Developed 
Countries Fund 
(LDCF), under the 
GCF, under 
implementation.  9 Scaling up the 
impact at the 
landscape level 
with the GEF  The project aims to support traditional rice farmers and communities in building their resilience 
to climate change through an ecosystem -based, market -driven approach in the lower sections 
of the NTSB and other areas along the Tonle Sap Lake. The project is highly complementary with the premium market -
based approach as it offers a range of adaptation support to rice 
farmers, while the premium market -based approach focuses narrowly on adaptation options 
through niche market tools and opportunities. Also, given the downstream location of this 
project along the Tonle Sap Lake, there is significant potential for establishing a landscape -
level approach by focusing on upstream- downstream relationships and effects. Activities such 
as catchment restoration, erosion control, and IPM can be pursued through integrated 
watershed management (IWM). Also, their shared geographical focus suggests the potential 
for collaboration on the development of agrometeorological advisory services and 
dissemination.  
ADB-led GCF project, 
"Climate -Friendly 141 Replicating the 
experience and The project aims to improve climate resilience and reduce the carbon footprint of commercial 
rice, maize, cassava, and mango value chains by investing in climate -resilient agricultural 
 
6 FAO-led GEF projects are also co -financing specific technical activities of the proposed project.


---
*Page 16*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
   
  Agribusiness Value 
Chains Sector 
(CAVS)", under 
implementation.  lesson s of 
another GCF 
project and 
scaling up the 
impact at 
systemic and 
institutional 
levels.  production and post -harvest infrastructure. The project will support production intensification 
and commercialization and promote low -carbon technologies in Kampong Cham and Tbong 
Khmum provinces along the Mekong River and Kampot and Takeo provinces in the Mekong 
Delta, another priority agricultural region for climate action. Despite its geographical and 
production expansion focuses, there is strong complementarity with the premium market -
based approach in the NTSB as it also employs a value chain approach, targeting a similar 
range of crops and promoting the broader adoption of CamGAP. From this perspective, 
effective knowledge sharing and harmonization of systemic and institutional capacity 
development support will ensure their additionality and lower the incremental cost of climate 
change adaptation of agriculture in the country.  
World Bank -led 
Agricultural Sector 
Diversification Project  
(CASDP) , under 
implementation.  101 Building on the 
parallel co-
financing for 
complementary investment results.  The project aims to facilitate the development of diversified agriculture value chains in 
Battambang, Mondulkiri, Ratanakiri, Stung Treng, Preah Vihear, Kampong Cham, Tboung 
Khmum, Kratie, Siem Reap, Kandal, Kampong Speu and Kampong Chhnang provinces and Phnom Penh. The project will remove barriers to successfully commercializing small - and 
medium- sized farmers' agricultural products by enabling agriculture diversification, supporting 
public infrastructure, and improving agriculture information s
ystems and quality control 
management. Particularly in Siem Reap and Preah Vihear, the PEARL project will coordinate 
closely with the CASDP to deliver incremental impact by promoting climate- resilient production 
and processing and harmonizing processes and procedures of quality control and traceability measures at both the site- specific and systemic levels. The PEARL project will also benefit 
from the infrastructure support provided by this project.  
IFAD -led project, 
"Sustainable Assets 
for Agriculture Markets 
Business and Trade 
(SAAMBAT)", under 
implementation.  142 Building on the 
parallel co-
financing for 
complementary investment results.  Building on its existing projects, "Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (AIMS)" and 
"Agriculture Services for Innovation, Resilience, and Extension (ASPIRE),"  the project aims to 
improve rural road and energy infrastructure, the use of digital technology and skills -base of 
rural youth entrepreneurs in agriculture around key market centers across the country, 
including the NTSB. The project's rural agricultural infrastructure improvements, including 
roads, collection and processing facilities, and renewable energy access, will significantly 
complement the premium market -based approach in the NTSB. Such infrastructure is an 
essential enabler of agricultural market development and the necessary conditions for 
successfully demonstrating adaptation options through alternative agricultural commodities 
and valu e chains.  
IFAD -led project, 
“Agriculture Services 
Programme for an 
Inclusive Rural 
Economy and 
Agricultural Trade 
(ASPIRE- AT)”, 
currently under 
development  133 Building on the 
parallel co-
financing for 
complementary investment results.  As the second phase of the ASPIRE  project, the project will use graduation processes to 
harness natural market forces to grow PG, AC, and union membership to be inclusive of 
motivated poor individuals in each community to help them achieve scale to attract more 
buyers and better terms of trade. Such efforts will promote affordable investment pathways for many smallholders, establish affordable initial investment options, and, with reinvestment of profits, generate increasingly higher net incomes. Direct targeting measures will be spec ifically 
used to increase women’s genuine leadership and promote women and youth into higher 
status business and entrepreneurship opportunities to serve their communities around the 
Tonle Sap Lake. The PEARL project will complement ASPIRE -AT by promoting harmonized 
approaches to climate resilience building (e.g., climate smart practices and technologies and capacity building of agricultural extension services) while drawing on ASPIRE -AT’s small -scale 
agricultural business development expertise and social infrastructure, developed through the 
AIMS and ASPIRE.  
EU-funded project, 
“Deforestation free 
agriculture value 
chains and 
sustainable food 
systems” through EU 
Multi -annual Indicative 
Programme (MIP) 
2021 -2027 under 
development   
 TBC (~ Euro 25 - 
30 milli on) Scaling up the 
impact at the 
landscape level  The proposed EU -funded project will contribute to Cambodia's efforts to set up a sustainable 
model for national food production by putting emphasis on higher -value products and 
increased productivity through the introduction of green technology and digital solutions. 
Activities will be designed with the aim to improve price and quality competitiveness while 
ensuring equity and inclusivity and maintaining a balance between conservation and 
development to foste r sustainable impacts. It will target inland fisheries and smallholder 
farmers through services, including improving financial access. Activities under the project will pay special attention to addressing climate vulnerability and environmental degradation to 
support the implementation of Cambodia's NDC. Early lessons from the PEARL project will offer helpful knowledge and a solid foundation for the project to design its interventions and approaches to ensure its complementarity with the PEARL project and f
ocus on delivering 
incremental impact.  In addition, the PEARL project will coordinate with this project closely to 
support deforestation free agricultural value chain development and explore market 
opportunities  for deforestation free agricultural products  from Cambodia  in the EU.  
Total   >551  
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
 
34 Based on the above justifications,  the value chain approach targeting premium price markets around cashew, 
mango, organic rice and vegetables illuminates a viable pathway towards climate- resilient, higher -value, inclusive and 
sustainable agriculture. From this perspective, the theory of ch ange for the proposed PEARL project is provided below


---
*Page 17*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
   
 in Figure 6 and in the narrative description of the project components . Note: the project activities are not discussed in 
detail in this section as they are discussed in Section B.3.  
 
Figure 6: Theory of Change  
 
VI. Goal Statement  
 
35  IF the project increases the capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors and institutional 
support mechanisms in the NTSB to generate and apply crop- specific agrometeorological information to reduce climate 
risks and impacts, and adopt market -informed climate -resilient and sustainable production and processing practices 
and technologies through improved PSPPs, THEN  Cambodia will be able to place this climate- vulnerable and 
agriculture- dependent region on a sustainable development pat hway through strategic alignment between climate 
foresight, market incentives and enabling environment, BECAUSE the smallholder farmers and other local value chain 
actors will have developed the necessary means and capacity to take advantage of relevant market opportunities and 
instruments t o reduce and cope with climate impacts and continue improving their agricultural production and livelihoods 
sustainably.  
 
VII. Expected Outcomes and Results  
 
36 The PEARL project will achieve this goal by delivering the three interdependent outcomes (Figure 7 ). These 
outcomes  (climate foresight, market incentives and enabling environment) will reinforce each other iteratively to 
transform the NTSB's current agricultural production and processing practices into climate- resilient, high -value and 
sustainable ones. The project will deliver  these outcomes in non-sequential order . Activities unde r these outcomes will


---
*Page 18*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
   
 thus be  implemented in a conjoining manner throughout the project to achieve their transformational goal.  These 
outcomes will jointly address the climate and socioeconomic vulnerabilities in the NTSB by instigating behavioral change 
among smallholder farmers and other small -scale local value chain actors. Such change will promote the adoption of 
agricultural practices that are informed by crop- specific climate risks, market signals, and opportunities and supported 
by improved agricultural extension capacity and an enabling environment for increased PSPPs, cross -sectoral 
coordination, public spending, and private investment for climate- resilient, high- value and sustainable agriculture.  
 
37 Outcome One (Climate Foresight)  ensures that smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors have a 
solid understanding of climate- related risks and mitigation strategies. The PEARL project will introduce state- of-the-art 
technologies to provide crop- specific agrometeorological forecasting, warnings, and related farm management and 
market advisory services to improve local capacity to identify and respond to risks associated with weather and climatic 
conditions. The project will also develop the necessary institutional arrangements, including the private sector, to 
effectively disseminate such advisory services to end- users. The increased agrometeorological foreca sting and 
advisory capacities will directly feed 
into Outcome Two for adopting 
climate -resilient techniques and 
technologies by smallholder farmers 
and other local value chain actors and promoting risk finance services.  
 
38 This outcome will build on 
several  international support 
initiatives in this area to focus on 
remaining capacity gaps (Table 4). 
While requiring more agriculture-
specific climate information, critical 
capacity gaps are mainly found in 
providing crop- specific advisory 
services and getting them to end-users on the ground (see Output 1.1, 
Figure 6). There are institutional and 
technical capacity limitations, for 
instance, translating weather and 
climate data into specific advisory 
services for agricultural applications, 
particularly putting into forms and contexts that are easily digestible by farmers and other local value chain actors. Also, dedicated institutional arrangements within and between the MAFF  
and the Ministry of Water Resources and 
Meteorology (MoWRM) are necessary to offer consistent and coherent agrometeorological advisory services to end -
users. Another area is strengthening extension services and partnerships with private actors and NGOs through local radio and TV stations, social media, and dedicated mobile apps such as Tonle Sap App, Chamkar  and EcoKas ksekor  
to disseminate harmonized and quality information to aid decision-
making in farm management and postharvest 
practices. Under this outcome, activities will coordinate with the FAO -led LDCF project, described above in Table 3, to 
ensure the sustainability and scalability of the project's investment at the landscape level.  
Table 4: Agrometeorological Forecasting, Warning and Advisory Service Capacity Gaps 
EXISTING CAPACITIES 
AND INITIATIVES  FOCUS/ACTIVITY  
Data and service production  Last mile: delivery and uptake by farmers  
Monitoring, data 
collection and 
equipment  Capacities of 
national 
institutions  Forecasting  Tailored 
services to 
agricultural 
sectors  Dissemination 
and extension  Participatory 
engagement 
of farmers 
end-users  Farmer 
training 
and demo  
DOM7 
Monitoring and forecasts         
UNDP -GEF8 
Early warnings for 
development   
      
 
7 Department of Meteorology Cambodia 
8 Strengthening Climate Information and Early Warning Systems in Cambodia to Support Climate Resilient Development and Adaptation to 
Climate Change  
Figure 7: Expected Outcomes of the PEARL Projec t


---
*Page 19*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
   
 WMO -CIAT9 
Forecasting and 
insurance    Coffee, rice, 
sugar, 
cassava, 
rubber, dairy, 
grazing     
FAO-University Southern 
Queensland10 
Pest and disease alerts   
  Pest and 
disease    
WFP -FAO-UNICEF  
Social protection     Social 
protection     
Technical Working 
Group- CARDI -MAFF  
Agromet bulletin 
production         
RIMES -SESAME  
Forecasts and crop 
advisories         
Shaded areas indicate some level of investment. Their exact contributions will be assessed during the project preparation pha se. 
Indicative PEARL project 
investment focus and 
level (  some  
strong)      
Cashew, 
mango, 
organic rice, 
vegetables     
 
39 Improved and highly accessible and tailored agrometeorological advisory services under this outcome will address 
critical barriers to climate- informed agriculture by developing the capacity of responsible institutions and end- users, with 
particular focus on women and other  socially excluded  minorities, and increasing the awareness of climate risks and 
options to address such risks (see barrier descriptions below).  
 
40 The primary beneficiary groups of this outcome are smallholder farmers in the target areas producing cashew, 
mango, organic rice, and vegetables and other small -scale local value chain actors who are involved in postharvest 
processing and value- addition ac tivities, as crop- specific  agrometeorological information can also be used to improve 
their activity planning  and reduce postharvest losses . Another primary beneficiary is a wider range of  farmers across 
the NTSB with improved access to advanced agrometeorological advisory and related last -mile services. Secondary 
beneficiary groups include public and private agricultural extension service providers and hydrometeorological service 
providers through technical capacity development concerning the production and dissemination of agrometeorological 
information.  
 
41 Outcome Two (Market Incentives)  will bridge the current capacity and resource g aps faced by smallholder 
farmers and other small -scale local value chain actors in the target areas to adopt alternative practices for climate-
resilient and high- value agricultural production and processing. Interwoven with the climate foresight infrastructure and 
capacities developed under Outcome 1, such practices will significantly increase the overall adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors by  increasing their climate resilience and financial viability  to 
afford improved adaptation and livelihood options. The project will use the certification schemes already operational in 
the country, including CamGap, GI, SRP, organic certification, and HACCP, as the primary vehicles of transformation to develop market incentives around cashew, mango, organic rice, and vegetables.  The project’s support for vegetable 
production mainly aims to empower and increase the climate change resilience of female farmers and female- headed 
households as the demographic trends in the region through labor migration by men make vegetable production a vital source of livelihood for many women farmers.  
 
42 This effort will draw on effective public -social -private partnerships (PSPPs) to promote the adoption of certification-
based and market -led practices and technologies that are climate -resilient , inclusive and sustainable. A PSPP focuses 
not only on maximizing efficiency by bringing the public and private sectors together but also on creating shared social values and visions by paying closer attention to various public needs and interests. This effort will include developing smallholder farmers’ and other local value chain actors’ climate- resilient entrepreneurial skills  (with particular focus on 
youth, women, and other socially excluded minorities)  and business and financial literacy and providing tools to make 
finance available for these beneficiaries , who would otherwise have limited means to adopt climate- resilient and market 
competitive practices and technologies. Such partnerships are starting to emerge in Cambodia. For example, the Preah 
 
9 De-Risk: https://public.wmo.int/en/projects/de -risk-south- east-asia 
10 Regional program on agrometeorology and plant pests and diseases


---
*Page 20*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
   
 Vihear Meanchey Union of Agricult ural Cooperatives (PMUAC) for organic rice farmers partners with buyers/exporters 
such as AMRU -Rice and Signatures of Asia (SoA) to provide guarantees and internal quality control for their contract 
farmers. This type of partnership increases not only the product quality for the buyers/exporters but also the collective 
bargaining power of farmers while advancing the government's value- focused agricultural development policy 
implementation.  
 
43 To enable this market -led transformation, a Farmer -led Agricultura l Resilience Mechanism (FARM) will be 
established to assist smallholder farmers and other small -scale local value chain actors in acquiring technologies and 
infrastructure assets that are essential for adopting climate- resilient and high -value agricultural  production and 
processing under this outcome (see Output 2.2, Figure 6). Under the FARM, the project will support ACs, FAs, PGs, 
and agricultural unions in developing individual ly tailored  business plans for climate- resilient and high- value agriculture 
in partnership with public extension services and private sector and NGO partners. The acquired technologies and 
infrastructure assets will help operationalize the plans. The FARM will also support the beneficiary groups with business 
and financial management and increase their governance capacity to ensure a just transition to climate- resilient and 
high-value agriculture  to help  implement their business plans technically and operationally  (see Section B.3 for further 
details).  
 
44 As part of the business plan development process, the project will establish partnerships with private sector 
partners. During the design phase, the project formulation team consulted with several value chain leaders, and Table 
5 provides examples of these value chain leaders. As the Accredited Entity (AE) for this project, FAO is currently 
screening and selecting private partners, starting with consultations with prioritized private sector entities based on a 
mapping exercise to identify and score their potential roles and contributions to the project, and co -develop tailored 
engagement plans, including capacity development and resource mobilization strategies. Selected partners will support 
the beneficiary groups' transition to climate- resilient and higher -value agriculture in several areas, including agricultural 
supply, direct purchasing, value addition processing, marketing  and sales domestically and internationally, agricultural 
insurance, and microfinance (also related to the FARM). Their business leadership and investment through PSPPs are 
expected to increase the economic viability of this outcome and establish an avenue through which to crowd in private 
and public investment. This process will also benefit the private partners in increasing  their supply capacity and quality , 
as they  are mainly small to medium- sized enterprises (SMEs) that are also in need of such partner ships to increase 
their quality control and supply capacity, market outlets and services along the value chains.  
 
Table 5: Examples of Value Chain Leaders Consulted during the Project Development Phase 
Category  Potential Partners  Potential Area of Collaboration  
Agricultural 
Supply Providers   Among agricultural suppliers, Agribuddy  is a unique and relatively small operator with limited outreach capacity, 
focusing primarily on rice producers. Their business model promotes higher standards of quality control and sustainable production through a credit guarantor system. The project will strengthen cooperative arrangements of cashew, mango, and vegetable producers and increase farmers' awareness of higher -value production options to 
support the expansion of their services into these segments. This will increase farmers' interest in quality supplies 
and credits for adopting climate -resilient and higher -value practices.  
Traders/ Exporters  
 Traders/exporters like AMRU Rice  (for organic rice), SeasonFresh (for mango), and Specialized Cambodian 
Produce  ( SCP) (for cashew) look to increase the production capacity of their contract farmers, particularly in 
premium price segments. Their ability to provide extension support to farmers and other local value chain actors to increase their production capacity and quality control measures is limited. Contract farming often offers farmers secure income and access to credits to afford their transition to climate- resilient and higher -value practices. The 
project will strengthen farmers' and other local value chain actors' capacities for climate- resilient and higher -value 
production and post -harvest quality control to expand contract farming arrangements that meet both parties' needs. 
The project will also ensure the necessary regulatory conditions and enforcement capacities (e.g., Law on the Management of Pesticides and Fertilizers, Seed Law, Agricultural Extension Policy, and operationalization of 
relevant certification schemes).  
Retailers/ Restaurants/ Hotels   
Health food retailers/distributors like Natural Garden  are still a novelty. This segment is, however, fast -growing due 
to increased public awareness of safe food and the recent introduction of the Law on Food Safety. Natural Garden supplies organic rice, vegetables, and fruits to over 80 hotels, restaurants, and supermarkets in the country. They also support small groups of farmers (over 70% women) through contract farming, extension services, and credit access. However, their direct sourcing and outreach capacities are limited. The seasonality and meeting the necessary volume of production remain a challenge. The project will expand the network of organic producers with 
the necessary extension services to address this challenge and increase farmers’ access to market and income to 
incentivize climate -resilient and higher -value practices.  
Microfinance 
lenders/ Agricultural Insurers   Microfinance and insurance provid ers like Agriculture and Rural Development Bank of Cambodia  (ARDB) (although 
not fully a  private bank), ACLEDA Bank , Angkor Microhenranhvatho Kampuchea (AMK) and Forte Insurance  are 
leading financial institutions supporting Cambodian agriculture. Their current scope is mainly focused on rice 
production. During the project development, the project preparation team interviewed ACLEDA and AMK. They 
indicated that very few smallholder farmers and other small -scale local value chain actors are able to access their SeasonFresh


---
*Page 21*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
   
  microfinance loan products for technology upgrades due to factors including their lack of collateral or guarantor, 
repayment capacity, limited business knowledge, entrepreneurial skills, and ACs' poor governance capacity. These 
banks operate extensive networks of services covering rural  communities across the country and express strong 
interest in expanding their services to smallholder farmers. However, removing the barriers to finance would require effective PSPPs to reduce investment risks and strengthen smallholders' financial and op erational capacities. 
According to a senior representative of AMK, "there is a considerable demand for unsecured finance at the level the project proposes [through the FARM] to meet...but the lack of consumers' awareness and governance capacity 
of ACs to h andle finance need to be addressed first, and we as a bank are limited in term of what we can do in 
those areas". Forte Insurance also indicated similar needs by increasing smallholder farmers' awareness of risk finance and its benefit and a coordinated public -private effort to make agricultural insurance accessible. These 
private- sector institutions are eager to adopt a social and environmental management system to align with 
international financing standards. The project will work with these potential financial sector partners to increase the 
project beneficiaries’ access to finance to accelerate their adoption of climate- resilient and higher -value practices 
and technologies through the FARM.  For example, the FARM beneficiary groups may use the acquired assets and 
savings accumulated through the use of the assets as group collateral to increase their access to commercial  
lending and insurance products and services.  The project will also coordinate with these partner s to promote and 
establish a harmonized lending system that favors loan and investment applications with built -in climate de- risking 
measures. In addition, the project will contribute to the National Crop Insurance Program, led by MAFF, Forte 
Insurance, and others, by assessing the feasibility of developing insurance parameters for cashew, mango, and 
vegetable producers.  
 
45 These private sector partners' effective engagement is contingent upon several enabling conditions (i.e., capacities 
of individual farmers and extension services, collective governance of smallholder farmers and other value chain actors, 
and favorable regulatory and institutional frameworks). Therefore, this outcome, together with Outcome 3, will establish 
these conditions to reduce the risk and cost of their engagement. Without the project's investment in these social and 
institutional capacity areas, this market -based approach to building the climate change adaptation of smallholder 
farmers and other small -scale local valu e chain actors would likely remain non- bankable from the private sector 
perspective.  
 
46 Through these partnerships, the PEARL project will promote several food safety, sustainability, and worker welfare 
certification schemes that are either currently operati onal to provide market -based incentives for the transition to 
climate -resilient, higher -value, inclusive and sustainable agriculture (see Output 2.1, Figure 6 ). Since these certification 
schemes focus mainly on ecological, social, and food safety aspects, the project will also support their alignment with 
climate risk considerations to operate as market enablers for climate- resilient agriculture. Using these  c ertification 
schemes is timely and strategic , given the increased public interest in safe and sustainably produced food in the country  
The project will build on this market trend to establish strategic partnerships between government institutions, private 
sector entities  and representative bodies of farmers and other local value chain actors.  
 
47 Underpinned by these market -based incentives, the project will promote the adoption of climate- resilient, high-
value and sustainable techniques and technologies, including small -scale infrastructure among smallholder farmers 
and other local value chain act ors to support their transition (Output 2.3, see Figure 6). The FARM will directly 
complement this activity through strategic business planning  and prov iding innovative support  for acquiring  and 
adopting the technologies and techniques identified in the business plans.  
 
48 Concurrently, the project will also promote an integrated watershed management (IWM) approach , incrementally 
building on the existing conservation and REDD+ related efforts of the government and development partners, to improve agroecological conditions at the site- specific and landscape levels (Output 2.4, see Figure 6
). IWM activities 
will support community protected areas (CPAs) and community forests (CFs) in critical catchment areas linked to 
cashew, mango, organic  rice, and vegetable production to strengthen catchment restoration and protection efforts and 
improve their livelihoods. The activities will promote alternative livelihood options (e.g., apiculture that also increases 
pollination services , agroforestry fr uits tourism, organic rice production, value addition to non- timber forest products 
(NTFPs)), and development of deforestation- free agricultural products and market opportunities.  
 
49 These activities  under this outcome will overcome the three fundamental ba rriers to the adaptation of agriculture 
to climate change in the NTSB  – limited knowledge of adaptive practices, and a lack of access to finance and 
technologies, as identified in the Climate Change Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Sector 2016- 2020 
(CCPAP -AFF) (MAFF, 2016)  (see barrier descriptions below). Building on the improved agrometeorological advisory 
services and increased awareness of risks under Outcome One, this outcome will directly enable the beneficiaries’ 
transition to climate- resilient, higher -value and sust ainable agriculture by making the necessary knowledge, financial 
and technological support  available and accessible.


---
*Page 22*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
   
 50 Under this outcome, Outputs 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 target both smallholder farmers and other small -scale local value -
chain actors as their primary beneficiaries through streamlined and climate- proofed certification processes, certification-
based business planning for production and processing, related capacity development, improved technological  access 
for operationalizing business plans, dem onstration and adoption of climate -resilient and high- value  production and 
processing practices and technologies  relevant to the business plans .  Members of CPAs and CFs and immediate 
downstream farmers are the primary beneficiary groups of Output 2.4.  
 
51 Outcome Three (Enabling Environment) strengthens the necessary regulatory and institutional frameworks and 
capacities for climate- resilient agricultural certification, cross -sectoral coordination for increased PSPPs and 
smallholder financing, and climate -informed investment support to ensure the successful delivery of Outcomes 1 and 
2. Thus, activities under this outcome will be implemented in conjunction with those under the other  outcomes  through 
a positive feedback loop (see Figure 7) . It ensure s the effective use of certification programs as primary vehicles for 
positive behavioral change while promoting effective PSPPs through the existing national and provincial stakeholder 
coordination mechanisms (Output 3.1, see Figure 6). Such mechanisms in clude the National Council for Sustainable 
Development (NCSD), National Committee for Sub- National Democratic Development (NCDD), and public forums at 
the provincial level. The project will partner with the Agricultural and Rural Development Bank of Cambod ia (ARDB) 
and private financial institutions to develop a lending scorecard system to consider climate resilience, inclusivity, and 
sustainability as crucial eligibility criteria in screening loan applications. This system would promote not only an overall  
shift towards climate- resilient agriculture within the sector but also a just transition by increasing smallholder farmers 
and other local value chain actors' ability to access finance through climate change adaptation.  
 
52 The project will also establish a gender -responsive, landscape- level agroecology monitoring system (LAMS) to 
crowd in public and private investments in climate- resilient, higher -value and sustainable agriculture (Output 3.2, see 
Figure 6). This is a climate -informed investment decision su pport system for public and private investors to funnel 
investment into a climate- resilient and just transition of the sector. The LAMS will also be linked with other climate data 
systems such as the national greenhouse gas inventory (NGHGI) and National F orest Monitoring System to support 
Cambodia’s reporting to the UNFCCC through the Enhanced Transparency Framework (ETF) under the Paris 
Agreement.  
 
53 These outputs under this outcome will remove systemic and institutional barriers that prevent concerted efforts 
between the public and private actors and levels of government to direct their financial, technological, and human 
resources to put the agriculture sector on a climate -resilient, inclusive and sustainable pathway to ensure a just 
transformation.  
 
54 Thes e three outcomes described above have been identified based on an extensive stakeholder consultation 
process (see Annex 7), various feasibility studies (see Annex 2), including a review of baseline investments and parallel 
funding activities to ensure the additionality and complementarity of these outcomes and associated outputs and 
activities.  
 
55 Under this outcome, the target beneficiaries of Output 3.1 include the public institutions and private sector partners 
through climate- proofing of certification processes, integration of the private sector into local development planning, 
and standardization of the smallholder lending approach, prioritizing resilience building.  Public institutions and private 
investors involved in the agriculture sec tor will benefit from Output 3.2 through LAMS, supporting their climate- informed 
investment decision- making processes  to support the project goal,  and establishing the country's enhanced 
transparency framework concerning agriculture.  
 
56 These outcomes will support  three GCF Adaptation Result Areas  (ARAs) - ARA 1 Most vulnerable people and 
communities, ARA 2 Health, well -being, food and water security, and ARA 4 Ecosystems and ecosystem services.  In 
addition, the project will also deliver the f ollowing two co-benefits related to climate change mitigation in the agriculture, 
forestry, and other land- use sectors, biodiversity conservation, and women's empowerment , as described in Section 
B.2 (b) .  
 
Co-benefit One: Agricultural production, and proc essing and agroecological management practices are improved 
to contribute to GHG emissions reductions.  
Co-benefit Two: Gender considerations are fully internalized into climate- resilient value chain development 
practices.  
 
VIII. Barriers


---
*Page 23*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
   
 57 Despite the growing premium price segments and related opportunities , most smallholder farmers' current 
production in the NTSB are generally described as low yield, low -quality, and low -value . There are limited value addition 
activities. These conditions a fford most smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors limited means and 
opportunities to adopt climate- resilient and higher -value practices  and livelihoods .  
 
58 The following six broad barriers prevent their transition to climate- resilient and hi gh-value agriculture that often 
compound one another to contribute to the current baseline situation in which most smallholder farmers and local value 
chain actors have the very limited adaptive capacity and options to cope with the impact of climate chang e. Another 
compounding factor that makes these barriers disproportionally challenging for women farmers and value chain actors 
is the inequality between men and women. Women tend to be excluded from decision- making processes and capacity 
development opport unities and have far more limited access to information than men. These conditions call for special 
attention to the needs of women and gender considerations when removing these barriers (e.g., ensuring women's 
representation and leadership in decision- making, and providing alternative venues and flexible schedules for training 
to increase women's participation).  
 
Barrier 1: Lack of reliable and crop -specific agrometeorological forecasting and related advisory services to 
support farmers' decision -making t hrough anticipatory action and on -farm planning.  
 
59 The lack of access to reliable and crop- specific agrometeorological forecasting and advisory services by farmers 
in the NTSB has hampered progress towards swiftly adopting their farming practices to the changes in the seasonality of monsoon, increased rainfall variability, higher temperatures, and outbreaks of climate- driven pest and diseases 
(FAO, 2022) . With international support, Cambodia has developed a network of hydrometeorological stations to provide 
general forecasti ng and early warning services (Table 4); however, there are significant infrastructural and capacity 
gaps in the provision and dissemination of agrometeorological forecasting and advisory services, including the last 
mile. Limited knowledge of climate- related risks among farmers and other local value chain actors is, therefore, a critical 
barrier. This barrier will be removed through Output 1.1. (Activities 1.1.1, 1.1.2 and 1.1.3).  
 
Barrier 2: Limited awareness of climate risks and climate -resilient and higher -value options among 
smallholder farmers and other small -scale local value chain actors.  
 
60 The limited awareness of risks and climate- resilient and higher -value options, promoted through extension services, 
training, social media  platforms, and mobile apps, is another barrier attributed to the weak institutional and cross -
sectoral coordination. It prevents smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women, and other socially excluded minorities, from adopt ing alternative production technologies and techniques that are climate- resilient, 
sustainable, and high- value. As a result, unsustainable practices that exacerbate vulnerabilities –  including mono-
cropping, increased use of chemical fertilizers and pestic ides, and poor soil nutrient management – 
have continued. 
The increased use of pesticides and other chemicals has, in turn, limited their opportunity to access premium price 
markets and raised food safety and environmental concerns (Burn et al., 2018) . The projected increase in pest and 
diseases due to climate change makes the role of IPM and an effort to limit and minimize agricultural che micals and 
improve agrometeorological forecasting and advisory capacities particularly essential (Cite Climate Report). From this 
perspective, the knowledge of alternative practices and technologies among farmers and other local value chain actors 
in the N TSB will be increased through Output 2.3 -  knowledge management (Activity 2.3.1).  
 
Barrier 3: Limited capacity and financial and technological access for smallholder farmers and other small -
scale local value chain actors to utilize premium price market opportunities as vehicles for adopting climate -
resilient and high -value practices.  
 
61 Limited market knowledge and financial access among smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors for 
adopting appropriate technologies and techniques pose a related challenge (MAFF, 2013; Kula, Turner and Sar, 2015; 
FAO, 2016) . These limitations make premium price markets inaccessible for these actors, as they lack the necessary 
resources and knowledge to target such markets or meet the required production volumes and quality standards. This 
barrier will be addressed through Outputs 2.1 and 2.2 to support market -led business planning (Activities 2.1.1 and 
2.1.2) and make low -cost agricultural finance available (Activities 2.2.1 and 2.2.3) to these actors, p articularly women 
and other socially excluded minorities, who would otherwise be unable to access finance as they lack the necessary 
collateral or guarantor. Also, ways to expand agricultural insurance services will be explored through Activities 2.2.2 to 
address their risk exposure.  
 
Barrier 4: Limited outreach capacity and market- based knowledge of agricultural extension providers  to 
support the necessary behavioral change and shift in agricultural practice.


---
*Page 24*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
   
 62 The current farming practices of most smallholder farmers in the NTSB follow the traditional focus of agricultural 
policy and extension services, which have placed a strong emphasis on productivity (i.e., qualitative objectives and 
indicators) (Burn et al., 2018) . As a result, this has generated a significant surplus of rice, leading to price decreases. 
Although the focus has gradually shif ted towards value addition and differentiation by quality, particularly given the 
increased production costs, including energy and transportation, the transition has been slow. This is mainly due to a 
lack of outreach capacity and market -based knowledge of  extension services and effective public -private partnerships 
(ibid.). Therefore, increased efforts are necessary to develop the ability of extension services to reach out to farmers 
and other value chain actors, including SMEs, to provide climate- informed, market -driven and quality -focused support 
services while leveraging support from larger private actors like buyers and exporters. Critical areas of capacity 
development include quality management and compliance with international standards through certif ications. Output 
2.3 will address this barrier by developing the capacities of extension services, including private extension providers, 
farmers, and other value chain actors to pursue climate -resilient and high- value agriculture (Activities 2.3.2).  
 Barrier 5: Weak IWM to ensure good agroecological conditions  and connectivity  and ecological  functions  
that can also reduce natural disaster risks.  
 
63 Deforestation and forest degradation due to rapid agricultural expansion for monoculture plantations through large 
scale agro- industrial Economic Land Concessions (ELCs) and distribution of land titles under Social Land Concessions 
(SLCs) have led to severe degradation of agroecological conditions at the farm and landscape levels in areas, 
particularly along waterways (Forest Trends, 2015; Sasaki et al., 2016; RGC, 2017; MoE, 2020b) . The sub-optimal 
watershed management practices to ensure good agroecological conditions and ecosystem services have 
depleted soil nutrients and the supply and quality of water and increased natural disaster risks through soil erosion and 
sedimentation along rivers and riparian areas downstream. The predicted increase in rainfall intensity is likely to 
compound these disaster risks to cause more localized flooding and landslides to reduce agricultural yields and product 
quality. Output 2.4 thus aims to remove this barrier by promoting a range of measures, including agr oforestry, the 
development of livelihood options, and IWM in critical catchment areas, among farmers and members of CPAs and 
CFs. This intervention will also help convert croplands used for intensive monoculture (e.g., cassava) production into 
cashew or ma ngo orchards with intercropping to enhance agroecological functions and benefits (Bernacki et al., 2018; 
Burn et al., 2018) .  
 
Barrier 6: Limited regulatory and institutional capacities for establishing effective PSPPs and leveraging 
public and private investment for climate -resilient, high -value and sustainable agriculture.   
 
64 The lack of favorable regulatory conditions and institutional arrangements is another barrier to ensure enabling 
conditions for leveraging effective PSPPs and public and private investment for climate- resilient, high- value and 
inclusive agriculture. The regulatory compliance costs borne by individual farmers, cooperatives, associations,  unions  
and SMEs for agricultural and food safety certification processes are relatively high, compared to those in other 
countries in the region, and procedures and requirem ents need to be streamlined to be more accessible (IFC, 2015; 
Burn, 2018; Burn et al., 2018) . Output 3.1 will address this barrier by supporting harmonized processes  at the regulatory 
and institutional levels and ensuring climate risks are adequately taken into consideration by these certifi cation 
processes (Activity 3.1.1). Also, Activity 3.1.2 will establish a harmonized system for agricultural lending at the 
institutional level to increase the availability of low -cost finance for smallholder farmers and other local value chain 
actors. Intersectoral coordination mechanisms will be improved through A ctivity  3.1.3  to direct public spending into 
areas that promote climate -resilient, high- value,  and inclusive agriculture and create bankable projects to crowd in 
private investment. To complement this effort, Output 3.2 will develop a system to enable strategic and climate- informed 
investment decisions by the public and private sectors to support the sectoral transformation.  
 
IX. Risks and Assumptions  
 
65 There are several risks and assumptions, as seen in Figure 6. Section F provides a complete description of the 
risks and their mitigation measures. The risks involved in the project are categorized as technical and operational, 
reputational , financial, and other. The technical and operational risks include 1) Rapid changes in market trends, 2) 
Limited intersectoral coordination and institutional arrangements, 3) Limited stakeholder engagement, and 4) 
Procurement delays in operationalizing the FARM arrangements. As described in Section F, a range of adaptive 
measures  and stakeholder engagement strategies will address these risks.  
 
66 The reputational risk concerns the potentially harmful social and environmental impacts identified under the Social 
and Environmental Management Framework (ESMF) (see Annex 6) and Gender Action Plan (Annex 8). Specific 
mitigation measures are described in these annexes and briefly summarized in Section G.


---
*Page 25*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
   
 67 There is also a  risk associated with financial irregularities, and this risk will be addressed by implementing the 
necessary checks and balances for financial regulation to address this risk  (see Section  F). Another risk relates to t he 
recent global pandemic (i.e., COVID19), and it has posed several operational challenges in the countr y. The project will 
take stock of lessons learned and best practices from the current pandemic and apply relevant measures  to minimize 
the risk. See Section F for more details.  
 
68 Key assumptions include effective coordination between relevant ministries, sub- national governments, and private 
actors, continued and increased public investment for systemic, institutional, and individual capacity development to 
complement the project's focus and investment on climate resilience, and substantial interest and support from the 
private sector, NGOs, farmers, and other local value chain actors. This partly rests on the assumption that the current 
market demand for premium agricultural products and the price differentiation between non- premium and premium 
products will continue. Also, the project beneficiaries' willingness to adopt new and alternative technologies and 
practices (i.e., behavioral change) is particularly essential for the success of this project. It requires a clear 
understanding of risks and benefits, ensured through extensive hands -on support programs and awareness -raising 
activities , including on gender and social inclusion . Key elements of these assumptions are also discussed as part of 
the risk identification and mitigation measures in Section F below.  
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
 
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4)  GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4)  
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  MRA 2  
Low-emission 
transpor t MRA 3  
Building, 
cities , 
industries, 
appliances  MRA 4  
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1  
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2  
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3  
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4  
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1:  
Climate 
Resilience  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 2:.  
Higher -Value 
Agriculture  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ 
Outcome 3:  
Enabling 
Environment  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
69 The project will focus its investment exclusively on generating adaptation results . 
 
70 Meanwhile, the project  will produce a co- benefit in climate change mitigation through improved soil and residue 
management, postharvest quality control, and processing to reduce food waste and critical catchment forest protection 
and restoration. Cambodia is currently reporting CO 2, CH 4, and N 2O at the Tier 1 methodology level (i.e., default values) 
from the 2006 IPCC guidelines, except for CO 2 emissions and removals from REDD+ (at the Tier 2 level).  Given the 
technical limitations, the project will only report its activity -level contribution that may be converted to mitigation impacts 
at the Tier 1 methodology level (e.g., # of trees planted, ha. of forest restored, ha. of  rice field under enhanced soil 
management regime, including postharvest residue management and optimized fertilizer application, reduced volume of chemical fertilizer use and postharvest loss). The project will coordinate with the National Forest Monitoring System 
(NFMS) for REDD+, which monitors and reports forest changes on the national scale.  The project will also coordinate 
with the ongoing FAO/GEF initiative, "Capacity -building Initiative for Transparency (CBIT)
11," which is currently working 
on establishing emission baselines in agriculture through crop mapping and assessment of biomass burning in the 
agriculture sector. Furthermore, the project will establish an operational link with a new FAO/UNDP project, “Scaling Up 
Climate Ambition on Lan d Use And Agriculture through NDCs And NAPs (SCALA)," aiming to enhance Cambodia's 
sustainable forest management efforts and animal waste management, including activities related to emissions 
measurement and monitoring. These linkages with the ongoing and planned initiatives  will ensure that this co -benfit  in 
climate change mitigation makes a tangible and cost -effective contribution.  
 
 
11 The United Sates Government, through the SilvaCarbon Programme, has also been collaborating with the CBIT project to support the General Directorate for 
Agriculture in improving the activity data, including carbon emissions from biomass burning, from the agriculture sector through the machine learning models. This 
collaboration aims to improve the spatial data for several priority crops and brings in the Royal University of Agriculture to increase national capacity for emission data 
collection.


---
*Page 26*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
   
 71 These activities linked to a co -benefit in climate change mitigation will also enhance agroecological conditions and 
ecosystem services, thus improving habitat connectivity across  the production landscape. This will also support the 
ecosystem -based adaptation of local communities to climate change.  
 
72 Another co- benefit of this project is women's empowerment. The project will design and implement activities 
explicitly target ing female- headed farming households and female vegetable farmers to address their unique 
socioeconomic vulnerabilities, making  them particularly vulnerable to climate change. The project's overall gender -
responsive approach is committed to paying specific attention to delivering outcomes that reflect an understanding of 
gender roles and inequalities. Based on this approach, the project will address challenges specific to women farmers, 
including time constraints and power disparities, through capacity, institutional, and support mechanism development 
activities. In addition to the agricultural certifications, the project will also explore the possibility of introducing the W+12 
standard, which me asures women's empowerment in a quantifiable manner, gives a monetary value to results, and 
creates an additional channel to financial resources for female farmers. Such additional finance could provide a 
sustainable mechanism for supporting female farmers' empowerment and climate adaptation. To ensure this co- benefit, 
there will be a full -time national gender expert to implement the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8).  
 
Co-benefit number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Agricultural production  and 
processing and 
agroecological management  
practices are improved to 
contribute to GHG emissions 
reductions.  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ 
Gender considerations are 
fully internalized into c limate -
resilient value chain 
development practices . ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages)  
X. General Approach  
 
73 The proposed PEARL project builds on the Royal Government of Cambodi a (RGC) ’s vision for the NTSB’s climate -
adapted agriculture that is high- value, and sustainable based on the logic described above to provide a range of 
adaptive options for smallholder farmers and SMEs through market -based mechanisms (MAFF, 2016; MoE, 2020b) . 
The PEARL project will enhance the climate resil ience of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, 
including SMEs in the NTSB, by removing the barriers identified above to climate -resilient, inclusive, high -value, and 
sustainable agriculture. This will build on the existing government and non- government partners' efforts on agricultural 
extension and sustainable agricultural expansion to ensure Cambodia's food security and safety. For instance, the 
General Directorate of Agriculture within MAFF (GDA/MAFF) has worked extensively on quality s eed production, market 
expansion, and agricultural intensification through its extension services and awareness -raising activities.  
 
74 The following outcomes , outputs and activities are designed to build on mutually dependent relationships between 
the three fundamental pillars - climate resilience, high- value agriculture, and an enabling policy and institutional 
environment. The approach will harness market forces through agricultural and food safety certification and associated 
value chain development to tri gger transformational change. Through the integration and streamlining of the three 
 
12 A women-s pecific standard measuring women's empowerment and giving a monetary value to results to provide financial resources to 
women. This certification (https://www.wplus.org ) scheme would mainly apply to women farmers involved in vegetable production under this 
project.


---
*Page 27*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
   
 pillars, the project  will also ensure the PEARL project’s overall 
additionality and complementarity with co- financing and parallel 
funding activities.  
 
XI. Narrative Descriptions of Expected Outcomes , Outputs 
and Activities (See Annex 2 for further details)  
 
EXPECTED OUTCOME ONE : FARMERS’ CAPACITIES ARE 
ENHANCED TO MANAGE CLIMATE IMPACTS AND RELATED 
RISKS  
 
75 This outcome will provide farmers and local communities with 
access to tailored and crop- specific agrometeorological advisory 
services. The component will also increase the awareness of 
climate risks among farmers and other local value chain actors to enhance their ability to identify and manage climate-
related risks 
and vulnerabilities concerning their agricultural production, 
processing, and livelihoods. Generating and disseminating 
agrometeorological information will foster co- production of services 
across relevant institutions, particularly the MAFF and MoWRAM, 
and incorporate various data sets, including weather forecasts, 
seasonal forecasts, crop calendars, crop production, and harvest 
information, and pest and disease information. Concurrently, this 
component wil l also systematically strengthen the capacity of 
agricultural extension services  and technical functions  in both the 
public and private sectors and develop effective public and private 
partnerships to ensure the effective dissemination of agrometeorologica l advisory information through increased and 
extended outreach capacities.  
 
76 Climate services involve the production, translation, transfer, and use of climate knowledge and information for 
climate -informed decision- making, including at the farm level. Thes e services will utilize the available Internet of Things 
(IoT) technologies for data collection, processing, and dissemination (e.g., use of mobile apps). Key attributes for 
effective climate services to meet the needs of users include timeliness, accessibility, dependability, usability and equity. 
Some of the main barriers to the effective and equitable communication of climate services are the lack of national 
capacity for communication, lack of client -driven tailoring of services, insufficient translatio n of relevant services into 
actionable products, and limited engagement with other actors involved in agricultural value chains (private and public).  
 
77 The framework put forward in Figure 8 from FAO’s Global Outlook on Climate Services in Agriculture (FAO, 2021) , 
highlights key steps for the effective provision of climate services, which are fulfilled by various actors depending on the local context. It is important to highlight the gaps at any stage of the framework will jeopardize efforts to develop services 
that are effectively delivered and applied by intended users. Every aspect of the climate services framework must be 
strengthened to ensure that the last mile barrier is overcome, and that information can lead to st rategic agricultural 
decision -making.  
 
78 Cambodia has undertaken various initiatives to increase agrometeorological service capacity through multiple 
projects over the last decade. These efforts include building weather and agriculture infrastructure and improving 
agrometeorological forecasting skills in collaboration with development partners such as World Bank, United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), Asian Development Bank (ADB), the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (UNDRR), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) with financial support from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Sub-
Committee on 
Meteorology and Geophysics (SCMG), Deutsche Gesellschaft für Int ernationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) Germany, 
Regional Integrated Multi- hazard early Warning System for Africa and Asia (RIMES), Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) and Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA).  
 
79 However, as shown in Table 6 below , it is ev ident that in Cambodia, current efforts and investments are focused 
on the first stages of the climate services framework, toward the monitoring and production of information products but far fewer investments are focused toward the later stages of the fra
mework, or the “last mile”, which focuses on the 
tailoring, dissemination and uptake of climate services for farmers.  
Figure 8 Value chain for an effective provision of climate 
services


---
*Page 28*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
   
  
80 Against the framework of climate services, a capacity need assessment in four capacity areas – 1) meteorological 
and hydrometeorological forecasting; 2) agricultural data; 3) pest and disease forecasting; and 4) outreach and 
agrometeorological information dissemination – was conducted during the project preparation stage (see Annex 2).  
The assessment findings suggest challenges and recommend actions in seven critical areas under the climate service 
framework as seen in Table 6. 
 
Table 6 Major challenges and recommendations to overcome last mile barrier to climate services in Cambodia  
Climate services  
framework  Major challenges  Recommendations for investment  
1. Data collection, 
monitoring and 
forecasting  • Insufficient observational network (automated and 
manual) with essential meteorological and agrometeorological variables required for developing agrometeorological services.  
• Weak technical capacity for data storage.  • Rehabilitate existing weather stations and procure 
additional stations in NTSB.  
• Support technical capacity for the maintenance of weather stations and data collection.  
• Upgrade the forecasting capabilities by improving the access and use of global and regional datasets, products and tools.  
• Develop dynamic cropping calendars that integrate forecasted precipitation patterns with sufficient time for farmers to adjust their planting dates.  
• Support agricultural institutions (i.e., MAFF, CARDI and Royal University of Agriculture) with tools and technical 
capacity for monitoring and digitalization of agriculture data  
2. Data sharing and 
coordination of 
relevant agencies  • Lack of coordinated and digitalized collection of 
agriculture and pest/disease data through agricultural 
ministries (e.g., MAFF, CARDI and Royal University 
of Agriculture) and research institutions.  
• No coordinated database or mechanism for data sharing between institutions.  
• Limited technical, financial, and human resources available to support national staff to collaborate and regularly meet as task force (i.e., Technical Working Group led by MAFF and MoWRAM).  
• Lack of incentive for collaboration and data sharing.  
• Insufficient access to necessary technologies for digital and online data collection and sharing.  
• Data sharing on a payment basis.  • Invest in further strengthening of existing agrometeorological 
technical working group and support national institutions to join regular meetings.  
• Strengthen governance arrangements and formalized agreements, including coordination and communication mechanisms within MoWRAM and stakeholders across sectors.  
• Invest in data collection technologies that facilitate digitalization (tablets, handheld devices) and development of national databases where information can be shared easily between relevant insti tutions.  
3. Co-production of 
tailored agrometeorological advisories  • Lack of mechanisms for exchange of information 
among key stakeholders (including private sector, ACs, FAs, etc.).  
• Lack of standard operating procedures for the coordination and co-production of agrometeorological 
services by multiple stakeholders.  
• Weak collaboration or communication between MAFF, MoWRM and other key institutions.  • Prepare concrete national road maps towards strengthening 
and operationalizing agrometeorological services.  
• Develop a standardized national framework for data collection, sharing, analysis, translation into actionable services, and last -
mile communication processes is systematically documented.  
• Support sensitization workshops and training sessions to encourage dialogue and bring together key actors, including farmers and end- users.  
4. Communication of 
services to the last mile • Challenges related to translating climate and agronomic information.  
• Inadequate means for communicating the 
information.  
• Lack of understanding of how farmers in NTSB are accessing information or ICT used.  • Invest in surveys and information collection from farmers and target users to better understand how they prefer to receive information (communication means, format etc.).  
• Invest in development of products and ICT means based on the needs assessment of farmers.  
• Establish an effective two -way communication and timely data 
collection and sharing between information providers and users.  
• Build the capacity of smallholder farmers, women, poor and 
socially marginalized groups to use ICT tools.


---
*Page 29*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
   
 5. Participatory 
engagement of last 
mile • Lack of awareness of climate and agronomic 
information generated by MoWRAM, MAFF and other national institutions.  
• Lack of effective two- way communication between 
agrometeorological services providers and users  • Promote participatory approaches such as the Participatory Integrated Climate Services for Agriculture (PICSA) approach or FAO Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) to ensure information uptake.  
• Invest in focused training or FFSs on IPM.  
• Support participatory scenario planning processes consisting of different interactive and iterative learning processes.  
• Invest in pilot programs or community outreach initiatives to engage farmers with  agrometeorological  services.  
• Financially support the engagement of farmers and e nd-users in 
national tasks forces for service production.  
6. Climate -informed 
actions  • Insufficient resources to apply climate informed recommendations even if information is available (e.g., irrigation or land preparation capacity)  
• Lack of access by farming communities to 
forecasting information that is translated into actionable climate- resilient advice tailored to the 
type of production (i.e., for cashew, mango, organic rice, and vegetables).  
• Lack of timely climate information to the last mile, as i t 
usually reaches households too late to make decisions (e.g., planting and harvesting dates).  
• Lack of extension or advisory support on how to 
implement climate information actions.  • Invest in the translation of  agrometeorological  data into services 
specific to target crops and relevant for climate sensitive periods of crop production for cashew, mango, organic rice and vegetables.  
• Support FAs, ACs, and extension services to support farmers with understanding of how to implement cl imate informed 
actions.  
• Through support to FAs and ACs, increase farmers resources and access to necessary equipment, information and financial services, including risk finance products (i.e., insurance) to 
implement recommended actions.  
 
Output 1.1: Availability and access to agrometeorological advisory services tailored to target value chains 
improved among smallholder farmers and local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain 
actors.  
 
81 Based on the above recommendations, this output  will deliver an improved system of agrometeorological advisory 
services that are tailored to the project’s target crops in these seven critical areas.  Advisory information will be delivered 
to end- users through a variety of means, including the existing mobile apps for agricultural advisory dissemination and 
data collection (e.g., Tonle Sap App , Chamkar and EcoKasksekor ), social media channels, TV and radio programs, 
community bulletins, community speakers, agricultural extension services, web platform hosted by MAFF.   Meanwhile, 
those recommendations that are linked to particular risk mitigation options through farm management practices and 
resource access will be implemented under Component 2.  
 
82 This output will benefit a total of 450,000 smallholder farmers (40- 60% women) in the NTSB involved in the target 
value chains over the project lifetime. This figure translates to about 75% of the agriculture- dependent population across 
the 24 target distr icts. While this output aims to support all smallholder farmers in the target areas, this target figure 
derives from a realistic estimate of the project’s outreach potential (please see Section D.1 for more details). 
Furthermore, a total of nearly 1,000 public and private extension providers, including NGOs, will be trained under this output (see Section E.5 for more details). The output will be implemented under the joint leadership of MoWRAM and MAFF  with technical support from FAO Cambodia (see Table 1 1 for more details) .  
 
Activities under Output 1.1. (See Section E.6.)  
Activities, Descriptions and Sub -Activities  
Activity 1.1.1:  Increase the spatial scale of agrometeorological data collection and capacity for data processing to produce enhanced 
agrometeorological forecasts and advisory services tailored for target value chain crops.  
 Description:  Upgraded agrometeorological data collection and processing capacities will enable an analysis of real -time weather and climate 
information, seasonal forecasts, historical records, crop parameters, soil moisture and temperatures, and pest and disease characteristics 
through relevant methodologies to provide crop-specific warnings and advisory services.  
 
• Sub-activity 1.1.1.1: Mobilize the TWG -AW to review baseline conditions and capacity and data gaps to validate the priority stations for 
additional sensor upgrades, strategic locations for adding new agrometeorological stations, and training needs.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.1.2: Upgrade existing hardware and software at the selected priority stations and install new agrometeorological  stations.  
• Sub-activities 1.1.1.3: Design and roll out an annual training program for station managers, data analysts, and system administrators.


---
*Page 30*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
   
 Activity 1.1.2:  Develop SOPs for the production and dissemination of agrometeorological advisory services and data sharing needs and 
architecture, targeting cashew, mango, rice, and vegetables through a variety of mediums.  
 
Description:  Crop -specific SOPs will allow farmers to grow, harvest and store the target crops and other local value chain actors to anticipate  
yields and processing volumes with reliable information and consistent advisory services to make the target value chains less vulnerable to 
climate change. The SOPs will ensure coordination among public and private extension services and provide highly tailored inf ormation through 
multiple mediums. The SOPs wi ll be placed under the existing SOP for general hydrometeorological advisory services, developed by the regional 
FAO project and the University of Queensland and WMO project, to provide highly tailored information. The SOPs will also cons ider strategies 
to reduce food loss along each value chain.  
 
• Sub-activity 1.1.2.1: Mobilize the TWG - AW with additional stakeholders to develop the SOPs for the production and dissemination of 
crop-specific agrometeorological advisory information.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.2.2: Establish a central database based on harmonized data management and sharing agreements under the SOPs with 
dedicated information dissemination and outreach mediums (e.g., web platform hosted by MAFF, mobile apps (i.e., Tonle Sap App, 
Chamkar and EcoKasksekor  ), social media channels, TV and radio programs, community bulletins, community speakers, FFS curricula, 
and private advisory services through contract farming and input supply sales).  
• Sub-activity 1.1.2.3: Conduct annual training of extension officers f rom the Provincial Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries 
(PDAFF ), Provincial Department of Water Resources and Meteorology ( PDoWRAM ), Provincial Department of Enviornment (PDoE), 
Provincial Department of Commerce ( PDoC ) , Provincial Committee for Desaster Management ( PCDM ) and district administration, 
commune and village extension agents, and private extension providers, including NGOs on the SOPs.  
Activity 1.1.3:  Increase awareness of agrometeorological advisory services  and the benefits of the application in farm management and value 
addition activities to support decision- making and reduce smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors' vulnerabilities to climate 
change, particularly women farmers and value chai n actors.  
 
Description:  Increased awareness of available services and their application among smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors will 
effectively reduce their climate vulnerabilities in agricultural production and processing. Increased service demand and user  feedback will also 
create an enabling environment for progressively improving service quality and options.  
 
• Sub-activity 1.1.3.1: Prepare and roll out training of trainer (TOT) curricula through FFS to raise awareness of advisory services and 
promote the application of agrometeorological advisory services among smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors.  
• Sub-activity 1.1.3.2: Support peer -to-peer knowledge sharing and training to further promote advisory services among other members of 
targeted ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions with their respective TOT -trained representatives.  
 
EXPECTED OUTCOME TWO: ADAPTIVE CAPACITY OF SMALLHOLDER FARMERS AND OTHER LOCAL VALUE 
CHAIN ACTORS, PARTICULARLY VULNERABLE WOMEN FARMERS, IS INC REASED THROUGH MARKET 
INCENTIVES THAT PROMOTE CLIMATE -RESILIENT, HIGHER -VALUE, DIVERSIFIED, AND SUSTAINABLE 
PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING.  
 
83 This component is delivered through four distinct but interdependent Output s – 2.1. Increased premium market 
access through agricultural certification programs; 2.2.  Increased access to climate- resilient and high- value 
technologies; 2.3. Demonstration and promotion of climate- resilient, high- value and sustainable agricultural practices 
and technologies; and 2.4.  Improved agroecological functions at the landscape level.  
 
84 This outcome will target approximately  124 ACs, FAs, PG s, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions, translating to 
roughly 24,000 farmers and other local value chain actors involved in the target value chains  over the project lifetime . 
The selection of the CPAs and CFs based on specific catchment restoration and protection criteria is presented under Output 2.4 and Annex 2. The selection of the ACs, FAs, PG
s, and agricultural unions will be finalized at the project's 
inception based on criteria, including their ambition and potential to adopt climate -resilient and higher -value practices 
and a moderate risk appetite for exploring new market opportunities. The project formulation team has identified and 
consulted several candidate benefic iary groups extensively during the formulation process (see Annex 7) as they have 
demonstrated the potential to champion the outcome and specific outputs. Others will be identified at the inception 
phase to ensure the selection of appropriate and timely beneficiary groups , particularly considering the fast evolving 
nature of practice and market trends and other socioeconomic factors  in the NTSB.   
 
85 In addition, a total of nearly 1,000 public and private extension service providers, including NGOs, will be tr ained, 
and a total of 1,200 local retailers, hoteliers, restauranteurs, and traders/exporters will be engaged to support the 
delivery of this outcome (see Section E.5 for more details). The outcome will be implemented under the joint leadership 
of MAFF and MoE with technical support from FAO Cambodia (see Table 1 1 for more details) and NGO partners 
(potential NGO partners include GRET, Wildlife Conservation Society ( WCS)  and Institute for research and application 
of development methods (I RAM ) – see Section B.4).  The AE will identify and select specific NGO partners among these


---
*Page 31*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
   
 potential partners through a competitive procurement process. The procured NGO partners will provide the project and 
intended beneficiaries with specific services. Such services include providing technical support to ACs, FAs, PGs, 
CPAs, and CFs, and agricultural unions to develop their business plans and designing relevant training materials. Their 
selection will be based on their proven areas of expertise and experience that are crucial for the project's success.  
 
Output 2.1: Premium market access opportunities for cashew, mango, organic rice, and vegetable producers 
and processors increased through climate -resilient and high -value certification programs . 
 
86 The baseline and feasibility studies by IRAM (2018)  and ICEM (2020)  on agricultural certification programs and 
climate -resilient value chains identif ied and examine d the economic, social, and ecological opportunities and challenges 
associated with the h igh-value crops and their value chains. Informed by these studies (Annex 2) and a series of 
stakeholder consultations (Annex 7), the project targets four crops 1) Rice in Preah Vihear; 2) Mango in Oddar 
Meanchey; 3) Cashew in Kampong Thom and Preah Vihear,  and 4) leafy vegetables in Siem Reap as vehicles for 
promoting climate- resilient and sustainable agriculture through certification programs in the NTSB.  As stated earlier, 
these comprise several of the country's priority crops identified by the MAFF (2019) . 
 
87 The agricultural certifi cation programs that were examined in these studies include Geographical Indications (GIs), 
Organic Certification, Cambodia Good Agricultural Practices (CamGAP), Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point 
(HACCP), and ISO 22000. However, given the rapidly evol ving nature of market trends, the selection of particular 
certifications , employed under this output , will be made at the project inception based on a crop- specific strategy 
development process, including a market suitability analysis. Additional certifications may be considered at that stage . 
 
88 Rice production in Preah Vihear remains relatively traditional, which has enabled the development of a significant 
organic rice sector mainly through the PMUAC, which supports 26 ACs (more than 4,000 farmers). A sizable production 
mechanism and supply chain has been established through v arious efforts in the province. Organic rice through the 
PMUAC is EU and USA/NOP certified. In 2017, the PMUAC delivered more than 10,800 tons of organic rice to two 
buyers - AMRU -Rice and SoA , leading organic rice buyers . The PEARL project will further su pport the PMUAC in 
expanding this organic rice production capacity.  
 
89 Contract farming has proven itself to be an effective tool for farmers and buyers, given the traceability and quality 
control requirements. Although contract farming can expose farmers t o many risks, it can also ensure a favorable 
environment for both farmers and contract providers, like AMRU -Rice, when an intermediary like the PMUAC is 
involved. For the contract provider, it makes quality control more manageable. For the farmers, contrac t farming 
guarantees their access to a premium price market while the intermediary  like the PMUAC  increases their collective 
bargaining power to negotiate favorable contract terms and prices. The project will thus scale up this modality and 
support the est ablishment and capacity strengthening of crop- specific unions to promote this win- win scenario through 
PSPPs. 
 
90 Among several certification options, GI offers a unique opportunity for organic rice production in Preah Vihear, 
where the potential for expanding its organic rice production capacity is somewhat limited,  to increase their premium 
earning capacity. The process to develop an GI product must also include an adequate level of market development 
efforts and investment, based on the lessons learned from other GI development in the country. The PEARL project could expect to achieve 1,000 ha of GI -certified rice production, with even more expansion potential.  The project will 
ensure that this expansion in production capacity does not lead to further agricultural expansion  to cause deforestation 
or land degradation. The project will increase production through increased productivity and expanding the number of 
farmers producing organic rice based on market incentives and capacity support.  
 
91 Cashew in Kampong Thom and some parts of Preah Vihear: Due to the growing regional demand, particularly 
from Viet Nam, and favorable prices, cashew production is currently boo ming in Cambodia. Kampong Thom is the 
leading producer of cashew in the country. The total cashew production area in the province was 54,609 ha (20% of 
the national total) in 2019, and t he production area in Kampong Thom had more than quadrupled between 2013 and 
2019  (NIS, 2019) . 
 
92 Most Kampong Thom and Preah Vihear  farmers cultivate M23 (80% in Kampong Thom). The so- called "local 
varieties" are also grown (more common in Preah Vihear). T he local varieties are being rapidly replaced by M23 (to a 
lesser degree, H09, M10, and M04) because it gives a higher yield, betwe en 1 to 2 metric tons of raw cashew nuts 
(RCNs)/ha, compared to 700 kg/ha with the traditional varieties. M23 and other new varieties , although presenting a 
higher yield, are more susceptible to diseases and insect pests. The incidence of pest and diseases  is rising due to 
prolonged droughts and increased temperatures. The cultivation of this variety thus often goes hand in hand with an


---
*Page 32*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
   
 intensification of production methods and increased use of chemical inputs, suggesting the need for increased efforts 
in IPM. 
 
93 Despite the recent market expansion, cashew production in Cambodia is not geared towards value addition through 
processing and certification. Cambodia remains a raw material producer for Viet Nam. Also, contract farming is not 
common. Most cashew farmers often sell their harvests to collectors on a first -come- first-served basis. Most collectors/ 
middlemen are not concerned with the product quality. This practice keeps both the quality and value of RCN low.  
 
94 Value- addition processing and packaging present a viable avenue for increasing the value of cashew production 
and income of cashew farmers while noting the importance of market development in parallel. While GI is not suitable due to the lack of evidence of geographical uniqueness, CamGAP offers some  potential for promoting high- value and 
climate -resilient production when combined with marketing efforts internationally  and domestically in major tourist 
destinations. There is a potential for organic cashew production in some parts of Preah Vihear and K ampong Thom, 
where organic rice production is practiced. However, increased pesticide and herbicide use, in general, poses a 
challenge to organic conversion while there is a strong demand for certified organic cashew kernels  internationally  (IFC, 
2010) . Local SMEs, including Sambo Cashew and Kosal Farm, are leaders in delivering near organic and value- added 
cashew products. The project will work closely with these companies to join the efforts and resources . 
 
95 Mango production in Oddar Meanchey  has been expanding rapidly due to high prices of mangoes with 
increasing demand from China, Thailand, Viet Nam, and others. Mango production in Oddar Meanchey is split between 
comparatively large and financially well -resourced plantations and smallholder farmers who lack the resources 
necessary to improve their adaptive capacities. In 2017, there was more than 7,000 hectares  of mango orchards in the 
province, with only approximately 3,000 hectares  already productive, according to PDAFF. The production capacity 
was estimated to more than triple in the next five years (Burn et al., 2018) .  
 
96 The most prevalent variety of mango under cultivatio n in the province is Kaev Lmiet, which is in high demand 
domestically and regionally (i.e., Thailand and Viet Nam). The natural fruiting season is March- April, and Paclobutrazol 
is widely used to induce out -of-season flowering. It is common in the province  to have two harvests, with the first 
occurring in February -March and the second in October -November.  
 
97 Most mango producers in Oddar Meanchey are not currently organized into legally recognized cooperatives, 
although the prevalence of cooperatives is growi ng. Smallholder mango farmers in the province typically sell  their 
mangoes to either Cambodian traders/exporters or local middlemen, some of whom come from Thailand. Mangoes that 
cross into Thailand are often processed and sold as Thai products. There is a lmost no commercial mango processing 
capacity in the province. With minimal extension support, many mango orchards are managed with chemical inputs, 
including fertilizers, insecticides, florigen, and glyphosate, without proper instructions and guidelines.  
 
98 GAP certification of mango in Oddar Meanchey has the potential to reduce production costs by cutting down the 
excessive use of pesticides, improve food safety and organoleptic quality of the fruits, and improve farmer health by reducing exposure to chemic als. This is  consistent with the overall GAP certification trend in the country. Quality -
focused mango traders/exporters, such as Seasons Fresh, actively support mango farmers’ adoption of CamGap in 
other provinces. The project will work closely with these private partners to promote higher practice standards. These 
efforts should also be combined with HACCP and ISO 22000 to improve handling, processing, and packaging 
capacities as a value addition strategy.  
 
99 Oddar Meanchey is among the driest and most dro ught-prone areas of Cambodia. Although heat stress can have 
severe negative impacts on mango, the trees are remarkably resilient to the effects of extreme heat and drought, making them comparatively climate- resilient compared to other crops. These geograph ical and climatic conditions also 
give Oddar Meanchey mangos a distinct flavor; therefore, GI registration should be considered a potential goal in the 
future.  
 
100 Planting mango and cashew trees on fields previously used for annual crops such as cassava will  have an 
emissions removal impact. The PEARL project will also prevent the expansion of these orchards into existing forests.  
 
101 Leafy vegetable production in Siem Reap is vital for farmers, particularly smallholders and female farmers, due 
to increased labor migration and in terms of income and nutrition. Vegetable growers are very diverse in scale, 
production, available resources, and needs, with most farms being small -scale and rainfed (Duong and Khin, 2016) . 
The main leafy vegetable crops farmed are Chinese kale and lettuce, and others include green garlic, cabbage, trakun, 
and amaranth (NIS, 2019) .


---
*Page 33*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
   
 102 The beginning of the dry season is the most favorable time for vegetable production, but due to the high water 
needs of leafy vegetables such as cabbage, production is limited by water availability towards the end of the dry season. 
Other factors such as floods and warmer temperatures decrease vegetable yields during the rainy season. Due to these 
limitations, local vegetable production is insufficient to meet domestic demand at the beginning of the dry season and 
during the rainy season.  
 
103 Being one of the most established tourist destinations in the country, there are many opportunities locally for 
vegetable farmers to sell their products to hotels and restaurants and at markets. Leafy vegetable production in Siem Reap is primarily for the Siem Reap and Phnom Penh consumers. Most vegetable farmers (90%) are not part of a 
cooperative. Most vertical linkages are informal, but the use of formal contracts is increasing. The return to labor is 
estimated to be about twice that of wet -season rice; thus, vegetables provide a reasonable opportunity for diversifying 
incomes. However, production is highly seasonal, and no policy has been put into place yet to address the main constraints of the sector, including water shortages, inadequate extension ser vices, and limited access to finance and 
technologies.  
 
104 There are some model farms and farmer associations in the area. One such example is the Eco Farm Group, 
supporting smallholder farmers, particularly women, in near organic production by adopting CamGap and other quality control measures through extension support and market access with strategic support from an NGO, GRET. There is an opportunity to replicate the Eco Farm model to promote and scale- up high- value extension and market access 
support throu gh quality assurance and climate- resilient technologies and practices, particularly for female -headed 
households  with limited labor and time availability.  
 
105 Market characteristics of certification programs: Supporting value chains through the certification of agricultural 
products requires targeted efforts that are unique to each certification program. One crucial aspect of such efforts is marketing and promotion and consumer awareness -raising. Each certific
ation scheme presents unique market 
characteristics and ; therefore, requires an understanding of specific needs for marketing and promotion. The analysis 
of the prominent certification programs is provided in Annex 2, which describes different ways in whic h the PEARL 
project may engage with these certification programs for the development of market -based instruments to promote 
climate -resilient and sustainable agricultural practices through a value chain approach.  
 
Activities under Output 2.1. (See Section E.6.)  
 
106 Building on these crop- specific and certification opportunities in each province, the project will first form an inter -
value chain committee to develop a roadmap at the provincial level to match the target crop with the most timely and relevant certification(s) for promoting high- value and climate- resilient agriculture. Based on the roadmap, the project 
will support ACs, FAs , PGs,  CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions in developing and implementing crop- specific  and 
climate -resilient  business plans . For CPAs and CFs, particular attention will be given to deforestation- free value chain 
development during the roadmap and business plan preparation.  The roadmaps and business plans will focus on 
specific market opportunities and relevant strengths of local  value chain actors while addressing crop- specific climate 
risks, identified through Output 1.1.,  by incorporating climate- resilient technologies and techniques demonstrated and 
promoted under Output 2.3.  This will be combined with training beneficiary farmers and other local value chain actors 
to develop their financial and business literacy and entrepreneurial skills  (with particular focus on youth, women, and  
other socially excluded minorities)  and extension providers to support the roadmap and business plans implementation. 
The project will also build direct partnerships with champion SMEs and traders/exporters to expedite the transformation  
process . Also, add- on guidelines and tools will be developed to ensure that the chosen certifications consider cli mate 
risks and impacts adequately.  
 
Activities, Descriptions and Sub -Activities  
Activity 2.1.1:  Develop and operationalize inter -value -chain -actors roadmaps at the provincial level and action/business plans for climate -
resilient, inclusive and gender -responsive premium value chain development and identify specific certification programs as key vehic les. 
 
Description:  Inclusive and gender -responsive value chain development roadmaps, linking various value chain actors, will establish strategic 
directions at the provincial level for supporting ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions in adopting climate -resilient, high- value and 
sustainable agriculture. Each roadmap will assess and identify appropriate certification programs as essential vehicles for accessing premium 
price markets. ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions in the target  districts will prepare their crop- specific action/business plans, 
guided by their district roadmaps to increase market access. Their business plans will feed into Activity 2.2.1.


---
*Page 34*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
   
 • Sub-activity 2.1.1.1: Establish an inter -value -chain committee to prepare p rovincial -level roadmaps to identify a target certification 
program(s) (e.g., CamGap, PGS, GI, SRP and organic for production, and ISO 2200 and HACCP for processing) for climate -resilient 
and high- value value chain development.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.2: Operat ionalize the roadmaps by establishing institutional arrangements, product specifications, quality control 
mechanisms for the selected certification schemes and marketing tools, ensuring legal registration, and conducting training.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.3: Sup port the provincial -level Inter -value- chain committees with focus on ACs, FAs, PGs, CFs, and agricultural 
unions to carry out branding, marketing (e.g., attending trade fairs, consumer awareness raising, and brokering purchase 
agreements) and sourcing and quality control activities.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.4: Support the provincial -level Inter -value- chain committees with focus on CPAs to carry out branding, marketing 
and sourcing and quality control activities.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.5: Conduct annual t raining of extension providers at the provincial level to operationalize the roadmaps to roll out 
the roadmaps through FFS curricula and other support programs for smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.6: Assist 78 ACs,  FAs, PGs , including up to 2 agricultural unions in preparing crop- specific action plans/business 
plans to operationalize the provincial -level roadmaps.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.7: Assist 30 ACs, FAs, and PGs  and 4 CFs in preparing crop- specific action plans/business plans to 
operationalize the provincial -level roadmaps.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.8: Assist 16 CPAs in preparing crop- specific action plans/business plans to operationalize the provincial -level 
roadmaps .  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.9: Assist ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CF s in forming crop- specific agricultural unions, where appropriate and strategic, 
to leverage pooled resources and capacities through action and business planning processes.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.1.10: Organize national and provincial annual dialogues between the beneficiary bodies (i.e., ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, 
CFs, and agricultural unions) and direct purchase agreement providers (i.e., traders/exporters, retailers, hoteliers, and 
restauranteurs) to establish operational partnerships for market development and impl ementing crop -specific action/business plans.  
Activity 2.1.2:  Develop voluntary add -on supplementary guidelines, tools, and training materials to consider specific climate risks, mitigation 
impact and strategies for the certification programs identified under Activity 2.1.1. (e.g., CamGap, GI and organic for product ion, and ISO 2200 
and HACCP for processing) for the target value chains (linking to Activity 3.1.1. on PLR and institutional arrangements concerning these 
certification programs).  
 
Description: Climate -proofing of the agricultural certification programs identified in the provincial roadmaps will be crucial for harnessing their 
market potential for assisting smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors in adopting climate- resilient, high- value, and sustainable 
agriculture and livelihoods.  
 
• Sub-activity 2.1.2.1: Establish a multistakeholder TWG for the certification programs identified in the provincial roadmaps to review and 
update/develop relevant supplementary guidelines, training materials, and tools to consider climate- related risks, climate- resilient 
approaches, and interventions.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.2.2:  Prepare and implement training programs for regulatory and independent verification bodies.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.2.3: Prepare and implement TOT programs for public and private extension providers, i ncluding NGOs and 
representatives of ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions to operationalize the supplementary guidelines, training materials, 
and tools.  
• Sub-activity 2.1.2.4: Explore the possibility of adopting and operationalizing W+ Standards to empower women farmers, particularly in the 
vegetable sector.  
 
Output 2.2: Access to technologies for climate -resilient agriculture and value chain development improved 
among smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain 
actors.  
 
107 The lack of agricultural infrastructure and value addition capacity in the region results in a substantial loss of 
opportunity for farmers and other local value chain actors, including millers and traders, hence limiting local employment 
and business devel opment options. For instance, because of their lack of proper postharvest storage and processing 
capacities, many farmers take the first price offer by market collectors in fear of being unable to sell all their harvest in  
the markets. These practices keep their agricultural production low quality and low value, thus limiting their long- term 
business development adaptation capabilities and capacities. Compounding these baseline conditions, limited access to services and information creates a lack of awareness and understanding of market trends and opportunities. Limited 
knowledge and outdated production and processing practices and technologies result in significant crop and value 
losses. One such example is the observed trend toward increased use of chemical pesticides without proper knowledge 
of effective application methods to address higher levels of climate change induced plant pest and diseases, which in 
turn limits their market access. Therefore, removing production and processing technological and inf rastructural 
capability and capacity barriers are crucial in assisting smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors in 
transitioning towards climate -resilient and sustainable agriculture practices.


---
*Page 35*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
   
  
108 To do so, the PEARL project will establish a climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism, the Farmer -led 
Agricultural Resilience Mechanism (FARM), to assist farmer associations (registered businesses) and other small -scale 
local value chain actors who would otherwise not have access to the necessary finance to adopt climate- resilient and 
market competitive practices and technologies, as they lack the collateral required. Accelerated technological 
improvements by farmer associations and other small -scale local value chain actors are also expected to benefit the 
private sector by increasing the quality and quantity of supply capacity and services and public sector spending in 
related enabling conditions.  
 
109 The FARM will support up to 124 legally registered agricultural unions, ACs, FAs, and PGs, including CPAs and 
CFs, in the NTSB, for procuring the technologies and infrastructure assets essential to implementing their crop- specific 
and climate- resilient business plans developed under Output 2.1 to transition to climate- resilient and higher -value 
agricu lture production and processing. The FARM will also ensure that such technologies and assets will be chosen 
using gender -responsive, inclusive and equitable processes and will include operation and maintenance plans and 
insurance services to ensure the sustainable life of the assets. Such targeted technologies and infrastructure include 
solar -powered cold storage facilities, pack house, smart high efficiency irrigation systems, and energy -efficient value-
added processing facilities (examples provided in Table 7), as identified in the beneficiary groups' business plans. The 
selection criteria for beneficiary groups include 1) Financial management capacity (e.g., membership- based savings 
and credit ratings), 2) Capacity to govern inclusively, gender -responsive ly, and equitably (e.g., governance 
arrangements), and 3) Viability and impact potential of their business plans.  
 
Table 7: Examples of Technologies and Infrastructure Assets  
 110 The FARM builds on best practices and lessons learned through the past and ongoing initiatives in the sector (see 
Annex 2 for the list of baseline investment projects). One of such initiatives is the Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and 
Smallholder Development Project (TSSD)13, implemented by the ADB and IFAD. The project supports ID Poor farmers 
in improving their livelihood options. The project established and has assisted more than 1,000 small groups of ID Poor 
farmers in establishing membership- based savings schemes through commercial banks to provide individual members 
with access to a line of credit backed by a group guarantee system. This mechanism has successfully increased financial and technological access, the entrepreneurial spirit, and a sense of ownership of livelihood improvement actions among the beneficiaries, while the social support network has notably reduced default payments and business failure risks. Box 1 provides a brief description of the TSSD and its lessons that have informed the design of the FARM. 
A more detailed description of the TSSD’s experience is provided in Annex 2.  Example Asset  Basic Asset Specifications  Pricing (USD)  Note  
Solar Water Pump  • 190W x 15  solar panels  
• Motor 3 HP  
• 5 kW Water pump inverter  
• Wires and other accessories  
• 60-80 m3 flow capacity  15,000 – 20,000  Multiple unites are 
required by each 
beneficiary group   
Drip Irrigation System  • Same system as above  
• Drip lines (USD 500 per ha) 
• Automated timer  40,000 -45,000 for 50 
hectare cropland  
Solar Cold Storage Room for 
mango and vegetables  • 5 kW solar capacity  
• 1.5- 2.7 refrigerant capacity  
• Humidity control range 65- 95% 
• Temperature range of 4 - 10˚ C .  15,000 – 25,000  Multiple unites are 
required by each beneficiary group   
Juice processing machine for 
reducing postharvest loss and 
value addition  • 3-5 t/hr. processing capacity  
• 1- 30 kW power output  
• High energy efficiency rating  100,000 -120,000  Multiple beneficiary 
groups may jointly own and share one unit.  
Laser land leveler to improve 
fertilizer and water use efficiency and increase production capacity.  • Fuel efficient 80 HP tractor  
• Trimble laser levelling unit  
• External hydraulic pump and oil 
cooler  45,000 – 50,000  
  
 
13 https://www.tssdcambodia.org


---
*Page 36*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
   
  
 
Activities under Output 2.2. (See Section E.6.)  
 
111 The FARM will be implemented in three stages as a graduation programme (see Figure 9). Beneficiary groups will 
be required to successfully complete the activities of each stage in order to graduate to the next stage of the programme. 
The first stage  begins  under Output 2.1 to develop crop- specific and climate- resilient production and processing 
business plans with the beneficiary groups. The project will also ensure that the business plans complement relevant 
Commune Development and Investment Plans (CDPs and CIPs) to contribute to climate resilience building at the local level. The project will provide various technical and operational agriculture value chain and business development 
support services to the beneficiary groups during this stage. Each busines s plan will include growth strategies using a 
phased approach, an assessment of resource needs, asset acquisition, and revenue management plans, which 
includes access to private financial capital and insurance services. The project will set up a business p lan review 
committee whose members will be FAO, MAFF, MoE, agricultural extension services, and private value chain leaders . 
The committee will establish specific review criteria to screen and approve business plans to ensure their climate adaptation benef its, business viability, quality control measures (see Table 8 ) and commune and district - level 
sustainable development contribution (e.g., youth employment, green jobs).  
 Box 1: Revolving Fund Experience of Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and Smallholder Development (TSSD)  
Target beneficiaries:  
• ID poor farmers in 7 provinces, including Kampong Thom an d Preah Vihear.  
• Initially designed for rice and vegetable production; however, almost two- thirds of the beneficiaries use the funds for chick/chicken raising 
(poultry) instead as it offers quick income generation opportunities.  
Target beneficiary unit:  
• Livelihood Improvement Groups (LIGs) -  Each LIG comprises 20 to 25 ID poor members.  
Coverage:   
• 1st phase (2010- 17):196 communes and 27 districts supported, and 1,241 Livelihood Improvement Groups (LIGs) established.   
• 2nd phase (2018 - 2022): 270 communes supported, and a total of 2,000 LIGs, including LIGs from the first phase, operational.  
Initial capital investment:   
• US$ 7 million (loan)  
Intermediary for fiduciary control:  
• Commune Councils receive funds through NCDD into dedicated accounts and manage fund disbursements and repayments from LIGs.  
Fund Access:  
• An individual member of a LIG is eligible to borrow up to US$ 240 at a time.  
• An applicant must develop a business plan, including a repayment plan.  
• LIGs provide group support to their members through peer -to-peer (P2P) learning and assistance.  
• TSSD provides capacity development support to LIGs and their members and assists in establishing individual bank accounts to receive funds.   
• Initial investment grew to US$ 10 million (2021).  
Repayments:  
• Repayment durations are determined based on income cycles (e.g., for rice, six months, nine months for handicrafts).   
• 50% of the interest collected paid back to LIGs to establish group savings accounts.    
Key lessons learned:  
• P2P efforts (e.g., literate members suppor ting others through business planning and bookkeeping) within each LIG created solid social cohesion 
among members, resulting in an effective group guarantee system and lowering the default risk.   
• Use of ICT was crucial for successful implementation: All t ransactions are done through mobile apps –  bank branches are often not nearby.   
• LIG group savings were not initially pursued but should have been done from the start -  the total available finance for the LIGs would have been 
much more significant.  This is highly recommended.


---
*Page 37*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
   
 Figure 9: FARM Stages  
 
112 In the second stage, following the completion and acceptance of the business plans, the project, in consultation 
with each beneficiary group, will identify a technology(ies) or/and infrastructure asset(s) that is/are essential for 
operationalizing the initial phase of their business plan. The project will develop standardized technical specifications 
for the proposed asset(s) and select vendors and procure the chosen technology (ies)/infrastructure asset(s) for the beneficiary group. At this point, each beneficiary group will be encouraged to make an upfront financial contribution (e.g., between 5 to 20 % of the total value) towards the purchase.  This contribution could take the form of voluntary 
financial contributions to their respective trust fund accounts established during Stage 3 of FARM as well as in- kind, 
non-financial contributions (e.g. labor for site preparation). The beneficiary group may provide a non -financial 
contribution (e.g., labor hours) during the installation of the acquired infrastructure asset(s). The upfront financial contribution towards the purchase of the asset(s) will be used as start -up funds in the beneficiary group's trust fund 
account (see Stage 3) and held as a minimum balance until the completion of the full handover schedule or project completion. The level of minimum fund balance to facilitate the initial financial contribution will be negotiated taking into 
account the conditions and business plan of each beneficiary group and included in the terms of establishment of the 
fund with the selected financial service provider. Although the project will transfer the ownership
14 of the procured 
asset(s) to the beneficiary group immediately upon the attainment of technical installation clearance, the project will 
withhold15 ownership documents and prepare a full handover schedule to prevent any fraudulent activities or illegal 
disposition of the asset(s) not according to the business plan. The beneficiary group will assume the full duty of care upon completion of ownership t
ransfer. The project will also support the beneficiary group in preparing and 
implementing an asset maintenance plan for keeping the asset(s) in optimal operating conditions. The beneficiary group 
will also be required to purchase an insurance policy for the asset(s) against the total loss or damage.  
 
Table 8: FARM Quality Control Measures 
Stage 1: Business Plan  Stage 2: Fund Initial Asset 
Acquisition  Stage 3: Saving and Finance for Future Assets  
 
14 FAO's Manual Section 503 on Asset Management, including sub- sections on asset disposal and transfer to financial beneficiaries, will guide beneficiary selection, legal 
agreement, and asset transfer processes and procedures to prevent fraudulent and illegal practices, including money -laundering and terrorist financing.  
15 FAO, as the AE, will undertake this responsibility.


---
*Page 38*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
   
 Each Business plan, assessed by Review Committee, 
includes:  
• Phased business graduation strategy and action plan, 
including revenue forecasts and management (e.g., set 
in 3 phases)  
• Asset acquisition plan, including technology and 
infrastructure needs and specifications for each phase.  
• Technical and financial monitoring plans and reporting 
procedures.  
• In-kind or/and upfront financial contribution commitment 
and its use (i.e., a minimum account balance in Stage 3).  
• Terms and conditions of asset transfer and full 
handover.  
• Asset maintenance and operation plans, including insurance (through fees and revenues).  
• Regular financial contribution level and schedule based 
on revenue forecasts and management plan, financial 
capacity, harvest cycle, etc.  
• Governance arrangements (i.e., a gender -balanced 
board of trustees, gender -responsive decision- making 
procedures, a dispute resolution mechanism, 
disbursement monitoring and reporting responsibilities, 
and post -project arrangements).  QC instruments for asset 
acquisition and transfer 
include:  
• FARM grants manual 
(developed at inception).  
• FAO’s internationally 
competitive procurement 
standards and procedures.  
• Grant agreement, including 
upfront in- kind (e.g., labor 
hours) or/and financial 
contribution commitment 
and arrangements.  
• Asset transfer agreement, 
including withholding legal 
documents to prevent any 
fraudulent activities or 
disposition of the asset(s) 
not in line with business plans and full handover 
terms and schedule.  
 Terms and arrangements of Trust Fund accounts 
include:  
• List of project’s recommended microfinance banks and service packages for beneficiary groups.  
• Trust account per beneficiary group (124 accounts in 
total) using a standard trust account package of 
commercial banks (e.g., ACLEDA, AMK).  
• Upfront financial contribution used as a minimum 
balance until full handover/project completion.  
• Expected regular contribution of average US$ 5,000 (ca. 
US $33 per individual member) annually guided by the 
business plans –  specific schedule TBD based on 
harvest cycles, etc.  
• Sources of regular contribution include membership fees and revenues from business plan implementation.  
• Estimated banking fees –  US$ 50 a year for up to 
US$ 50,000 in deposit, plus transaction fees.  
• Board of trustees per account –  the tr ustees, including 
the project, consult with members to make disbursement decisions executed by the bank.  
• Customized disbursement/withdrawal criteria per account (primarily for business plan advancement).  
• Biannual business plan progress reporting by each beneficiary group (financial and technical), including 
board meeting minutes and bank statements.   
 
 
113 Each beneficiary group will develop and cover the cost of maintenance and operation plan and insurance through 
their membership fees16 or/and revenues generated through the implementation of its business plan. As part of its asset 
acquisition plan, the project will support the beneficiary groups in making regular financial contributions for the use of 
the assets(s) (e.g., a proportion of  the revenues generated through their business plan implementation) to increase the 
sense of ownership of their acquired asset(s) and business plans. The financial contribution schedule will be prepared 
based on crop- specific harvest cycles (e.g., biannual , annual), the business activities of the beneficiary group and the 
financial ability of each beneficiary group.  Based on the financial scenarios provided in Annex 2, the project expects 
each beneficiary group to be able to make a regular contribution of approximately US$5,000 annually or based on an alternative contribution schedule, as described above. This figure is estimated based on a standard loan principal 
repayment level with the MFIs in Cambodia and the project financial impact of the project demonstrated in Annex 3. 
For instance, an average beneficiary group comprises 150 members, which equates to US$33 per member annually to make the annual contribution. The project expects to contribute to a yearly household income increase of US$200-
300 (Annex 3), and this estimated individual contribution level is considered feasible. However, any higher contribution 
or financial commitment level would make the mechanism unviable for the beneficiary groups as it would further reduce 
the already marginal househol d income increase delivered by the project. Directing the increased household income 
as much as possible to enhance the individual beneficiaries' adaptive capacity is the primary objective during this 
business incubation period. In the post -project environ ment, these beneficiary groups will have developed the adequate 
financial ability to access finance at a much lower level of concessionality.  
 
114 In parallel, the project will provide ongoing technical support to the beneficiary groups in implementing their 
business plans, including demonstrating and supporting the adoption of relevant climate- resilient and high- value 
practices and technology applications under Output 2.3.  
 115 The GCF resources (roughly US$ 7 million) will be used as initial funding for the procurement of the technologies 
and infrastructure assets and to support the establishment of the FARM. According to the conservative estimate from the feasibility study (see Annex 2 for the detailed calculation), the initial funding will generate roughly US$ 20 million 
over the project life to finance a range of activities by the beneficiary groups for their transition to climate- resilient and 
high-value agriculture. However, much of these activities will focus on capacity development efforts related to the 
operationalization of the business plans on a trial -and-error basis; therefore, a high level of concessionality through 
GCF finance is required to support this incubation process during which the revenue generation potential remains 
relatively low.  
 
116 In the third stage , the project will assist
17 each beneficiary group in establishing a trust fund account with a local 
commercial microfinance bank (e.g., ACLEDA, AMK – see Table 5). The account will be established using a commercial


---
*Page 39*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
   
 banking product with standar d services. Most commercial microfinance banks in Cambodia offer a trust account service, 
which charges US$ 50 for an annual service fee for an account holding up to US$ 50,000 and requires a board of 
trustees and customized transaction criteria. The proje ct will support beneficiary groups to match with the most 
appropriate finance institution to establish the trust fund account. A minimum requirement for selecting a finance institution is compliance with the Cambodian financial sector regulation including directives on capital buffers (2018) and liquidity risk management (2017) as well as the new Banking and Financial Institutions’ Code of Conduct (2022). The beneficiary group will then place their financial contributions for the acquired asset(s) in the trust fund. A board of 
trustees, comprising of beneficiary group members (gender balanced) will be established to oversee fund 
disbursements/transactions.  The trustees include the project for quality assurance, and the project will support the 
board in developing post -project governance arrangements. The disbursements18 will be used to advance the 
implementation of the beneficiary group’s business plan (e.g., completing the initial phase and initiating the second 
phase with clear action plans and graduation strategies). Disbursement decisions will be monitored and advice provided by the PEARL project, to ensure that the disbursements will directly support climate change adaptation and related efforts and that gender responsiveness, and equity considerations  are assured. The project working with the beneficiary 
groups will establish customized disbursement criteria for each beneficiary group based on its specific needs and 
actions identified under its business plan. See Table 8 for specific quality control measures for each stage, and also 
Figure 12 in Section B.4 shows the operational arrangements of the FARM.   
 
117 Concurrently, the project will provide governance capacity development support to the beneficiary groups through 
establishing and training boards of  trustees and beneficiary group members to ensure risk -free and inclusive decision-
making, transparency, and accountability. The project will also increase the beneficiary groups' awareness of financial products and services (e.g., savings, investments, and loans) and risk financing (i.e., insurance) available in the country that would be complementary to the FARM to advance the implementation of their business plans. The beneficiary groups may use the acquired assets and trust fund accounts as group collateral to access such products and services. This overall expansion of financial access underscores the fundamental rationale for the FARM: it strategically bundles technical and financial assistance to ultimately de- risk and lower the cost of lending and borrowing, insurance, and 
public and private investment for the climate change adaptation of smallholder farmers and other small -scale local 
value chain actors.  
 
118 In addition, the PEARL project will work with the National Agricultural Insurance Program, led by MAFF in 
partnership with the country's leading insurance providers (e.g., Forte Insurance), to explore additional risk insurance options, particularly for cashew, mango, and vegetable producers and related local value chain actors. They currently 
do not  have many opportunities to protect themselves from perils. The National Agricultural Insurance Program intends 
to make subsidized insurance available for farmers to reduce the overall impact of climate change- related agricultural 
and livelihood loss and damage. In this context, private sector partners have few financial incentives to invest in 
research and development (e.g., prototype development); therefore, a high level of concessionality through GCF 
finance is also required in this effort. During the project design phase, consultations with private insurance providers 
and the National Agricultural Insurance Programme identified a critical capacity gap. Without the project intervention to 
support risk profiling of these crops to establish the baseline information for the insurance providers to lower the cost 
of insurance product development, especially for the perennial crops, insurance options for producers of these crops would remain limited. The project will thus develop and pilot prototype products under the overall framework of the National Agricultural Insurance Program. The project's specific outputs will be directly owned and managed by MAFF under the National Agricultural Insurance Program. Furthermore, the project will increase the beneficiaries' awareness 
of the available financial support products to improve their financial access.  
 
Activities, Descriptions and Sub -Activities  
Activity 2.2.1:  Establish a Farmer -led Agricultural Resilience Mechanism (FARM), for ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions to 
assist their members' transition to climate- resilient and high- value agriculture in an inclusive and gender -responsive manner.  
 
 
16 Most beneficiary groups have an established mechanism to collect membership fees from their members regularly for a group savings scheme or/and to cover 
operating costs. The project will support each beneficiary group in identifying ways to cover the cost of insuring and maintaining the acquired asset. One such way is to 
agree among its members to increase their membership fee contribution level.  
17 The project will work with each beneficiary group to identify the most suitable commercial bank to set up its trust  fund account. The process will consider factors such as 
their physical accessibility, the beneficiary group's previous and existing business relationship and experience with the bank, and product and service competitiveness. As part of the screening process for identifying private partners, FAO, as the AE, will also screen several large agricultural microfinance banks to identi fy a list of 
recommended banks. The project will also assist each beneficiary group in selecting an appropriate service package (i.e., trust fund arrangements) with the identified bank. The beneficiary group will be responsible for opening the trust fund account.  
18 Disbursements will finance various activities, including purchasing additional equipment and agricultural supplies and qu ality control- related activities identified in the 
business plan.


---
*Page 40*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
   
 Descr iption:  An innovative climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism, FARM, will be established to support the operationalization of 
the action plans/business plans developed by a total of 124 ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions under Activity 2.1.1. This will 
include the preparation of  a FARM grants manual,  technical specifications and procurement packages in consultation with beneficiary groups 
and procurement of identified infrastructure assets and technologies. In preparing the technical specifications and procurement packages, attention will be paid to the specific and different needs of men and women.  
 
• Sub-activity 2.2.1.1: Train ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and unions of cooperatives annually to develop financial and business liter acy and 
entrepreneurial skills ( with particular focus on youth, women, and other socially excluded minorities) for preparing and updating business 
plans, including maintenance and operation plans and private finance and insurance plans.  
• Sub-activity 2.2.1.2 : Procure an initial set of agricultural assets based on the approved business plans to operationalize FARM (average 
cost of USD 50,000 per beneficiary group with co- financing of between 5 –  20% by the beneficiary group; however, an agricultural union 
or a group of cooperatives/associations may access a larger amount by pooling funds.  
• Sub-activity 2.2.1.3: Establish a FARM account (trust fund) for each beneficiary group to advance its business plan with clearly defined 
governance arrangements  and ongoing business development support  (i.e., FARM grants manual, Board of trustees, disbursement 
eligibility criteria, fiduciary and performance monitoring mechanisms).  
Activity 2.2.2:  Assess the feasibility of developing additional risk finance options for cashew, mango, and vegetable producers, particularly  
women farmers.  
 
Description: A feasibility study will be conducted to assess risk financing opportunities for cashew, mango, and vegetable producers to 
lessen their financial risks due to climate- induced crop loss and damage. Concurrently, the lack of insurance products for supporting 
agricultural unions, often providing internal quality control for meeting certification standards i n bad harvest years, will be addressed to ensure 
business continuity in assisting individual farmers. The activity builds on the existing agricultural (index -based) insurance products for rice and 
other crops.   
 
• Sub-activity 2.2.2.1: Train PDAFF, PDoE and PDoC  staff, district administration officers, commune and village extension agents, and 
NGOs, through TOT programs on the costs and benefits of index -based and other insurance products to raise awareness.   
• Sub-activity 2.2.2.2: Establish an expert working group to identify index -based risk financing parameters linked to agrometeorological 
information for cashew, mango, and vegetable production and explore the possibility of developing and piloting prototype index- based 
insurance products.  
Activity 2.2.3:  Raise awareness of available financial support products and services in Cambodia systematically among smallholder farmers 
and local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors.  
 
Description:  A comprehensive list of various financi al institutions as well as types of financial support and risk financing options will be made 
available for ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, unions, and their individual members to ensure the beneficiary groups have the inform ation 
necessary to make the needed tr ust account arrangements and access complementary financial products and insurance services.  
 
• Sub-activity 2.2.3.1: Compile and regularly update a menu of financial support and insurance products and services available for ACs, 
FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs and agri cultural unions and their individual members in NTSB as part of FFS curricula and demonstration activities 
and through existing user interfaces (i.e., Tonle Sap App, Chamkar and EcoKasksekor).  
 Output 2.3: Awareness and knowledge of climate -resilient and sustainable, high -value agriculture increased 
among farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors . 
 
119 To counteract the main climate hazards affecting the NTSB, including flooding, drought, pest and diseases, and 
changes in rainfall patterns, a survey carried out as part of the climate rationale study (FAO, 2022)  revealed t hat value 
chain actors generally support climate- resilient practices such as the utilization of organic pesti cides that can also be 
cost-saving. They also identified that the harvest phase should be supported with early warning systems to minimize 
the impact of flooding and pest and diseases.  
 
120 These stakeholder inputs were analyzed together with the existing best practices and lessons learned documented 
in the country and regionally to identify suitable adaptive measures to be promoted and demonstrated under this output. 
The analysis considered climate risks and impacts at several  critical stages of the value chain cycle for the target crops  
(Annex 2).  
 
121 Table 9 shows the crop- specific adaptive measures, which are further described in Annex 2 and the climate 
rationale study (FAO, 2022) . Under this output, the PEARL project will promote these measures in conjunction with the 
improved agrometeorological advisory services and risk awareness among the beneficiaries under Output 1.1. Many 
of these measures demonstrated under this output will be fully operationalized as part of business plans under Output 
2.1 and financed by the FARM under Output 2.2.


---
*Page 41*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
   
 Table 9: Crop -specific Climate -Resilient and High -value Measures  
STAGE  RECOMMENDED CLIMATE ADAPTIVE/ RESILIENT MEASURES (non -comprehensive list)  
ORGANIC RICE  CASHEW  MANGO  LEAFY VEGETABLES  Soil Preparation/ Land Management  • Provide accurate and timely 
weather  services before rain 
events.  
• Promote minimum soil 
disturbance practice, minimum 
tillage, introduction of leguminous crop cover, etc.  
• Promote laser land leveling where appropriate to reduce water requirements.  
• Promote postharvest crop residue management.  
• Promote erosion control and 
water retention techniques.  • Support CF/CPA management 
planning to restore primary and 
secondary forest cover, mixed with 
sub-sections for agroforestry, 
agriculture, and other livelihood 
activities (e.g., NTFPs, apiculture, 
tourism).  
• Prevent unsustainable expansion into forested areas.  
• Promote intercropping and mulching schedule methods (e.g., with leguminous crops).  
• Promote slope agriculture land technology where applicable.  • Support CF/CPA management 
planning to restore primary and 
secondary forest cover, mixed with 
sub-sections for agroforestry, 
agriculture, and other livelihood activities (e.g., NTFPs, apiculture, tourism).  
• Prevent unsustainable expansion into forested areas.  
• Promote climate- informed 
expansion to reduce flash flooding 
and landslide risks.  
• Promote sustainable soil enrichment and organic fertilizer 
production and use.  
• Promote intercropping and 
mulching schedule methods (e.g., with leguminous crops).  
• Promote slope agriculture land 
technology where applicable.  • Promote horticultural operations (e.g., 
mulching to reduce evaporation, raised 
beds, organic fertilizer application) to reduce soil moisture loss and flood 
damage.  
 Seeds/Variety & Seeding  • Promote quality seed supply 
and seed testing.   
• Build local seed production 
capacity (e.g., seed certification)  
• Provide crop- specific agro- met 
information (e.g., climate-informed crop calendar).  
• Promote stress- tolerance, early 
maturing, shorter -duration 
(fragrant) varieties.  
• Promote mechanization - 
sowing and transplanting and 
elements of System of Rice 
Intensification.  • Promote local and other varieties 
that are more resistant to 
droughts, pests, and dis eases.  
• Promote propagation and grafting 
techniques.  
• Support farmers’ networks to promote suitable varieties.  • Support water management and 
micro- irrigation infrastructure for 
nurseries.  
• Promote research for climate resilient variety development.  
• Promote propagation and grafting techniques.  
• Support famers’ networks to promote suitable varieties.  • Support production, dissemination, 
and awareness of climate- resilient 
seeds/varieties .  
• Support climate- resilient seed 
development and research.  
• Support famers’ networks to promote suitable varieties and seeds.  Production/  
Flowering/ Fruiting  Wet Season  
• Invest in broader uptake of water -saving techniques and 
information on timing of irrigation 
• Expand farmer field school 
(FFS) on organic fertilizer 
production and IPM.  
• Support cultivation of short -cycle 
varieties in the eastern and northern parts (e.g., Preah Vihear).  
Dry Season (optional)  
• Invest in irrigation needs of dry 
season rice producers, including 
advisory support for farmers to grow dry season rice.  
• Explore the use of underground 
water for irrigation where 
feasible.  
• Develop tailored water use and management advisories linked 
to agro-met information.  • Tailor climate services based on 
calendar and sensitive periods to prevent damage.  
• Develop farm- level training/FFS on 
water -saving practices, organic 
fertilizer production, managing 
pest and disease on mango 
production (i.e., IPM), incorporating traditional knowledge.  
• Consider improving pollination services through enhanced awareness and intercropping.  • Develop farm -level training/ FFS 
on water -saving practices, organic 
fertilizer production, managing pest and disease on mango production (i.e., IPM).  
• Trailor climate services based on 
calendar and sensitive periods to 
prevent damage.  
Fruiting  
• Tailor clim ate services based on 
calendar and sensitive periods to prevent damage.  
• Consider improving pollination services through enhanced awareness and intercropping.  • Promote year -round production based 
on AquaCrop simulations to increase yields and address seasona
lity issues.  
• Apply salt models for estimating the effect of salinity on plant growth.  
• Promote short -cycle varieties to 
reduce heat stress at key phenological 
phases and minimize crop water requirements.  
• Promote agroforestry systems to reduce evaporation 
from direct sunlight 
and decrease air and soil surface temperature.  
• Promote shade houses to minimize heat stress.


---
*Page 42*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
   
 Inputs  • Strengthen agricultural 
extension capacity/technical 
functions for providing coherent and relevant guidance and training to farmers.  
• Provide fertilizer advisory based on soil type.  
• Increase organic fertilizer production capacity.  
• Identify a list of quality input suppliers to share with farmers, ACs, FAs, PGs, and unions.  
• Increase governance capacity, including quality control, of ACs and unions to ensure enabling conditions for climate- resilient 
and sustainable practice uptake.
 • Strengthen agricultural extension 
capacity/technical functions for providing coherent and relevant guidance and training to farmers (e.g., appropriate agrochemical application).  
• Provide fertilizer advisory based on soil type.  
• Increase organic fertilizer production capacity and access, 
including bio- digesters  
• Establish a public -private sector 
coordination mechanism to promote controlled agrochemical product labeling appropriate and minimal agrochemical application.  
• Identify a list of quality input suppliers to share with farmers, ACs, FAs, PGs, and unions.  
• Increase governance capacity, including quality control, of ACs and unions to ensure enabling conditions for climate-
resilient and 
sustainable practice uptake.  • Strengthen agricultural extension 
capacity/technical functions for 
providing coherent and relevant guidance and training to farmers (e.g., appropriate agrochemical application).  
• Provide fertilizer advisory based on soil type.  
• Increase organic fertilizer production capacity and access, including bio- digesters  
• Establish a public -private sector 
coordination mechanism to promote controlled agrochemical product labeling appropriate and minimal agrochemical application.  
• Identify a list of quality input suppliers to share with farmers, ACs, FAs, PGs, and unions.  
• Increase governance capacity, including quality control, of ACs and unions to ensure enabling conditions for climate- resilient and 
sustainable practice uptake.  • Strengthen agricultural extension 
capacity/technical functions for providing coherent and relevant guidance and training to farmers (e.g., 
appropriate agrochemical application).  
• Increase organic fertilizer production capacity and access, including bio-digesters  
• Provide fertilizer advisory based on soil type.  
• Establish a public -priva te sector 
coordination mechanism to promote 
controlled agrochemical product 
labeling appropriate and minimal agrochemical application.  
• Identify a list of quality input suppliers to share with farmers, ACs, FAs, PGs, and unions.  
• Increase governance capacit y, 
including quality control, of ACs and unions to ensure enabling conditions for climate- resilient and sustainable 
practice uptake.  Pest Control  • Invest in modeling and research 
and development of rice pest and diseases to improve understanding of spatial distribution of risks.  
• Promote IPM linked to provision of tailored agro- met services.   
• Improve tailored pest and 
disease warnings and 
advisories.  • Improve research and data 
collection on key  pest and 
diseases on cashew production t o 
develop tailored IPM measures.  
• Strengthen extension services to promote IPM, climate- informed 
practices, and risk management using agro- met services.  
• Promote local “traditional” varieties 
that are resilient to pests and diseases.   
• Improve tailored pest and disease warnings and advisories.  
• Use of herbicide alternatives.  • Improve research and data 
collection on key  pest and 
diseases on cashew production to develop tailored IPM measures.  
• Strengthen extension services to promote IPM, climate- informed 
practices, and risk management using agro- met services.  
• Improve tailored pest and disease 
warnings and advisories.  
• Use of herbicide alternatives.  • Strengthen extension services to 
promote IPM, climate- informed 
practices, and risk management using 
agro- met services.  
• Improve tailored pest and disease warnings and advisories.  
• Promote control measures, including long rotation of crops, draining soil, 
mechanical control, and weed 
management.  Irrigation  • Establish IWM mechanisms to 
improve water availability and 
pollution control.  
• Improve water conservation/ management practices, including use of soil moisture sensors and dry season irrigation options.  
• Promote fixed- water supply to 
reduce water losses from direct 
evaporation.  • Establish IWM mechanisms to 
improve water availability and pollution control.  
• Develop natural canal and pond networks.  
• Monitor water flow and quality and 
crop water requirements to provide 
tailored agro- met advisories.  
• Promote climate- smart irrigation 
systems and schedules to optimize 
water resources.  • Promote smart irrigation systems 
(e.g., drip irrigation and ponds) and schedules to optimize water resources.  
• Monitor crop water requirements to 
provide tailored agro- met 
advisories.  • Develop crop -water models based on 
AquaCrop simulations to provide tailored agr o-met advisories.  
• Promote low -cost drip irrigation and 
water storage (e.g., ponds, gravity water tanks) systems .  Harvest  • Promote climate -resilient 
harvest techniques linked to agro- met advisories.  
• Promote immediate drying after harvest.  
• Invest in energy -efficient drying 
facilities.  
• Increase knowledge of 
temperature and humidity 
control measures.  • Promote climate -resilient harvest 
techniques linked to agro- met 
advisories.  
• Provide tailored climate services 
and early warning systems to 
inform farmers’ decision to harvest 
with appropriate timing and methods   
• Promote immediate drying after 
harvesting.  • Promote climate -resilient harvest 
techniques linked to agro- met 
advisories.  
• Provide tailored climate services and early warning systems to inform farmers’ decisions to harvest with appropriate timing and methods.  
• Invest in immediate cold storage 
capacity.  • Promote early morning harvesting to 
avoid heat stress and UV light.  
• Promote the use of bamboo crates and 
wet cloth covers to minimize water loss.


---
*Page 43*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
   
 Post -harvest Storage, Milling, and Processing  • Invest in AC and union -level 
energy -efficient storage facilities 
(renewable energy sources).  
• Raise awareness about 
increased price negotiation power through storage.  
• Increase knowledge and use of temperature and humidity sensor systems (e.g., ITCs).  
• Store in aseptic and hermetic bags.   
• Climate- proof rice storage and 
processing facilities.  • Promote storing nuts in jute bags 
and other techniques to decrease mold.  
• Increase awareness of optimum thermal processing and storage techniques.  
• Increase use of fan, dehumidifiers, 
and ventilators to reduce storage loss.   
• Increase knowledge and use of temperature and humidity sensor systems (e.g., ITCs).  
• Promote better use of by -products  
and value- addition strategies (e.g., 
juice, jam, and honey making through apiculture)  
• Invest in research and development for value- addition 
processing options.  • Invest in post -harvest treatment 
capacity such as hot water t
reatment to reduce loss and meet 
international standards.  
• Promote quality control and certificated processing measures.  
• Increase knowledge and use of temperature and humidity sensor systems (e.g., ITCs).  
• Invest in collection centers with cold storage capacity.  
• Invest in research and 
development for value- addition 
processing options.  
• Invest in sustainable and transport 
damage- proof packaging.  
• Promote better use of by -products 
and value- addition strategies (e.g., 
juice, jam, and honey making 
through apicult ure) • Invest in energy -efficient cold storage 
capacity and post -harvest technologies 
at AC and union levels (e.g., solar -
powered storage facilities, cool -bot 
equipped cool rooms).  
• Promote best transport practices (e.g., 
cold chain capacity).  
• Invest in research and development for 
value- addition processing options.  
 Markets  • Make market information available as part of services for farmers  and other local value chain actors through existing market apps (e.g.  by IFAD AIMS, 
ASPIER projects)  
• Support adoption of CamGAP, GI, organic certification, including Ibis Rice, and other appropriate value- adding certifications.  
• Establish a close link between target certifications and climate resilience for further value addition.  
• Build PSPPs to increase collaboration and coordination across value chains (e.g., market networks, trade fairs, matching serv ices).  
• Increase farmers’ and other local value chain actors’ business, market and financial literacy.  
• Raise awareness of c limate- resilient and high- value products and their benefits among buyers, exporters, and consumers.  
• Promote contract farming and direct purchase agreements for increased demand and supply.   
• Invest in labeling and traceability capacity.  
 
122 The analysis also recommends an effort to improve existing knowledge management systems that currently  exist 
at an individual initiative level by harmonizing and streamlining their availability and accessibility for the project 
beneficiaries  (these are the  same beneficiaries of the FARM) to promote relevant best practices and lessons learned 
through a variety of mediums, including social media platforms and mobile apps.   
 
Activities under Output 2.3. (See Section E.6.)  
Activities, Description s and Sub -Activities  
Activity 2.3.1:  Develop a clearinghouse, consolidating existing knowledge systems, for harmonized knowledge management and systematic 
dissemination of lessons learned and best practices in climate- resilient, inclusive, gender- responsive, and high- value agriculture for su pporting 
the implementation of the roadmaps and action plans under Activity 2.1.1, and for raising awareness of the practices and technologies under 
Activity 2.3.2 and associated economic and social benefits.   
 
Description:  A consolidated and improved clearinghouse will systematically collect and disseminate relevant lessons learned and best practices 
from all past and ongoing pertinent initiatives for promoting climate -resilient, high- value, and sustainable agriculture practices and technologies. 
The clearinghouse will operate as a one-stop- shop web- platform that provides centralized access to all relevant lessons learned and best 
practices from various sources to ensure institutionalized knowledge management for supporting systemic progress. The centralized system 
will assure the quality control and harmonization of information through various mediums, including FFS curricula, Facebook, YouTube channels, 
and mobile apps (e.g., Tonle Sap App, Chamkar and EcoKasksekor) so that farmers and other local value chain actors have reliable sources 
of consiste nt technical guidance and interactively provide feedback and information. The information is also used to promote buyers’ inf ormed 
purchasing and sourcing of agricultural products.  
 
• Sub-activity 2.3.1.1: Consolidate and improve existing knowledge systems to established a semi -automated clearinghouse system to 
collect, process, and disseminate relevant lessons learned and best practices in climate- resilient, inclusive, gender- responsive, and high-
value production and processing practices and technologies.  
• Sub-activity 2.3.1.2: Promote through FFS curricula, Facebook, YouTube channels, and mobile apps (e.g., Tonle Sap App, Chamkar and 
EcoKasksekor) for on- demand information access among smallholder farmers, other local value chain actors and buyers, particularly 
women farmers and value chain actors.  
• Sub-activity 2.3.1.3: Conduct annual training seminars for retailers, hoteliers, restauranteurs, and traders/exporters to increase their 
awareness of the benefits of climate- resilient, inclusive, gender- responsive, and high- value agriculture to promote informed purchasing 
and sourcing.


---
*Page 44*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
   
  
Output 2.4: Improved agro -ecological conditions and connectivity . 
 
123 A recent study on forest landscape restoration opportunities in the NTSB (Bernacki et al., 2018)  provides the case 
for investing in catchment restoration to restore and enhance ecosystem services and downstream agroecology. The 
report identified restoration interventions to increase forest cover, reduce soil erosion, increase the availability of non-
timber forest products (NTFPs), and improve local livelihoods. The approach is also consistent with Cambodia’s 
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP)  (2016), which underscores  the critical role of agriculture in the 
maintenance and r estoration of ecosystem services and connectivity through ensuring agroecology in the mosaic 
landscapes of this region.  
 
124 Building on these recommendations, the PEARL project focuses its activities under this output to support CPAs 
and CFs in restoring and protecting 7,600 ha of critical catchment forests and other ecologically sensitive riparian zones 
in the upper watersheds  through IWM and agroforestry interventions. These interventions will link with the CPAs' and 
CFs' business plans developed under Output 2.1., the FARM under Output 2.2. and demonstration of alternative 
practices and technologies under Output 2.3. to ensur e that activities draw on market incentives and improved 
knowledge and skills in climate- resilient practices. From this perspective, IWM and agroforestry activities will promote 
conservation practices that offer enhanced livelihood options. For example, th e project will promote apiculture to 
increase local pollination services while also increasing income generation opportunities, agroforestry of native and 
climate -resilient species for fruits and agrotourism opportunities, and value addition of NTFPs.  
 
125 The above study’s key guidelines and area estimates were adopted to analyze and identify potential CPAs and 
CFs to  engage in the restoration work under the PEARL project. During project formulation, a study was conducted to 
identify target CPAs and CFs for PEARL restoration interventions. The study report (Seak, 2022)  identifies and 
recommends 14 CPAs and 6 CFs  (Table 10). A large group of these communities is located within the catchment areas 
of the Stung Sen River, where their catchment restoration and protection activities have a significant bearing on 
downstream rice -growing regions in Preah Vihear and Kampong Thom provinces.  Activity 2.3.2:  Provide horizontally and vertically harmonized and targeted extension services, linking the provincial, district, commune, an d 
village levels and public and private extension providers, to promote the adoption of climate- resilient, inclusive, gender -responsive, and high-
value practices and technologies relevant for the implementation of roadmaps and action plans developed under Activity 2.1.1 and financed under Activi ty 2.2.1.  
 
Description:  For successful implementation of the provincial -level value chain roadmaps and crop- specific action/business plans prepared by 
ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs,  and agricultural unions  and financed through FARM under Activity 2.2.1 must be coupled with consistent and 
coordinated extension services to promote highly relevant production and processing practices and technologies that are climate -resilient, 
inclusive, gender -responsive, and high- value. Such practices and technologies will include the application of stress -tolerant varieties, small -
scale irrigation systems, horticultural techniques (net house, raised bed production, drip irrigation), on- farm and homestead multi -use ponds, 
composting and organic fertilizer production, elements of t he system of rice intensification, solar water pumps and storage tanks, integrated 
livestock waste management, IPM19, climate -resilient post -harvest storage, value- addition facilities, and traceability and labeling.  
 
• Sub-activity 2.3.2.1: Design inclusive and gender -responsive training curricula for four target groups -  1) public extension officers at the 
provincial, district and commune and village levels, 2) private extension providers, including NGOs, 3) trainer/model farmers and local 
value chain actors, and 4) female farmers and value chain actors -  to promote the adoption of climate- resilient and high- value practices 
and technologies in line with the roadmaps and action/business plans (Output 2.1)  
• Sub-activity 2. 3.2.2: Conduct biannual training of public extension officers for identifying, demonstrating, and promoting climate- resilient 
and high- value practices and technologies relevant for the action/business plans.  
• Sub-activity 2.3.2.3: Conduct annual training of private extension providers, including NGOs to mainstream climate- resilient and 
sustainable practices and technologies and clearinghouse knowledge into their services.  
• Sub-activity 2.3.2.4: Conduct biannual TOT training of representative farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women 
farmers and value chain actors from ACs, FAs, PGs, CFs, and unions on demonstrating and promoting climate- resilient and high- value 
practices and technologies relevant for their action plans implementation (flexible time arrangements to meet women specific needs).  
• Sub-activity 2.3.2.5: Conduct biannual TOT training of representative farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women 
farmers and value chain actors from CPAs on demonstrating and promoting climate -resilient and high- value practices and technologies 
relevant for their action plans implementation (flexible time arrangements to meet women specific needs).  
• Sub-activity 2.3.2.6: Establish model farmer and processor demonstration sites to promote the adoption of climate- resilient, inclusive, 
gender -responsive, and high -value best practices and technologies.  
 
19 The project will scale up the efforts of the National Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Program, supported by FAO and the International 
Rice Research Institute, developed over the past de cades.


---
*Page 45*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
   
  
Table 10: Identified CPAs and CFs  
# CPA/ CF Name  Location (Province/PA)  
1 CPA-Kaki Brahoang (Boeng Per Wildlife Sanctuary)  Dang Kambet commune, Sandan District,  
Kampong Thom  
2 CPA-Skor Krouch (Boeng  Per Wildlife Sanctuary)  Sandan commune and District, Kampong Thom  
3 CPA-Chhoam Thlork (Boeng Per Wildlife Sanctuary)  Ngan commune, Sandan district, Kampong Thom  
4 CPA-Kbal Daun Krei  (Prey Lang Biodiversity Conservation 
Corridor)  Mean Rith commune, Sandan district,  
Kampong Thom  
5 CF-Prey Tatei  Mean Rith commune, Sandan district, Kampong Thom  
6 CF-Prey O’Kranhoung  Mean Rith commune, Sandan district,  
Kampong Thom  
7 CF-O’Soam  Sala Visai commune, Prasat Balangk district, Kampong Thom  
8 CPA-Chup Tasok (Kulen National Park)  Khnang Phnom commune, SvayLeu district, Siem Reap  
9 CPA-Prey Thom Anlung Thom (Kulen National Park)  Khnang Phnom Commune, Svay Leu District, Siem Reap  
10 CPA-Prey Thom Popel (Kulen National Park)  Khnang Phnom Commune, Svay Leu District, Siem Reap  
11 CPA/CF -Sang Sahakum Rokha Vorn (Sang Rokha Vorn Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Trapeang Tav and Koun Kriel Communes, Anlong Veng district, Oddar 
Meanchey  
12 CPA/CF -Ratan ak Rokha (Sang Rokha Vorn Wildlife Sanctuary)  Samrong and Koun Kriel communes, Samrong municipality [district], Oddar 
Meanchey  
13 CPA/CF -Samaki (Northern Biodiversity Conservation Corridor)  Trapeang Tav Commune, Anlong Veng district, Oddar Meanchey  
14 CPA/CF -Thmorda O'Toek Khiev (Northern Biodiversity 
Conservation Corridor)  Ph’av commune, Trapeang Prasat district, Oddar Meanchey  
15 CPA-Akphivoat Prey Veng (Kulen Promtep Wildlife Sanctuary)  Srayang commune, Kulen district, Preah Vihear  
16 CPA-Sambo Akp hivoat (Kulen Promtep Wildlife Sanctuary)  Srayang commune, Kulen district, Preah Vihear  
17 CPA-Pourieng (Kulen Promtep Wildlife Sanctuary)  Kulen Chheung commune, Kulen district, Preah Vihear  
18 CF-Prey Mloung  Srayang commune, Kulen  district, Preah Vihear  
19 CF-Koh Ker Rik Chamroeun  Srayang commune, Kulen district, Preah Vihear  
20 CF-Prey Pou Mek Boun  (Kulen Chheung commune, Kulen district), Preah Vihear  
 
126 Other CPAs and CFs are located near the Kulen National Park in Siem Reap and Sang Rokha Vorn Wildlife 
Sanctuary in Oddar Meanchey. The report recommends the PEARL project to support these CPAs and CFs in designing 
and implementing restoration and protection activities to improve their livelihood options to achieve the restoration target.  
 Activities under Output 2.4. (See Section E.6.)  
Activities, Descriptions and Sub -Activities  
Activity 2.4.1:  Restore and protect critical forest catchments in upper watershed areas where the target crops are produced (this activity wi ll 
build directly on and extend the existing conservation and catchment protection efforts by MoE, WCS20 and others).  
 Description : Establishing an inter -district integrated watershed management (IWM) program with relevant district councils in upper catchment 
areas of where the target crops are produced will enable both the restoration and protection of critical catchment forests and other sensitive 
ecological zones and improvement of agroecological conditions, including water availability and quality, while also reducing hazards, for downstream targeted farmers. Such restoration efforts will also increase the livelihood quality of upstream communities through improved 
ecosystem services and alternative livelihoods development  (e.g., apiculture, agroforestry -based (fruits) tourism, NTFP value addition). 
 
• Sub-activity 2.4.1.1: Establish an inter- district IWM framework to identify priority areas and interventions for restoring and protecting 
critical catchment forests and other sensitive ecological zones in upper watershed areas where the target crops are produced.  IWM 
activities will build on and enhance CPAs' and CFs' management plans.  
• Sub-activity 2.4.1.2: Design restoration and protection plans and provide capacity development in an inclusive and gender -responsive 
manner for the identified CPAs and CFs through agroforestry, other revenue- generating conservation activities, and contract  work.  
• Sub-activity 2.4.1.3: Support CFs to implement and monitor their restoration and protection plans.  
• Sub-activity 2.4.1.4: Support CPAs to implement and monitor their restoration and protection plans.  
• Sub-activity 2.4.1.5: Establish a methodological  approach and mechanism to identify baselines, monitor the impacts of catchment 
protection and restoration, and identify issues for improvement under the inter -district IWM framework.  
 
 
20 WCS successfully established a conservation- focused organic rice brand, Ibis Rice, incentivizing local conservation efforts to improve 
local agroecology and habitat connectivity.


---
*Page 46*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
   
 EXPECTED OUTCOME THREE 3 : REGULATORY AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS AND CAPACITIES FOR 
CLIMATE -RESILIENT AGRICULTURAL CERTIFICATION, CROSS -SECTORAL COORDINATION FOR 
INCREASED PSPPS AND SMALLHOLDER FINANCING, AND CLIMATE -INFORMED INVESTMENT SUPPORT 
ARE STRENGTHENED.  
 
127 This component will support the delivery of Components 1 and 2 by ensuring enabling conditions through a 
conducive regulatory  and institutional framework. Through this component, an effective vertical and horizontal 
integration of efforts and best practices across relevant sectors, stakeholder groups, and levels of government will be 
ensured to support the project in meeting its  objective.  
 
Output 3.1: Regulatory and institutional arrangements and capacity relevant to developing certification -based 
value chains strengthened to provide enabling conditions for adopting climate -resilient, high -value and 
sustainable agriculture and food security.  
 
128 Institutional support and coordination efforts and mechanisms for supporting the market -based transition of 
smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors to climate- resilient and high- value agriculture are currently 
limited. Enablin g regulatory and institutional conditions  are required to ensure that the certification standards targeted 
by the project  are effective and climate resilient  to achieve its goal. A systematic approach to promoting inclusive and 
gender -responsive financial access for smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors without collateral or  
guarantor is necessary to complement FARM under Output 2.2 to accelerate their transition. The PEARL project will 
also improve public -private partnerships, which are currently limited, and intersectoral coordination mechanisms to 
support the transition to climate- resilient agriculture.  
 
129 Under this output, the PEARL project will support the capacity development  of the ARDB as it will play a n essential  
coordination role under Activity 3.1.2 to design and operationalize a scorecard system for the agricultural finance sector  
and is also expected to be an integral part of  the project’s exit strategy, as the ARDB  with the project’s support  may 
develop a complementary GCF project for scaling up low -cost agricultural finance to support Cambodia’s accelerated 
transition to climate- resilient agriculture. The project's capacity development support for the ARDB will include 
establishing and strengthening its social and environmental policy and transparency and accountability guidelines for 
the ARDB to demonstrate its leadership in preparing, adopting, and operationalizing the lending scorecard system. Such support may also indirectly contribute to the ARDB's GCF accreditation process.  
 
130 The joint  leadership of MAFF and MOE with technical support from FAO Cambodia. Concerning agricultural 
finance, the ARDB21 will play a coordinating role. The target beneficiaries of this output include the public institutions 
and private sector partners at the national and sub- national levels through climate -proofing of certification processes, 
integration of the private sector into local development planning, and standardization of the smallholder lending 
approach, prioritizing resilience building.  FAO as the AE is currently screening and selecting private partners, starting 
with consultations with prioritized private sector entities based on a mapping exercise to identify and score their potential  
roles and contributions to the project and co- develop tailored engagement plans, including capacity development and 
resource mobilization strategies.  Potential private partners are identified based on their leadership in relevant areas 
concerning the project activities (see Table 5 for examples). The public institutions that benefit from this output include MAFF, MOE, ARDB and the Secretariates of NDSD and NCDD.  
 
Activities under Output 3.1. (See Section E.6.)  
Activities, Descriptions and Sub -Activities  
Activity 3.1.1:  Upgrade/establish an enabling regulatory and institutional framework for the climate -proofed certification programs under Activity 
2.1.2. to operate effectively.  
 Description:  The updated guidelines, training manuals, and tools for the target certification programs under Activity 2.1.2. must be fully 
underpinned by appropriate regulatory conditions and institutional arrangements to operate effectively and ensure long- lasting impacts.  
 
• Sub-activity 3.1.1.1: Mobilize the TWG, established under Sub-acti vity 2.1.2.1, to identify areas of improvement and recommend actions 
for ensuring an enabling regulatory and institutional environment for promoting climate- resilient, inclusive, and gender -responsive 
agricultural certification programs.  
• Sub-activity: 3.1 .1.2: Organize a stakeholder validation meeting(s) for the recommendations and submit stakeholder validated 
recommendations for amendments in the regulatory and institutional framework to the policymakers for their consideration.  
 
21 While not an Executing Entity, ARDB will be contracted by the AE to provide specific services related to the lending scorecar d 
development and stakeholder coordination in the financial sector.


---
*Page 47*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
   
 Activity 3.1.2:  Demonstrate a harmonized sectoral approach to climate -resilient, inclusive, and gender -responsive finance to complement 
Activity 2.2.1 for rolling out the FARM.  
 
Description:  This approach will promote and demonstrate harmonized practices across the agricultural finance to mainstream climate and 
sustainability considerations as critical de- risking measures by developing and adopting a scorecard system to increase financial access for 
smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors, with limited to no collateral assets.  
 
• Sub-activity 3.1.2.1:  Establish a working group with members from public and private financial institutions servicing the agriculture sector 
to design a lending scorecard system together with a user manual to consider climate- resilience and sustainability as main eligibility 
criteria for screening loan applications from smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors with limited to no collateral.  
• Sub-activity 3.1.2.2:  Facilitate agreements with at least three public and private financial institutions to operationalize the scorecard system 
on a pilot basis . 
Activity 3.1.3:  Increase private sector engagement in sub -national planning for improved PSPPs.   
 
Description:  Effective PSPPs for the development of climate- resilient, high- value, and sustainable value chains for smallholder farmers and 
other local value chain actors and ensuring food security depend on enabling conditions that forge coordination and collaboration  across relevant 
sectors (i.e., agriculture, finance, food, retail, hospitality, and trade) and between national and sub- national governments. Another such condition 
is to respond to citizens’ voices to create and achieve shared social visions, and this activity will ensure these enabling conditions.  
 
• Sub-activity 3.1.3.1: Strengthen the provincial public forum mechanisms by increasing private sector engagement to facilitate open 
dialogues between governments, the private sector, and smallholder farmers and local value chain actors  to forge effective PSPPs . 
• Sub-activity 3.1.3.2: Establish a sub- committee to serve NCSD and NCDD to strengthen cross -sectoral and vertical coordination and 
institutional arrangements by improving a feedback mechanism between national policy processes and sub- national forums on PSPPs 
for climate -resilient, inclusive, gender -responsive, and high -value agriculture and improved food security . 
 
Output 3.2: Gender -responsive landscape- level agroecology monitoring system (LAMS) developed to crowd in 
public and private investments in climate- resilient, high -value and sustainable agriculture.  
 
131 A systematic approach and process to enable strategic investment by the public and private sectors into climate-
resilient and high- value agriculture in a strategic and structured manner are currently absent. This hinders a clear 
understanding and monitoring of capacity gaps and climate finance investment needs, thus limiting the country’s ability to direct public spending and private sector investment into creating bankable projects to ensure incremental outcomes. The PEARL project will establish an integra ted decision- support tool for systematically monitoring climate risks and 
suitability shifts, linking to Output 1.1 and identifying investment gaps and opportunities, and monitoring progress to 
increase public and private investment. This tool will also su
pport the country’s effort toward developing and 
operationalizing an ETF under the Paris Agreement. The primary beneficiaries of  this output are MoE and MAFF by  
supporting the establishment of  the ETF concerning agriculture, while the LAMS will serve various needs and interests 
of public and private partners by providing investment decision support . In developing the LAMS, the project will draw 
on FAO's international best practices and lessons learned through designing and operationalizing interactive datab ases 
and user interfaces (e.g., C ollect Earth).  
 
Activities under Output 3.2. (See Section E.6.)  
Activities, Descriptions and Sub -Activities  
Activity 3.2.1:  Establish a gender -responsive landscape -level agroecology monitoring system (LAMS) with an interactive web platform.   
 
Description:  LAMS will offer a one- stop-shop platform for public and private investors in agriculture to make informed investment decisions. LAMS will guide 
investors by identifying investment gaps and opportunities in making agriculture resilient to climate change, high- value, inclusive, and gender -responsive to 
maximize their investment returns and track investment progress in terms of emissions, climate resilience, and social and environmental impacts over time. LAMS will be operationally linked to other climate- related monitoring systems (e.g., REDD+ NFMS, NDC ETF).  
 
• Sub- activity 3.2.1.1: Establish an expert working group with technical members from institutions managing relevant databases concerning climate 
change, agricultural production, and related socio- economic development and investment activities to identify the scope of LAMS's function 
parameters, data needs, and sources, and data sharing and harmonization needs, roles and responsibilities of parties involved, and an annual operating budget.  
• Sub- activity 3.2.1.2:   Facilitate data sharing and harmonization agreements between MAFF (a host of LAMS) and relevant data- holding institutions 
(NIS, MAFF, MoE, MoC, MWoRAM, and others).  
• Sub- activity 3.2.1.3:   Design a gender -responsive LAMS operating framework  with a web interface and an SOP for operating LAMS, including 
operational guidelines, roles and responsibilities, and training manuals.  
• Sub- activity 3.2.1.4: Train system analysts and administrators on the SOP to operationalize LAMS.  
• Sub- activity 3.2.1.5: Refine the predictive models of climate impacts on the target crops and other key crops in AquaCrop and through AEZ methodology 
based on ground data to aid the identification and selection of climate -resilient investment options under LAMS.


---
*Page 48*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
   
 Activity 3.2.2:  Promote the use of LAMS in public and private investment decision -making, monitoring, and reporting.  
 
Description:  To ensure wide application of LAMS among policymakers, public institutions, and private investors, promotional material devel opment (e.g., 
leaflets, sample analysis reports shared through social media and email listserv), and awareness -raising and end- user training events, including virtual 
resources, will be carried out.  
 
• Sub- activity 3.2.2.1: Develop awareness materials (e.g., leaflets, sample analysis performed on LAMS web platform, virtual end- user support materials 
on YouTube) and an end- user training program.  
• Sub- activity 3.2.2.2: Conduct bi -annual end- user training events to promote the broad application of LAMS and collect user feedbac k to improve 
LAMS's scope and analytical functions.  
 
XII. Alignment with National Policies and Strategies  
 
Climate Change and Agriculture under Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)  
132 Cambodia’ s updated NDC (MoE, 2020b)  to the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC underscores agriculture’s 
essential role in both mitigation and adaptation actions. The NDC brings particular attention to the need to increase the resilience of agriculture as it is one of the most affected and economically essential sectors on which a significant proportion of the country’s population directly depends. The NDC highlights the expected negative impact of food systems, increasing the risk of food insecurity and malnutrition, particularly among vulnerable groups, includin g the 
poor, women, children and other socially excluded minorities. Concerns over how such impacts disproportionately affect 
female farmers’ labor allocation and workload are emphasized to call for gender -responsive action and the need to 
collect gender -disaggregated data to better understand the effects of climate change on women in agriculture.  
 
133 Out of the 58 priority adaptation actions identified in the updated NDC, 17 focus on agriculture (ibid.). Among such 
priority adaptation actions, ten are directl y relevant to increasing the adaptive capacity of the NTSB through the 
promotion of climate- resilient and higher -value production of cashew, mango, organic rice, and leafy vegetables among 
smallholder farmers. For the agriculture sector, the NDC estimates the cost of climate change adaptation at USD 306 
million, much of which is expected to come through international support.  
 
134 These climate change adaptation actions to increase the resilience of crop systems and agricultural livelihoods 
also deliver mitigat ion co -benefits, for instance, through the organic fertilizer and biogas production and improved land 
management practices for increased agroecological functions and crop suitability. The NDC calls for increased public -
private partnerships (PPPs) to unlock  private sector investment and promote technology transfer and a market -driven 
transition towards a climate- resilient and sustainable development pathway. The NDC also stresses the need for 
improved institutional arrangements and capacity among the MAFF, MOE, and MOWRAM through data collection, 
analysis, management, monitoring and reporting, ensuring an enabling regulatory environment for PPPs, and 
advancing the above priority adaptation actions(ibid).   
 
135 The NDC contributes directly to the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (CCCSP) (2014) , which builds on 
the NSDP and Rectangular Strategy IV.  
 National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Process  
 
136 Cambodia’s NAP process builds on the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) (2006)  and identifies a 
lack of access to financial, technological, and human resources as the primary challenge and sets out medium and long-term adaptation goal s in critically affected sectors, including agriculture and water resources and human health. 
The NAP process begun in 2014 to advance four key elements: 1) laying the groundwork, 2) working preparatory elements, 3) developing implementation strategies, an d 4) setting up reporting and monitoring framework to place the 
adaptation to climate change at the center of policy agenda (GSSD, 2017) . Together with the NDC, the NAP also 
contributes to NSDP and CCCSP.  
 Cambodia’s GCF Country Programme  
 
137 Building on its NAPA, NAP process, CCCSP and sectoral climate change action plans, Cambodia’s GCF Country 
Programme (2020a)  identifies agriculture, water resources, infrastructure, forestry, health and coastal development as 
its priority investment areas for climate change adaptation. Agriculture and forestry are also considered key sectors for climate change mitigation. The Country Programme ranks the PEARL project as its top priority adaptation project. 
Establishing effective PPPs to leverage private investment for supporting adaptation actions is an essential strategy 
under the Country Programme. Cambodia currently has one Direct Access Entity (DAE), the National Committee for


---
*Page 49*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
   
 Sub-National Democratic Development Secretariat (NCDD).  Increasing the number of DAEs in Cambodia is another 
priority. In this context, the ARDB is currently considered by the NDA for DAE nomination.  
 
Climate Change Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Sector  
 
138 Directly contributing to the CCCSP, the Climate Change Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Sector 
2016- 2020 (CCPAP -AFF) (MAFF, 2016)  aims to develop appropriate institutional capacity and human resources in the 
sector to devise new and innovative technologies and measures. It also aims to increase far mers ’ awareness of climate-
related risks and options and ensure that they have the necessary means to adopt climate- resilient technologies and 
measures to minimize their crop and livestock damage and loss. The CCPAP -AFF identifies strategic objectives in its 
sub-sectors  – 1) food security and livelihoods; 2) plantation; 3)livestock; 4) forest management; and 5) fisheries – with 
actions to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions and increase their adaptative capacities to cope with increased 
floods, droughts, temperatures, and pest and diseases. For food security and livelihoods, priority actions include the promotion of sustainable farming systems and postharvest technologies, development of suitable crop variety and an information system of climate change impacts on agriculture and livelihoods, research and development of climate-
smart technologies and techniques, capacity building of agricultural cooperatives and SMEs in climate- smart 
agriculture.  
 
139 While the CCPAP -AFF sets out a comprehensive plan of action that sets ambitious targets, the less than 50% of 
the US$ 246 million required for the full implementation of the CCPAP -AFF was secured at the start of its 
implementation (ibid.). The sources of finance include the Secretariat Working Group on Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (SCAFF), government annual budget allocation, loans and grants from the World Bank, Asian Development Bank and International Fund for Agricultural Development. Although various climate change funds through the United Nations and bilateral agencies also provide additional support, much more is still needed to close the current financial gap.  
 
Cambodian Sustainable Development Goals (CSDGs) Framework (2016- 2030)  
 
140 Guided by the NSDP and Rectangular Strategy IV, the CSDGs Framework (2018a)  sets out the country -spec ific 
targets and indicators to track and monitor its progress towards its 18 goals, adapted from the Global Sustainable 
Development Goals to meet specific national circumstances. The CSDGs particularly relevant to the proposed project include Goal 1 (no poverty), Goal 2 (zero hunger), Goal 5 (gender equality), Goal 13 (climate action), and Goal 15 (life 
on land). According to the Framework, the average rural poverty rate will be halved, the value of agricultural production 
per capita will be doubled, and public expenditure on climate actions will also be increased by one percentage point by 2030.  
 
FAO’s Country Programme Framework 2019- 2023  
 
141 Building on the RGC’s national development, sectoral and climate priorities, as briefly described above, and the 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2019 – 2023, combined with FAO’s corporate strategic 
objectives on Better Environment and Asia -Pacific regional priorities on Accelerating sustainable natural resources 
management for biodiversity conservation and climate action, FAO in Cambodia aims to achieve three key outcomes:  
• Enhanced agricultural productivity, diversification and commercialization, and safe and nutrition- sensitive food 
systems for poverty reduction and food and nutrition security.  
• Equitable and sustainable management of natural resources, and increased capacity to monitor and report 
climate action.  
• Reduction of vulnerability, and improved resilience to climate change and shocks at national, community and 
household level.  
 
142 The PEARL project contributes to the delivery of these outcomes, for example, by 1) promoting organic agriculture, 
GAP, and GI and innovative, inclusive, and gender -responsive practices, guided by relevant best practices and lessons -
learned, under Outcome 1, 2) restoring and protecting critical catchments and agroecological functions and connectivity through an equitable approach under Outcome 2, and 3) increasing the resilience and adaptive capacity of vulnerable farmers and other value chain actors through improved access to highly tailored climate risk information, adaptive 
knowledge, finance and technologies under Outcome 3.  
 
B.4. Implementation a rrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams)  
XIII. Implementation Arrangements  (see Figure 1 0)


---
*Page 50*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
   
 Accredited Entity (AE)  
 
143 FAO will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for this project. As such, FAO will be responsible for the overall 
management of the project, including: (i) all aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical 
oversight and supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as the timeliness and quality of 
reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. FAO will ensure these responsibilities in accordance with 
the detailed provisions outlined in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between FAO and GCF.    
 144 FAO role as AE will be attributed to the relevant offices and divisions in FAO Headquarters located in Rome, Italy 
(HQ), Sub -Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (FAO -RAP) located in Bangkok, Thailand and FAO Representation 
in Cambodia (FAO -Cambodia).  
 
145 In order to fulfil the AE functions, FAO will set up a dedicated Project Task Force (PTF) in line with FAO project 
cycle guidelines. The PTF will be composed by the Budget Holder (BH), the Lead Technical Officer (LTO), Funding Liaison Officer (FLO), HQ Technical Officer and other officers, as appropriate.  
 
146 The PTF will remain independent from the Executing Entity functions also performed by FAO (see Project execution 
section below). In line with the GCF policy on fees adopted through GCF Board Decision B.19/09, the above- mentioned 
segregation of responsibilities within FAO will ensure that the Organization can independently and effectively perform the AE functions listed in the GCF General principles and indicative list of eligible costs covered under GCF fees and 
project management costs.  
  
 
Project co -financing  
 
147 The Royal Government of Cambodia acting through MAFF and MoE will provide co- financing in the form of in-kind 
contribution to the project: (1) through MAFF USD 3.69 million and (2) through MoE USD 2.258 million. The co- financier 
is responsible for reporting to the AE in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined in the GCF policies as well as AMA, Funded Ac tivity Agreement (FAA) between FAO and GCF and the Project Agreement  between the Host Country  
and FAO in its capacity of AE, which will also cover  co-financing activities execution, and the disbursed and allocated 
co-financing amount. The Royal Government of Cambodia acting through MAFF and MoE will be responsible for 
executing and managing their co- financing funds under the coordination of the Project Management Unit (PMU) and 
through the Project Steering Committee (see Project execution section below).  
 
148 FAO will provide US$ 0.67 million co- financing in the form of in- kind.  
 
Other project partners  
 
149 Several partners will be engaged in the project either to ensure complementarity with their activities and/or delivery 
of goods , works and services. These may include, MoWRAM, MoC , ARDB and NGOs (potential NGO partners include 
GRET, IRAM and WCS)  as procured parties. The procured parties, such as NGOs, will be selected through an open 
and competitive bidding process .The procured parties will be selected during project implementation in accordance 
with relevant FAO Manual Sections.  
 
Executing Entities  
 
150 The project will be executed by The Royal Government of Cambodia acting through MAFF and MoE  and FAO in 
to deliver the project activities  (see Table 11).  
 151 FAO will act as co -EE and will ensure strong country -driven execution of project activities and execute the in -kind 
contribution from the FAO  (LDCF and IW/GEF) and will also be in charge of the execution of selected activities funded 
by GCF proceeds based on its comparative advant ages.  
  
152 A FAO Project Execution Team (PET) will be set up in FAO -Cambodia, comprising relevant FAO country personnel 
(Assistant FAO Representative of Programme, Administrative and operational staff) and will be responsible for FAO EE function.  
 
153 The Royal Government of Cambodia acting through MAFF and MoE will executing project activities funded by GCF 
proceeds. FAO will enter into Operational Partnership Agreements with MAFF and MoE.


---
*Page 51*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
   
  
154 The Royal Government of Cambodia acting through MAFF and MoE  will be responsible for executing their co -
financing activities.  
 
 
Table 11: Assignment of EEs (see Annex 4 for sub -activity level assignments)  
Component 1 Farmers’ capacities are enhanced to manage climate impacts and related risks  
Output  Activity  Sub-activity  EE Co-finance  Funding Source  
1.1 1.1.1  1.1.1.1  FAO  GCF  
1.1.1.2  FAO  GCF  
1.1.1.3  FAO  GCF  
1.1.2  1.1.2.1  MAFF   GCF  
1.1.2.2  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
1.1.2.3  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
1.1.3  1.1.3.1  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
1.1.3.2  FAO FAO GCF  
Component 2: Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly vulnerable women 
farmers, is increased through market incentives that promote climate -resilient, higher- value, diversified, and sustainable 
production and processing.  
Output  Activity  Sub-activity  EE Co-finance  Funding Source  
2.1 2.1.1  2.1.1.1  FAO  GCF  
2.1.1.2  FAO  GCF  
2.1.1.3  MAFF   GCF  
2.1.1.4  MoE MoE GCF  
2.1.1.5  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
2.1.1.6  FAO  GCF  
2.1.1.7  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
2.1.1.8  MoE MoE GCF  
2.1.1.9  FAO  GCF  
2.1.1.10  MAFF   GCF  
2.1.2  2.1.2.1  MAFF   GCF  
2.1.2.2  MAFF   GCF  
2.1.2.3  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
2.1.2.4  FAO  GCF  
2.2 2.2.1  2.2.1.1  FAO  GCF  
2.2.1.2  FAO  GCF  
2.2.1.3  FAO  GCF  
2.2.2  2.2.2.1  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
2.2.2.2  MAFF   GCF  
2.2.3  2.2.3.1  MAFF   GCF  
2.3 2.3.1  2.3.1.1  FAO FAO GCF  
2.3.1.2  MAFF   GCF  
2.3.1.3  MAFF   GCF  
2.3.2  2.3.2.1  FAO  GCF  
2.3.2.2  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
2.3.2.3  MAFF   GCF  
2.3.2.4  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
2.3.2.5  MoE MoE GCF  
2.3.2.6  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
2.4 2.4.1  2.4.1.1  MoE MoE GCF  
2.4.1.2  FAO  GCF  
2.4.1.3  FAO  GCF  
2.4.1.4  MoE MoE GCF  
2.4.1.5  FAO FAO GCF  
Component 3 Regulato ry and institutional frameworks and capacities for climate -resilient agricultural certification, cross -
sectoral coordination for increased PSPPs and smallholder financing, and climate -informed investment support are 
strengthened  
Output  Activity  Sub-activity  EE Co-finance  Funding Source  
3.1 3.1.1  3.1.1.1  MAFF  MAFF  GCF  
3.1.1.2  MAFF   MAFF  
3.1.2  3.1.2.1  FAO  GCF


---
*Page 52*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
   
 3.1.2.2  FAO  GCF  
3.1.3  3.1.3.1  MoE MoE GCF  
3.1.3.2  MoE MoE GCF  
3.2 3.2.1  3.2.1.1  MoE MoE GCF  
3.2.1.2  MoE  GCF  
3.2.1.3  FAO  GCF  
3.2.1.4  MoE MoE GCF  
3.2.1.5  FAO  GCF  
3.2.2  3.2.2.1  MoE  GCF  
3.2.2.2  MoE  GCF  
 
Project Execution  
 
155 A dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU)  will be established and hosted by MAFF in Cambodia. The PMU 
will be functional for the entire duration of the project. The PMU will be established at the General Directorate of 
Agriculture at the MAFF ( GDA/MAFF) in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. The PMU will coordinate directly with EEs and project 
stakeholders and will be responsible for providing support to the execution of day -to-day activities the technical quality 
of the project outputs, effective stakeholder engagement.   
 156 The PMU will be led by a National Project Director (NPD) and managed by a project -recruited National Project 
Coordinator (NPC). The NPD will be appointed/nominated by the GDA/ MAFF (see Table 12 ). NPC will be responsible 
for overall project management and coordination with project stakeholders. The PMU will also include a finance officer, 
operation officer, Human resources & admin officer and procurement & contracting officer.   
 
157 Within the PMU, proj ect-recruited staff and staff seconded by the government will collectively comprise a project 
delivery  team that will ensure sound and effective project implementation. The specific roles of critical members of this 
project delivery team are described in T able 12.  
 
 
Figure 10: Implementation Arrangements  
 
 
Project Steering Committee  
 
158 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic guidance for the project. The PSC will 
be co- chaired by MAFF and FAO -Cambodia.  
 
159 The NPC of the PMU will serve as Rapporteur to the PSC. The PSC will be comprised of representative members 
from relevant ministries, other Procured Parties. The PSC will also invite representatives from relevant CSOs, the 
private sector, and academia as necessary to discuss thematic issues as well as partnership opportunities.   The role 
of the PSC will  be to:


---
*Page 53*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
   
 • Provide overall guidance and direction to the project, ensuring it remains within any specified constraints;  
• Address project issues as raised by the national project coordinator;  
• Monitor project risks and the effectiveness of mitigation measures, and provide guidance on new project risks, 
and agree on possible countermeasures and management actions to address specific risks;  
• Review the project progress, and provide direction and recommendations to ensure that the agreed deliverables 
are produced satisfactorily according to plans;  
• Review and agree with annual work plan and provide necessary strategic guidance for its implementation;  
• Appraise the annual project implementation report, including the quality assessment rating report; make 
recommendations  for subsequent work plans to build on achievements and address any shortcomings;  
• Provide ad hoc direction and advice for exceptional situations when the project coordinator’s tolerances are exceeded.  
 
160 FAO as a co- chair with the government partner will have a joint final decision- making authority of the PSC . The 
PSC will be expected to meet formally at least once every 12 months. Formal meetings will be scheduled and arranged 
by the National Project Coordinator in consultation with, and at the request of PSC members (with tentative dates for 
the following meeting being agreed under Any Other Business). Extraordinary meetings of the PSC can be requested 
by any of its members . 
 
Table 12: Key Positions  
No. Position  
 Duration  Responsible 
Areas  Responsibility  
1 National Project Director 
(co-financed position)  Part-time PMU and All 
Outcomes  • Provide overall directions and guidance and operational leadership for all 
activities.  
• Provide high -level coordination support between all EEs and Procured  Parties. . 
2 National Project 
Coordinator (National 
Technical Advisor)  72 months  PMU and All 
Outcomes  • Ensure day -to-day project operations and coordination with all stakeholders 
involved in project  implementation.  
• Oversee all planning activities, including annual work planning and budgeting, and coordinate PMU- led recruitment, procurement, and monitoring and reporting 
activities.  
• Ensure timely mobilization of all nece ssary resources, including co -finance.  
3 International Senior 
Project Officer (Chief Technical Advisor)  66 months  PMU and All 
Outcomes  • Oversee technical activities in all outcome areas.  
• In close coordination with the Project Director, National Technical Advisor, and national counterparts, supervise and coordinate the work of all international and national experts to ensure timely deliverables that meet FAO/GCF quality standards and reflect international best practices.  
• Ensure strategic and technical linkages and coherence between the outcomes 
and outputs.  
4 Head of Operations 
(international)  17 months  PMU and All 
Outcomes  • Provide overall guidance on all operational matters based on FAO rules and 
regulations and international best practices.  
• Ensure quality assurance of all technical, operational, and financial activities.  
5 International Operations 
Officer  30 months  PMU and 
Outcome 2  • Liaise with various units of the FAO -Cambodia to ensure all operational activities 
are planned and carried out in a timely manner and in compliance with the necessary rules and regulations.  
• Support the development of operational and procurement specifications under 
FARM.  
6 National Operations 
Officer  72 months  PMU  • Oversee all operational matters under PMU.  
• Provide capacity development support to the co- EEs to establish the necessary 
quality control mechanisms that match FAO/GCF quality control standards for 
operational issues.  
7 National 
Procurement/Grant 
Specialist  72 months  PMU  • Manage all procurement activities under PMU.  
• Support the procurement of goods and services under Component 2 as required.  
8 National Finance 
Specialist  72 months  PMU  • Prepare financial plans and expenditure reports.  
• Make payments and track expenditures and process payments.  
• Provide capacity development support to the co- EEs to establish the necessary 
quality control mechanisms that match FAO/GCF quality control standards for 
financial matters.  
9 National Finance 
Associate  72 months  PMU  • Assist the National Finance Specialist in financial management and quality 
control.  
10 National Human 
Resources Specialist  72 months  PMU  • Coordinate all human resources recruitment and related activities to ensure timely 
implementation of project activities.


---
*Page 54*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
   
 11 National Administration 
Assistant   72 months  PMU  • Assist project staff in ensuring day -to-day project operations and coordination,  
and carry out any other secretarial tasks.  
12 International Technical 
Advisor for MEAL 500 days  All Outcomes  • Lead the development of a Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning 
(MEAL) strategy and MEAL system.  
• Develop the project staff’s capacity for implementing the MEAL strategy/system.  
13 National MEAL 
Specialist  72 months  All Outcomes  • Coordinate the implementation of the MEAL strategy/system.  
• Prepare MEAL reports based on the MEAL Plan (Annex 11).  
14 National MEAL Assistant  72 months  All Outcomes  • Assist the International Technical Advisor and National Specialist for MEAL in 
providing staff capacity development support and implementing the MEAL Plan.  
15 National 
Communications 
Specialist  72 months  All Outcomes  • Devel op and implement a communications strategy.  
• Support all communication- related activities under the project, including 
knowledge sharing and management.  
16 National Safeguard 
Specialist  72 months  All Outcomes  • Prepare and implement specific social and environmental management plans 
based on the ESMF (Annex 6) and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7).  
• Handle activities related to reporting and investigating disputes through the 
grievance redress mechanism.  
• Monitor and report progress and newly arising r isks.  
17 National Gender 
Specialist  72 months  All Outcomes  • Coordinate the implementation of the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8) and 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex 7).  
• Handle activities related to reporting and investigating cases concerning  Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH).  
• Support the project staff’s and co- EE’s capacity in gender mainstreaming and 
women’s empowerment.  
18 International  Technical 
Advisor on Agrometeorology  36 months  Outcome 1  • Oversee the planning and implementation of all activities under Component 1 to 
ensure effective and timely sequencing of all key deliverables while meeting FAO/GCF quality standards.  
• Provide technic al guidance on agrometeorological information production and 
dissemination and related capacity development activities.  
19 National Agriculture 
Extension Advisor  72 months  Outcomes 1 and 
2 • Support the beneficiary groups and public and private extension services in 
identifying and demonstrating appropriate climate- resilient, high- value and 
sustainable techniques, and technologies through various outreach and extension activities in coordinati on with relevant experts and government counterparts.  
• Coordinate Behavior Change Communication (BCC) activities under Outcomes 1 
and 2 together with the National Communications Specialist.  
20 National Operations 
Officers (Two positions -  
Supporting Gover nment 
co-EEs)  72 months  Outcomes 1 and 
2 • Support the co -EEs’ (i.e., MAFF and MoE) operational activities under Outcomes 
1 and 2  
• Ensure all activities, including reporting, comply with PMU/FAO/GCF standards, 
processes, and procedures.  
21 International Technical 
Advisor for Value Chain Development  72 months  Outcome 2  • Oversee the planning and implementation of all activities under Component 2 to 
ensure effective and timely sequencing of all key deliverables while meeting FAO/GCF quality standards.  
• Lead all value chain development activities, including PSPP establishment and 
marketing.  
22 International Technical 
Advisors for Target  
Crops (4 positions)  221 days 
per 
position  Outcome 2  • Provide technical agronomic advisory services and crop -specific production 
strategies in coordination with the International Technical Advisors for Value 
Chain Development and Agrometeorology.  
23 National Agricultural 
Advisor  462 days  Outcome 2  • Support the implementation of crop -specific production strategies.  
• Provide related capacity development support to the beneficiary groups and 
extension providers.  
24 International Agricultural 
Finance Advisor  462 days  Outcome 2  • Provide strategic and technical guidance to the establishment of FARM.  
27 National 
Procurement/Grant 
Associate  72 months  Outcome 2  • Manage FARM -related procurement cases.  
• Handle other procurement activities under Outcomes 1 and 3, as needed.  
25 Provincial Value Chain 
Specialists (4 positions)  72 months  Outcome 2  • Coordinate the implementation of value -chain development activities in the 
respective provinces.  
26 Provincial Value Chain 
Assistants (4 positions)  72 months  Outcome 2  • Assist the Provincial Value Chain Specialists by executing administrative and 
operational tasks.  
28 National Watershed 
Management Specialist  72 months  Outcome 2  • In coordination with MoE, design and implement catchment restoration and 
protection plans and activities with the identified CPAs and CFs.  
29 National Policy Analysis 
Advisor  72 months  Outcome 3  • Oversee the planning and implementation of all activities under Component 3 to 
ensure effective and timely sequencing of all key del iverables while meeting 
FAO/GCF quality standards.


---
*Page 55*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
   
 30 International Investment 
Planning Advisor  462 days  Outcome 3  • Provide strategic and technical guidance and support in developing a lending 
scorecard system and LAMS in coordination with other experts and government 
counterparts.  
31 National Geographical 
Information System 
(GIS) Advisor  72 Months  Outcome 3  • Develop a  geospatial information portal and data management system linking to 
LAMS and supporting activities under Outcomes.  
• Assist project activities with GIS support.  
• Support the co -EEs in strengthening their GIS capabilities.  
32 National GIS Associate  36 months  Outcome 3  • Assist the National GIS Advisor in providing various GIS support activities.  
 
Flow of funds and contractual arrangements  (see Figure 11) 
 
161 FAO will enter into a Project Agreement with the Host Country acting through MoE, which covers 1)  provisions on 
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies, 2) provisions with respect to the co-
financing to be provided by the H ost Country acting through MoE and MAFF, and 3) the respective roles and 
responsibilities of the Accredited Entity and the Host Country, acting through MoE and MAFF for the implementation of the Project. The Project Agreement will be legally binding for both MoE and MAFF under the Government of the Cambodia.  
  
162 In line with the project implementation arrangements outlined above, GCF proceeds received by FAO in its capacity 
as Accredited Entity will flow to FAO as EE as well as the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), and 
the Ministry of Environment (MoE) for the implementation of the identified project activities. In accordance with FAO Manual Section 701, FAO will enter into two Operational Partnership Agreements (OPAs) with the two operat ional 
partners namely MoE and MAFF after FAA effectiveness.  
 
163 Procured parties will be contracted in accordance with FAO rules and regulations of procuring goods and services 
(e.g. FAO Manual Section 502 and 507).  
 
164 FAO will execute the project in accordance with FAO rules, regulations, policies and procedures. Financial 
management and procurement under this project will be guided by relevant FAO rules and regulations as relevant 
provisions in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed between FAO and GCF. These rules and regulations 
were reviewed by GCF and deemed satisfactory by the GCF Secretariat and Accreditation Panel as part of FAO’s 
accreditation to GCF.  
 
Figure 11: Flow of Funds  
 
  
165 Figure 12 shows the operational arrangements for the FARM. The project will be responsible for procuring the 
assets identified in the business plans of the beneficiary groups while ensuring that the beneficiary groups receive the


---
*Page 56*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
   
 necessary technical and op erational support. As referred to in Figure 12, specific agreements and terms under each 
successive stage of the FARM are specified in Table 8 under Section B3. The project will also develop a FARM grants 
manual during the inception stage to clarify specific procedures and requirements at each of the three stages.  Each 
beneficiary group will establish its individual FARM Trust Fund account with a local microfinance bank, using a standard 
trust account service package available at the bank. The project will support the beneficiary group in selecting  
appropriate terms and conditions with the bank.  
 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
166 Cambodia is an LDC with many development priorities and investment needs. One of these priorities is accelerating 
the current effort to adapt its agriculture sector to climate change. The country's economy and its rural population 
heavily depend on this sector, and rural agrarian communities are highly vulnerable to the observed and anticipated 
impacts of climate change due to widespread poverty. The NTSB is vital in this respect as nearly a third of the country’s 
agricultural output comes from this region,  and 20% of the country's population, mainly engaged in agriculture, resides 
there.  
 
167 However, Cambodia has limited financial and technical capacity to address this urgent need on its own adequately. 
The RGC is also aware that both public and private finance is necessary to harness the benefits of value- chain 
approaches to address the challenges facing the NTSB. Given the current lack of regulatory and incentive mechanisms, 
the RGC recognizes the need for public sector efforts to establish the necessary enabling conditions to leverage and 
unlock private sector investment in the medium to long term. In this context, the proposed PEARL project is considered 
a timely and the most critical priority project under Cambodia's GCF Country Programme (2020a) .  
 
168 The requested GCF support is thus expected to assist this effort by the RGC to encourage private- sector  actors, 
particularly agricultural suppliers, traders/exporters, retailers, and local financial institutions, to work in partnership w ith 
the project’s target beneficiaries to adopt and further invest in climate- resilient and high- value practices. Through this 
effort, the RGC also intends to expand the value chain concept to include consumers as a critical group of actors to 
promote an accelerated transition to climate- resilient and sustainable agriculture and secure increased access to safe, 
quality, and sustainably produced agricultural products in the country.  
 
169 The financial support from the GCF will directly contribute to the country's current effort toward realizing the full -
scale implementation of the CCPAP in agriculture, while the project's value -chain approach keeps investment risk low. 
Figure 12: FARM Operational Arrangement


---
*Page 57*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
   
 The activities inclu ded in the project would not be viable at a lower level of concessionality, as revenue -generating 
activities are not included in the project. The project will partner with private- sector actors who are SMEs with limited 
resources to reconfigure and scale up their existing practices and businesses for the climate change adaptation of 
smallholder farmers and other small -scale local value chain actors. The project's intervention is crucial to increase, the 
awareness of climate risks through Outcome 1as well as  the capacity of smallholder farmers and local value chain 
actors to meet specific certification standards and their technological access through the FARM (Outcome 2). The 
private sector partners will focus their scarce resources on market inclusion and development. Both interventions (GCF 
proceeds and SMEs) are needed and complementary. The successful adaptation approach based on premium price 
market opportunities promoted by the project will trigger the partner SMEs to continue and champion this process 
through PSPPs by leveraging further investment and crowding- in others in the post -project environment.  
 
170 GCF  grant  financing  will be directed towards  capacity  development  and the establishment  of enabling regulatory  
and institutional  conditions  while  working  with private sector  partners  to make  market  opportunities,  finance,  and 
technologies  more accessible  to smallholder  farmers,  ACs,  FAs, PGs, and agricultural  unions.  The areas  of intervention  
under  the project  are generally  considered non-bankable by the private sector.  Without  GCF  grant  financing,  it would  
not be possible to capitalize  on these high-value  markets  to support  the project’s  beneficiaries  in shifting  to climate-
resilient  agriculture.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
171 The project's  potential  for sustainability  and replicability  is built on PSPPs  through  the integrated  landscape  and 
value- chain  approaches.  PSPPs  are especially  suited  for the agriculture sector,  where public  needs  from both t he 
producers'  and consumers'  perspectives  must  be met with the efficiency  and finance of the private  sector  under  a robust  
regulatory  framework.  Having such  shared social  values  and visions  will ensure fair and equitable distribution  of benefits  
and responsibilities  among  value- chain  actors  to galvanize their value chains  into internalizing  as much as possible  
social  and environmental  externalities  through producing and securing market  access for climate- resilient,  quality,  safe,  
and sustainably  produced ag ricultural  products.  
 
172 Through  the PEARL  project,  smallholder  farmers  and other  local value  chain  actors  currently  without  full access  
to high-value  premium price  markets  will have developed pertinent  knowledge and skillsets to meet  various  market  
requirements  and incorporate climate risk  mitigation measures  into their agricultural  practices.  These beneficiaries will 
have received capacity development support to prepare, update and operationalize highly tailored business plans and manage and reinvest their increased revenues through the FARM to continue advancing their climate- resilient and 
high-
value agriculture and sustainable livelihood visions. The project will have facilitated the development of 
partnerships between these beneficiaries and private -sector actors in supply, purchasing, export, sales, microfinance, 
and insurance and ensured enabling regulatory and institutional conditions. As indicated earlier, the majority of value -
chain leaders are SMEs. Through such partnerships, the project will  have also demonstrated the viability of their 
engagement in value chain development and expansion that focuses on inclusion, climate resilience, and sustainability to create the necessary momentum for further unlocking private investment for climate- resilient agriculture in the post -
project phase.  
 
173 The project’s beneficiaries will thus be able to continue expanding their knowledge and skill base and leverage 
additional financial and technological resources as necessary to sustain and improve their climate- resilient, higher -
value, and sustainable agricultural practices through the established PSPPs. In addition, the ARDB, through the 
project’s support, is expected to lead and scale up Cambodia’s microfinance lending for the climate change adaptation of smallholder farmers and other small- scale local value chain actors, together with other partners in the finance sector, 
and expand its effort to develop climate- resilient and green investment projects during the project and in the post -
project phase. Once the ARDB successfully becomes  an accredited entity under the GCF, the ARDB is expected to 
design an agricultural investment project to scale up and replicate the results of the project in other parts of the country.  
 
 174 From the perspective of agricultural certi fication , the project is highly likely to succeed and replicate as it builds on 
existing best practices. For instance, under the Law on GIs in Cambodia (2014), Kampot pepper and Kampong Speu palm sugar have already been registered as GI goods. Kampot pepper, for example, has gained formal brand protection 
within the EU, reaching 500 million consumers across 28 countries. There are over 400 producers currently involved in 
the production of Kampot pepper, and the farm price of their black pepper is US$15 per kg, while non- GI black pepper 
receives only around US$ 7 per kg. These producers are now estimated to be earning up to 2 times above the country's GNI per capita. This success story has encouraged many farmers in surrounding areas to look towards sustainab le 
and organic production.


---
*Page 58*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
   
 175 Building on these experiences, the project’s PSPP model will harness market incentives, technologies, social and 
political institutions, and public and private investments to achieve its goal. Throughout the project implementat ion, this 
model will be iteratively improved. As part of the project's exit strategy, replication of the approach will be ensured that 
the direct beneficiaries and private and public sector partners can scale up the project's capacity development programs 
and PSPP arrangements within the NTSB and beyond. This will be done, for example, through the business planning and entrepreneurial skills development  (with particular focus on youth, women, and other  socially excluded minorities) , 
the establishment of FARM Trust Funds, improved extension services, and the expansion of contract farming/direct purchase agreements to support similar processes in other parts of the NTSB and the country.  
 
176 This systematic approach ensures the cost -effectiveness and sustainability of GCF support. The project will also 
ensure strong national ownership and increased absorption capacity by directly working t hrough the existing national 
and sub- national mechanisms and institutional arrangements to strengthen their functional and technical capacities. 
For instance, under the LAMS, the project will coordinate with Cambodia's NFMS for REDD+ and efforts to update the GHG inventory as part of the country's ETF. Through this process, the project will ensure that the investment decision support system and built capacities around it and to deliver co- benefits in women's empowerment and emissions 
reductions, including t
hrough avoided postharvest and food loss, are fully integrated into Cambodia's existing 
institutional framework and arrangements. This will ensure that the project's outputs will continue to be replicated and scaled up in the post -project phase. This will be matched with an effort to promote active stakeholder participation in 
decision -making through the project activities to build trust and strategic partnerships between the state and non- state 
actors and the public and private sectors. These multi -level efforts will ensure that the project's results and impacts are 
maintained by stakeholders and their strategic partnerships beyond the project's life.  
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF 
funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + 
vii) Total amount Currency  
36.232  million USD ($)   
GCF financial 
instrument  Amount Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(vi) Grants  36.232     
(b) Co -financing 
information  Total amount  Currency  
6.618  million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
MAFF  In kind  
 3.690 million 
USD ($)   Enter  
years  
Enter  
years  Enter % Options  
 
MOE  In kind  
 2.258  million 
USD ($)   Enter  
years  
Enter  
years  Enter % Options  
 
FAO In kind  
 0.670 million 
USD ($)   Enter  
years  
Enter  
years  Enter % Options  
 
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
42,850,231  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 
0.5 page) N/A 
  
C.2. Financing by component


---
*Page 59*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
   
 Outcome Output  Indicative 
cost GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  Amount  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions   USD ($)  USD ($)  million USD ($)  
1. Farmers’ capacities 
are enhanced to 
manage climate 
impacts and related 
risks 1.1. Availability and 
access to agro -
meteorological advisory 
services tailored to 
target value chains 
improved.  3,396 ,366 2,976,366  Grants  0.3 In-kind  MAFF  
0.12 In-kind FAO 
2. Adaptive capacity of 
smallholder farmers 
and other local value 
chain actors, 
particularly vulnerable 
women farmers, is 
increased.  2.1 Premium market 
access opportunities for 
cashew, mango, organic 
rice, and vegetable 
producers and 
processors increased.  16,834 ,115 13.669,115  Grants  2.01 In-kind MAFF  
1.155  In-kind MoE 
2.2. Access to 
technologies for climate -
resilient agriculture and 
value chain 
development improved.  9,015,495  8,835,495  Grants  0.18 In-kind MAFF  
2.3. Awareness and 
knowledge of climate -
resilient and 
sustainable, high -value 
agriculture increased.  3,101,330  1,920,850  Grants  0.73048  In-kind MAFF  
0.25 In-kind MoE 
0.2 In-kind FAO 
2.4. Improved agro -
ecological conditions 
and connectivity.  4,592,220  3,822,220  Grants  0.42  In-kind MoE 
0.35 In-kind FAO 
3. Regulatory and 
institutional 
frameworks and 
capacities for climate -
resilient agricultural 
certification, cross -
sectoral coordination 
for increased PSPPs 
and smallholder 
financing, and climate -
informed investment 
support are 
strengthened.  3.1. Regulatory and 
institutional 
arrangements and 
capacity relevant to 
devel oping certification-
based value chains 
strengthened.  1,509,525  1,160,795  Grants  0.215  In-kind MAFF  
0.13373  In-kind MoE 
3.2. Gender -responsive 
landscape -level 
agroecology monitoring 
system (LAMS) 
developed.  1,294,710  1,069,710  Grants  0.225  In-kind MoE 
M&E  1,065,980  1,065,980  Grants     
PMC  2,040,490  1,711,450  Grants  0.25452  In-kind MAFF  
0.07452  In-kind  MoE 
Total cost (USD)  42,850,231  36,231,981  6,618. 250  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer  (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding financ e capacity building activities?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding f inanc e technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
177 Several  categories of capacity development activities will take place, including:  
• Agrometeorological information production, dissemination, and application;  
• Climate- resilient and high- value business planning and development;  
• Establishment of FARM Trust Funds and revenue management;  
• Promotion and adoption of climate -resilient and high -value practices and technologies;


---
*Page 60*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
   
 • Integrated watershed management;  
• Intersectoral coordination for improved regulatory and institutional environments and private sector 
engagement; and  
• Strategic investment decision support mechanism for climate- resilient agriculture.  
 
178 Each category targets a different group of beneficiaries, including:  
• Meteorological services,  
• Farmers and other local value chain actors, ACs, FAs, PGs, and unions,  
• Extension services, including extension officers from PDAFF, PDoWRAM, PDoC, PCDM and district 
administration, commune and village extension agents, and private extension providers, including NGOs,  
• retailers, hoteliers, restauranteurs, and traders/exporters,  
• CPAs and CFs, and  
• Ministries and their sub- national departments. Nearly 80% of the requested GCF grant will be directed to 
supporting the capacity development of these beneficiary groups.  
 
179 The remaining 20% will directly assist in acquiring and transferring climate- resilient technologies for the beneficiary 
groups through the above -indicated capacity development activities.  
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s  
Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
180 The beneficiaries of the PEARL project are smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, including ID 
poor farmers, women, and other minority groups, in the target areas of the NTSB and private sector actors involved in 
the target value chains. The beneficiaries are categorized into two groups – direct and indirect.  
 
181  Based on stakeholder consultations during the project design phase, combined with the projections of climate 
change impacts and demographic factors underlying particular socioeconomic vulnerabilities, the project will target 24 
districts in the northern sections of the NTSB (see the maps in Annex 16) with relatively well- kept agroecological 
conditions and predominantly small -scale agricultural practices due to its geography and topography. Their remoteness 
and relatively hilly topography make large- scale commercialization, mechanization, and intensification challenging and 
costly. Despite these limitations, these districts are also located along national and provincial roads, which off er 
significant potential to increase smallholder farmers’ market access through this approach (see Annex 16 - maps).  
 
182 In these sections of the NTSB, many smallholder farmers in these areas produce cashew, mango, organic rice, 
and vegetables in relatively small quantities with minimal to no agrochemical input (Burn et al., 2018; ICEM, 2020) . 
Therefore, premium market segments that value quality over quantity can most effectively harness their growing 
capacity to produce cashew, mango, organic rice, and leafy vegetables to instigate transformational change towards 
climate -resilient agriculture.  
 
183 As shown in Table 13 , according to the most recent agricultural census (NIS, 2019) , approximately 590,000 
individuals (48% women) practice farming as their primary livelihood activity in these 24 target districts. About 85% of 
these farmers are involved in rice production, while the remaining 15% produce perennial and other crops, inclu ding 
vegetables, as their primary crops. Approximately 150 officially registered AC, FAs, PGs, and agricultural unions are 
currently active in the project's target districts. The project targets roughly 25% of these farmers (135,000) to adopt 
climate -resilient and high- value agricultural practices through climate- resilient value chain development through 
Outcome 2. Under Outcome 1, approximately 75% of these farmers (450,000) will benefit from improved access to 
crop- specific agrometeorological advisory ser vices.  
 
184 Additionally, based on the areas identified for the IWM activities under Output 2.4, derived from the recent 
restoration potential study (2018) , the project targets roughly 8 to 10 % of the immediate downstream farmers (ca. 
50,000) as direct beneficiaries of improved agroecological conditions while noting the overall benefit of enhanced 
ecosystem services to a more significant number of beneficiaries along the waterways. In determining these target 
figures, the project development team consulted with the past and ongoing agricultural support projects of FAO and 
other development partners in the country, to identify the project’s potential outreach capacity from the operational and 
financial standpoints.


---
*Page 61*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
   
 185 These target areas and figures, combined with the selection of target crops, were validated through the national 
stakeholder validation workshop (Annex 7). The sensitivity analysis under the economic and financial analysis (Annex 
3) indicates that the project must directly benefit at least 157,988 farmers to maintain its positive investment return, and 
this confirms the robustness of the project’s direct beneficiary targets.  
 
186 In total, 450,000 beneficiaries will directly benefit from improved agrometeorological information, training/extension 
services, and other last -mile services to increase their resilience to climate change. Within this group of beneficiaries, 
smaller groups (see Table 14) will receive highly tailored capacity support to improve their crop- specific application of 
agrometeorological information and advisory services, access premium markets, finance, and climate- resilient, and 
high-value technolog ies, and benefit from restored ecosystem services in upper catchment areas, and improved 
downstream agroecology.  
 
 
Table 14 Summary of Direct Beneficiaries  
Number of 
Beneficiaries  Direct Beneficiary Type  Benefit Description  
450,000  Smallholder farmers in the target districts  Improved access to tailored agrometeorological advisory services to 
reduce agricultural loss due to climate change;  
135,00022 Smallholder farmers and other local value chain 
actors , including local SMEs,  involved in the 
target value chains  in the target districts  Improved market and financial and technological  access and 
accelerated support for adopting climate- resilient and high- value 
practices and technologies;  
50,00023 Downstream farmers in the target districts.  Improved ecosystem services, agroecology, and 20 CPAs/CFs with 
improved livelihood options through restoration and protection of 
catchment.  
 
 
22 This is part of the 450,000 total direct beneficiaries.  
23 This is part of the 450,000 total direct beneficiaries.  
Table 13 Demographic Profile of 24 Target Districts


---
*Page 62*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
   
 187 The project also targets roughly 25% of the NTSB’s population 
(1,000,000) who are primarily dependent on agriculture as their primary livelihood 
activity ( Table 15) as its indirect beneficiaries. The project defines them as a 
beneficiary group that is not directly targeted by the project, and this group is thus 
not involved in the target value chains in the 24 districts of the NTSB. These indirect 
beneficiaries will benefit from the project by having general access to improved 
agrometeorological information and increased exposure and awareness of 
alternative practices and technologies through peer -to-peer learning, 
demonstration sites, extension services, social media platforms, and mobile apps. 
In addition, private sector actors, including agricultural suppliers, collectors, 
traders/exporters, retailers, hoteliers, and restauranteurs, playing critical roles in 
providing agricultural extension services, developing market opportunities,  and 
promoting climate- resilient and high- value practices, as well as consumers, will 
benefit from increased supply and sourcing capacities for climate- resilient and 
sustainable products and related investment opportunities. For the private sector 
actors and consumers, the project cannot at this point estimate its target beneficiary 
figures; however, at the inception stage and during the implementation, the project will conduct several surveys to 
measure and report its impact on these beneficiary groups.  
 
188 Delivering these benefits to the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries contribute to the three GCF Result Areas: 
ARA1 Most vulnerable people and communities; ARA 2 Health, well- being, food and water security; and ARA 4 
Ecosystems and ecosystem service s, as described further in Section E.3.  
D.2. Paradigm shift potential ( max.  500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
189 The project will focus on creating enabling conditions through market -based mechanisms based on PSPPs to 
support a smooth and timely transition to climate- adapted, high- value, and sustainable agriculture. This will facilitate 
transformational change that builds on cost -effective and strategic investments to increase the sector's overall climate 
resilience and sustainability. The increased market access and opportunities created under Outcome 2 through market -
based mechanisms will strengthen the rationale for farmers and other local value chain actors to adopt climate- resilient, 
sustainable, and higher -value agricultural practices. Regulatory and institutional enabling conditions under Outcome 3 
ensure the sustainability of the GCF investment at the systemic level well beyond the project's life. These market -led 
incentives and enabling conditions provide the project's beneficiary farmers and other local value chain actors practical 
avenues to address climate -related risks, which have been illuminated under Out come 1.  
 
190 The project will catalyze impact beyond its one- off investment by supporting its beneficiaries in improving access 
to climate information, business, market and extension knowledge, finance, and technologies. The accelerated adoption 
of climate- resilient and high -value practices and technologies will enable the project beneficiaries involved in cashew, 
mango, organic rice, and vegetable value chains to access premium price markets to increase their farm income, 
resulting in their increased adaptive capacity at the household and community levels. As their remoteness and 
topographical features limit further mechanization and industrialization, this approach to target certified premium market 
expansion is considered highly relevant to the northern sections of the NTSB, where these exact features have generally 
kept their farming practices small scale and relatively less dependent on machinery and chemical inputs. The approach 
will also benefit the private sector actors, leading the development of sustainable value chains based on the target 
crops by increasing their supply capacity and business expansion opportunities.   
 
191 These increased opportunities for the targeted smallholder farmers, other local value chain actors, and private 
sector champions will form enabling conditions for effective PSPPs. Such conditions will also increase private and public 
investment in the target value chains to ensure the GCF investment's scalability, replicability, and sustainability through 
this project.   
 
192 The project will instigate transformational change in the NTSB through the following six mechanisms. The market -
driven/linked nature of these mechanisms make them highly scalable and replicable within the NTSB and beyond.  
Table 15 Demographic Profile of NTSB


---
*Page 63*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
   
 • Improved agrometeorological advisory services and their outreach capacity;   
• Business and financial literacy development and climate- resilient and high- value business planning;  
• An innovat ive climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism (i.e., FARM) for smallholder farmers and other 
local value chain actors with limited access to finance  for adopting climate- resilient measures, which also 
promote high- value practices ;  
• Awareness -raising, knowledge management and demonstration of appropriate farming and value- addition 
techniques  and technologies;  
• Integrated watershed management for improved ecosystems resilience and agroecology;   
• An enabling environment for enhanced access to agricultural finance, PSPPs, and systematically leveraging 
private and public investment for climate- resilient agriculture (i.e., LAMS).   
D.3. Sustainable development ( max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
193 The project is expected to build stronger and closer relationships between climate resilience, sustainable 
agriculture, sound environmental management, and rural poverty alleviation, providing a fundamental base for 
sustainable development in Cambodia. Such efforts will produce several additional benefits, contributing directly to 
Cambodia's Sustainable Development Goals (2018a) . 
 
194 The project’s beneficiaries will be provided with the services and capacities needed to sustainably increase their 
food production capacity and income generation opportunities along the targeted value chains. The catchment 
restoration and protection will enhance ecosystem services and agroecological conditions at the landscape level. The 
integrated climate- resilience practices and technologies will also ensure soil enrichment, efficient water management, 
and reduced harmful pesticide and agrochemical use. The project will also generate critical gender benefits, mainly 
through supporting female vegetable producers and female- headed households in diversification efforts , introducing 
time-saving technologies, providing tailored capacity building support and addressing labor shortages due to labor 
migration.  
 
195 These additional benefits specifically support Cambodia’s Sustainable Development Goal 1 (no poverty), Goal 2 
(zero hunger), Goal 5 (gender equality), and Goal 15 (life on land).  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
196 NTSB is home to 20% of the country's population, and the majority of them are engaged in agriculture. Roughly 
15 % of the country's households below the poverty line are in the NTSB, with Oddar Meanchey and Preah Vihear 
among the country's poorest provinces (RGC, 2014, 2020b) . 
 
197 Labor migration by men to urban areas and abroad is widespread in the northern sections of the NTSB. The number 
of female- headed households in all four provinces has increased significantly in recent decades, and the trend has 
been particularly noticeable in the two northern provinces (RGC, 2014, 2018b). Many female- headed households have 
shifted to vegetable production to cope with labor shortages.  
 
198 The RGC's commitment to addressing climate- related challenges, described in its NDC, CCCSP, and sectoral 
CC(P)APs, has also been well demonstrated through mostly public spending. In 2014 alone, over US$ 200 million were 
allocated by the RGC to address climate- related challenges (MoEF, 2016). The private- sector investments in climate 
change- related activities during 2009 – 2011 were worth US$ 185 million, although mainly going to mitigation areas. 
These figures have since increased steadily in agriculture- related sectors to indicate growing commitm ents and 
interests from the public and private sectors.  
 
199 Despite these increasing interests and commitments, the climate- related spending of the MAFF accumulatively 
accounts for less than 50% of the US$ 246.20 million required for the full implementation o f its CCPAP (MoEF, 2016) . 
The sources of finance for the CCPAP include the Secretariat Working Group on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries 
(SCAFF), government annual budget allocation, loans and grants from the World Bank, ADB, and IFAD (ibid.). Although 
various climate change funds mobilized through the UN and bilateral agencies also provide additional support, much 
more is still needed to close the current financial gap. Much of the existing support has focused on policy -level capacity 
development and framework building (i.e., NAP process, REDD+, general early warning) at the national level. Despite 
the NTSB's critical role in agriculture and its notable vulnerability to climate change, the existing support in the NTSB 
is mainly focused on agricultural productivity and poverty alleviation or site- specific climate adaptation on a pilot basis 
without adequate coordination and mechanisms for scaling up best practices (see Annex 2 for more details).


---
*Page 64*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
   
 200 Meanwhile, organic aromatic rice, cashew, mango, and vegetables have emerged as alternative agricultural 
commodities in the NTSB with the potential to access premium price markets through meeting quality control and food 
safety standards (Burn et al., 2018; ICEM, 2020). While the production of these crops needs climate change adaptation, 
as discussed under Section B.1 and Annex 2, these emerging markets offer practical opportunities to incentivize these 
vulnerable smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors to adopt climate- resilient practices and technologies 
and improve their livelihoods, thus increasing their overall adaptive capacity. There is an increasing interest among 
smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors to access such markets.  
 
201 However, the current production practices of these farmers and other local value chain actors are considered low 
quality and low value; therefore, their access to these markets is limited without the proposed technical  and financial 
support under the PEARL project to remove the current barriers at systemic, institutional and individual levels, as 
described under Section B.2. From this perspective, the proposed project is paradigm- shifting, sustainable and local 
demand-d riven as it harnesses the current market trends to address the sector's vulnerability to climate change.  
 
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
Brief Description of FAO, MAFF and MoE   
 
202 FAO is a specialized agency of the United Nations with the mandate to improve food security, nutrition, and 
agricultural productivity and reduce rural poverty. FAO is a leading global institution with highly technical expertise and 
knowledge in several critical sectors concerning its operational mandate. FAO demonstrates a solid commitment to 
meeting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  through the transformation to more efficient, inclusive, resilient, 
and sustainable agri -food systems for better  production, nutrition, environment, and life, leaving no one behind.  
 
203 FAO has supported Cambodia since 1979 in agricultural production, value chain development, market access, 
climate change adaptation and mitigation, sustainable management of natural re sources (forestry and fisheries), 
irrigation, animal health and production, food security and nutrition, and food safety.  FAO's work has spanned the entire 
country and has extensive experience designing and implementing projects in the NTSB.  The overarchi ng goal of 
FAO's programme in Cambodia is to contribute to eradicating poverty, food insecurity, and malnutrition and sustainable 
management and use of the country's natural resources. FAO has laid a strong partnership and strategically aligned 
with the RGC counterparts to deliver needed services that contribute to the advancement of Cambodian agriculture, 
food security and nutrition, sustainable management of natural resources, and climate resilience.  
 
204 The two Co- EEs of the project are the MAFF and MoE. The MAFF was established in 1996 with the mandate to 
lead and administer Cambodia's agriculture, forestry, and fisheries sectors. The MoE was also established in 1996 with 
the mandate to coordinate the environmental affairs in Cambodia. The MoE is Cambodia’ s focal institution for the Rio 
Conventions and the NDA for the GCF.  
 
Country Ownership  
 
205 The PEARL project is identified as the number one priority adaptation project under Cambodia's GCF Country 
Programme (2020a) , drawing on its NDC, NAPA, NAP process, CCCSP, and sectoral climate change action plans. 
Cambodia's NDA and other vital stakeholders recogn ize the urgent adaptation challenges facing the country's 
agriculture sector. Ensuring the sector's climate resilience in critical agricultural regions, including the NTSB, is a prior ity. 
In this respect, establishing effective PPPs to unlock private finance for adaptation actions is essential under the Country 
Programme.  
 
206 The NDA looks to the PEARL project to lay the necessary foundation for strategically directing public spending to 
fill the existing capacity gaps in enabling conditions to increase the number of bankable projects for private investment 
and guide such resources to deliver incremental results. As part of this foundation building for value- chain- led 
agriculture adaptation, the PEARL project will strengthen the technical and operational capacity of the ARDB to play a 
leadership role in agricultural finance, supporting smallholder farmers and small -scale local value chain actors. The 
ARDB is expected to continue advancing the area of agricultural finance to accelerate the transition to climate -resilient 
and high- value agriculture in the NTSB and beyond after  the project completion.  
 
207 In this context, the PEARL project has been prepared under the strong leadership of the NDA and full and active 
engagement by relevant national and local government and NGO partners, including the MAFF, MoE, MWRM, and 
their sub- national departments, ARDB, GRET, IRAM, and WCS. Also, national and local private sector actors 
representing SMEs, traders/exporters, microfinance institutions, insurance providers, input suppliers, and retailers have


---
*Page 65*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
   
 been actively engaged in the project's design. More than two dozen  ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, FAs, and unions were 
consulted extensively to reflect their views and accurately target their needs (see Annex 7).  
 
208 During the project implementation, the NDA will ensure effective coordination between the PEARL and another 
GCF -funded CAVS project, led by the ADB, as the two projects comprise integral components of Cambodia’s 
harmonized response to climate change in the agriculture sector, guided by its NDC and CCCSP. Also, under this 
overarching framework of action, the MoE, the focal  institution for the Global Environment Facility (GEF) together with 
FAO, ensures the complementarity of the PEARL and FAO -led LDCF projects to deliver extended results at the 
landscape level around the Tonle Sap Lake.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
209 The project builds on existing best practices and baseline and parallel investments (see Table 3 and Annex 2) to 
deliver incremental impacts. The project is efficient and effective as a GCF grant investment, as argued below, and has 
a high likelihood of success and replication through the six mechanisms of transformation described under Section D.2. 
One of such mechanisms is the FARM, which is expected to deliver more than three times the initial investment value 
(i.e., USD 7 million) for supporting the project's beneficiaries over the project's lifetime. The other mechanisms will also 
generate the information, capacities (at both the farm and community levels), market incentives, and conducive enabling 
environment needed to crowd- in additional climate- oriented private investment along and beyond the targeted value 
chains.  
 
210 Macroeconomic impact analysis of the project (Mazzoli and Branca, 2022)  (Annex 3)  suggests that the project will 
have economic impacts on several levels, including Cambodia’s GDP, household and government incomes, and per 
capita consumption and value- added. The PEARL project is expected to benefit mainly rural but also urban households 
through increased climate resilience of the target value chains and supply of safe and quality food while also lowering 
the prices of agricultural products. The cumulative impact of the project’s intervention over its life on the country’s 
economy is estimated at USD 53 million, with a multiplier effect of 1.38 for every dollar spent. Out of the total value 
created, USD 50.74 million is linked to the project's direct and indirect sectoral stimulus. An additional USD 2. 20 million 
is associated with incremental tax revenues for the government, thus indicating the project’s GDP contribution of 
0.04% annually  and 0.23 % over the implementation period . 
 
211 This macroeconomic projection is predicated on the project’s focus on investing in enabling conditions. From this 
perspective, the requested GCF grant financing is necessary given the non- bankability of the proposed interventions 
to establish critical enabling capacities and conditions to leverage increased investments from the public and private 
sectors into the areas crucial for climate- resilient, high- value and inclusive agriculture.  
 
212 An economic and financial analysis (EFA) (Branca and Mazzoli, 2022)  (Annex 3) confirms the viability and 
robustness of the project from both economic and financial perspectives. Financially, the project is expected to increase 
its target beneficiaries' average household annual income by 28% compared to the scenario without the project based 
on a conservative estimate. In socioeconomic terms, the diffusion of information, knowledge, skills, and investments 
through the project activities will generally strengthen local economies, resulting in improved living standards and 
increased local demand and decent employment opportunities, particularly for women and other minority groups. 
Furthermore, expanding the project's target value chains will also promote the development of related service sectors, 
thus increasing demand for goods and services in general. These broader impacts will reduce rural -urban migration by 
offering jobs with decent wages and local entrepreneurial opportunities, particularly for young generations.  
 
213 More specifically, the EFA (ibid.) suggests the project’s  aggregate Financial Internal Rate of R eturn (F IRR) of 
38.7%, and overall Economic Internal rate of Return (EIRR) of 45.8% , based on the assumption that 60% of the 
target beneficiaries will have successfully adopted the climate- resilient and high- value practices and technologies as a 
result of the project, and economic benefit parameters limited at farm- gate. Thus, the EIRR giv es a conservative 
estimate. At the discount rate of 5%, the base economic net present value (NPV) of the project is US$ 84 million 
over the 20 year impact period . The E FA also tested the sensitivity of the EIRR and NPV based on three scenarios 
– 1) 10 to 20% cost over -run, 2) benefits fluctuations between +20% and - 20%, and 3) benefit delays of 1 to 2 years. 
The results ( Table 16) show the robustness of the project under all scenarios and the minimum number of direct 
beneficiaries of 157,988 farmers  (i.e., an adoption rate of 31%), until which point the project maintains a positive NPV 
(break -even point).


---
*Page 66*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
   
  
 
214 In addition, the project will demonstrate effective coordination and complementarity between GCF and GEF finance 
through the proposed integrated approach between the PEARL and FAO -led LDCF projects at the landscape level. 
Although the level of co- finance and volume of funds directly leveraged by the project are and will be modest, the 
broader contributions of the project to unlocking additional investment in climate- resilient agriculture in the NTSB and 
beyond in the medium to long- term will be significant, as discussed above.  
 
215 The project interventions are vertically and horizontally interlinked through the integrated landscape and value-
chain approaches to address the critical challenges associated with climate vulnerability in the NTSB. Building a greater 
understanding and awareness of their interdependency through the integrated approaches is expected to galvanize the 
NTSB's current agriculture and environmental management practices to shift towards a climate- resilient and sustainable 
path.  
 
 
Table 16: Results of the economic and sensitivity analysis  
Break-even point (adoption rate)
Minimum number of beneficiaries to have a positive NPV (HH) 157,988
Corresponding adoption rate (%) 31.3%+10% +20% +10% +20% -10% -20% 1 year 2 year
EIRR 45.8% 40.0% 35.4% 52.4% 59.3% 39.5% 33.4% 31.1% 38.1%
NPV @ 5% (000 $) 84,083 44,834 41,966 55,338 62,975 40,063 32,426 39,311 45,567Base caseCost increments Benefits increm ents Benefits decrease Benefits delayPerformance indicators


---
*Page 67*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
  
  
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK   
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
216 Further to the paradigm shifting potential of the project described under Section D.2, t he improved agrometeorological advisory services and 
establishment of climate- resilient, high- value and sustainable market practices are expected to permeate the sector across  the NTSB through co- financing 
efforts of EEs and Procured Parties  and activities  of parallel funding projects. Such effects will directly scale up and replicate the project impacts to benefit 
farmers and value chain actors in other parts of the country and consumers through increased food security and quality.  The project’s scalabilit y, replicability 
and sustainability potentials are discussed below.   
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will contribute 
(Description ) 
Description  Rating  
Scale  Current meteorological forecasting and advisory 
services are not tailored for agricultural use to 
address the vulnerability of farmers and other 
local value chain actors to climate change. Also, 
systematic efforts to capture, analyze, 
disseminate and demonstrate best practices and 
lessons learned are limited to hinder the progress of farmers and other local value chain actors’ adoption of climate- resilient and high- value 
practices and technologies.  Medium  Increased availability and accessibility to crop -specific 
climate information and risk mitigation strategies can quickly scale up  climate- informed farming, risk awareness, and adaptive 
options. Farmers and other value chain actors in the NTSB and Cambodia have access to and regularly apply crop- specific 
agrometeorological advisory information, made accessible through various mediums to take early actions to minimize their loss and damage and increase their productivity by taking adaptive actions. There is also a systematic effort to promote proven adaptive practices and technologies through various mediums at farm and landscape levels to lead their increased awareness of climate risks into action.  The project will contribute to realizing this target 
scenario through:  
• Component/Outcome 1: Improved 
agrometeorological advisory services and their 
outreach capacity.  
 
• Component/Outcome 2: knowledge management 
and demonstration of appropriate farming and 
value- addition technologies and technologies; and 
integrated watershed management for improved 
ecosystems resilience and agroecology (see E 5 
below).  
Replicability  Presently, smallholder farmers and other local 
value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors, have limited access to high- value markets that could offer significant 
opportunities for improving their adaptive 
capacity due to a lack of public and private sector support and engagement. Unlocking such market opportunities for building the climate resilience of these farmers and value chain actors requires 
access to market information, extension 
knowledge, technologies, and especially finance. There are limited financial instruments available 
to support smallholder farmers and local value Medium  Replication based on market -led examples of success  in 
transitioning to climate- resilient and high- value agriculture provides 
the most robust business case, as farmers and other value chain actors naturally gravitate towards such trends.  Farmers and other 
value chain actors in the NTSB and Cambodia, facing similar 
agroecological and socioeconomic limitations, have market -proven 
examples that provide increased adaptive capacity and livelihood options at the household and community levels. The public and private sectors  also strategically invest in these opportunities by 
providing regulatory and quality control, skills training, and 
business and market development support. These efforts are coupled with increased access to low -cost finance for farmers and The project will contribute to realizing this target 
scenario through:  
• Under Component/Outcome 2: Business and 
financial literacy development and climate- resilient 
and high- value business planning.  
 
• Under Component/Outcome 2: A n innovative a 
climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism 
(i.e., FARM) for smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors with limited access to finance (see E 5 below)


---
*Page 68*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
  
  
 chain actors without collateral or guarantor to 
access the markets.  other value chain actors with limited means to replicat e the 
successful  examples . 
Sustainability  There are limited systemic and institutional efforts 
for smallholder farmers and other local value 
chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors, to increase their access to the necessary financial resources for transitioning to climate- resilient and high- value agricul tural 
production and processing. Also, coordinated 
efforts towards planning and monitoring climate 
investment gaps and agricultural impacts are 
absent. An integrated decision- support system is 
needed at the national level to direct public spending on enabling conditions to increase the number of bankable projects for climate- resilient 
and high-
value agriculture to unlock private 
sector finance to accelerate the transition.  Medium  
 Effective cross -sectoral coordination, PSPPs, and adequate 
and predictable investment ensure sustainability.  Public 
spending and resource allocations systematically ensure enabling 
systemic, individual, and institutional conditions to increase the overall bankability of private actors' investments in climate- resilient, 
high- value and inclusive agriculture. Also, there is a system in 
place to monitor and report on investment progress and gaps to ensure incremental results across the sector and increase climate 
finance's overall effectiveness and efficiency from public and 
private sources.  The project will contribute to realizing this target 
scenario through:  
• Under Component/Outcome 3: An enabling 
environment for improved access to agricultural 
finance, PSPPs, and systematically leveraging 
private and public investment for climate- resilient 
agriculture (i.e., LAMS)  (See E 5 below).  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
 
GCF 
Result 
Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final24 
TOTAL (ARA 1 
+ ARA 2)  Core 2: Direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached • See ARA 1, ARA 2 
and Core 6 MoVs  See ARA 1 
and ARA 2 
baselines  150,000 smallholder 
farmers, and other 
local value chain 
actors  
 
150,000 direct (50% 
women)  
350,000 indirect25 
(50% women)  450,000 smallholder 
farmers, and other 
local value chain 
actors  
 
450,000 direct  (50% 
women)  
1,000,000 indirect 
(50% women)  • See D.1 and Annex 2 for the methodology  
• See ARA 1, ARA 2 and Core 6 notes  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  
 Supplementary 
2.1: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) 
adopting 
improved and/or 
new climate-
resilient livelihood 
options  • National Census of 
Agriculture by National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and MAFF  
• Qualitative and impact assessment (e.g., key informant 0 150,000 smallholder 
farmers, and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors (50% women).  450,000 smallholder 
farmers, and other local value chain actors, particularly 
women farmers and value chain actors (50% women).   Assumptions:  
• Market trends and price advantage within Cambodia and abroad remain favorable.  
• National and global scale disruptions (e.g., COVID 19) remain minimal.  
• Effective cross -sectoral coordination and partnerships exist.   
• Beneficiaries develops increase awareness of climate risks and risk 
migration measures through tailored agrometeorogical advisory 
 
24 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined 
as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expect ed to be effective.  
25 Please see Section D1 for the description of the direct and indirect beneficiaries.


---
*Page 69*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
  
  
 interviews (KIIs) 
and focus group 
discussion (FGD))/ 
quantitative survey 
by the project  services and adopt climate -resilient and high -value practices and 
technologies through increased access to finance and technologies 
through FARM and diversified agricultural livelihoods through 
alternative value chain development.  
 
Note:  
• Household to individual conversion ratio is 1:4.5  
• Average proportion of  women  farmers in the target district is 48%.  
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, food 
and water 
security  
 Supplementary 
2.2: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) 
with improved 
food security  • Food Insecurity 
Experience Scale 
(FIES) surveys of 
the project areas at inception to set a baseline and monitor changes.  
• National Census of Agriculture by National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and MAFF  
• Qualitative and impact assessment (e.g., KIIs and FGD/ quantitative survey by the 
project  The number 
of food insecure famers (female/male) in the project target districts to be determined at 
project 
inception through FIES survey.  
 150,000 smallholder 
farmers, and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors (50% women).  450,000 smallholder 
farmers, and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors (50% women).  • Assumptions:  
• Market trends and price advantage within Cambodia and abroad remain favorable.  
• National and global scale disruptions (e.g., COVID 19) remain minimal.  
• Effective cross -sectoral coordination and partnerships exist.   
• Beneficiaries apply tailored agrometeorological advisory services and increase climate risk awareness and risk mitigation measures to improve their food security.  
 Note:  
• According to 2019 Agricultural Census, 70,000 to 215,000 households (20-60%)  with large interprovincial variability  in NTSB experience 
moderate to severe food shortages due to crop loss and damage on an annual basis.  
• The mid- term and final targets are subject to change after the baseline 
FIES survey at inception.  
ARA4 
Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  
 Supplementary 
4.1: Hectares of 
terrestrial forest, 
terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater 
and coastal 
marine areas 
brought under 
resoration and/or 
improved 
ecosystems  • National Forest 
Monitoring System (NFMS) by MAFF  
• National biodiversity database of MoE  
• Qualitative and impact  assessment  
(e.g., KIIs and 
FGD/ quantitative 
survey by the project   0 2,500 hectares of 
terrestrial tropical rain forest.  7,600 hectares of 
terrestrial tropical rain forest.  Assumptions:  
• Effective cross -sectoral and inter -district coordination and partnerships 
exist.   
• Strong interest and active participation of CPAs and CFs.  
• Beneficiary groups (i.e., 16 target CPAs and 4 target CFs) adopt improved catchment forest management and unitarization practices through agroforestry and other livelihood diversification activities.  
 Note:  
• Weak linkages between upper watershed management and downstream agricultural productivity contribute to downstream farmers' increased vulnerability and exposure to climate- related hazards. 
Among the highest deforestation rates through cropland expansion in upstream areas affect  the quality and availability of water, particularly 
for organic rice production downstream. There are 20,000 hectares of 
potential restoration areas across the region under community -
protected areas(CPAs)and community forests (CFs).


---
*Page 70*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
  
  
  
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
 
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation  • Current meteorological 
forecasting and advisory 
services are not tailored or specific to the project’s target crops (i.e., cashew, mango, 
organic rice and leafy 
vegetables) to address the vulnerability of the target farmers and other local value chain actors to climate change.  
   
• Currently, no integrated decision- support system exists 
at the national level to systematically accelerate the transition towards climate-resilient, inclusive, gender -
responsive and high- value 
agriculture and to crowd in and direct public and private investments into areas that are 
strategic and relevant.  medium  • Highly tailored and g ender -responsive agrometeorological 
information for cashew, mango, organic rice, and leafy vegetable producers for  the target areas is available to reduce 
the targeted farmers and other value chain actors’ climate risks. The information is disseminated through various 
communication and outreach mediums to overcome 
information access barriers, particularly for women and other 
socially excluded minorities. Such mediums include a web 
platform hosted by MAFF, mobile apps,  social media channels, TV and radio programs, community bulletins, community speakers, FFS curricula, and private advisory services through contract farming and input supply sales .  
 
• Both public institutions and private sector partners regularly use LAMS for tracking progress and making decisions to 
prioritize areas for public spending and private investment in the agriculture sector to crowd in investments for  climate-
resilient, inclusive, gender -responsive, and high- value 
agriculture and ensure their incremental impact.   • The project will develop  tailored and 
crop- specific agrometeorological 
advisory information and increase information dissemination capacities under Outcome 1.  
        
• The project will develop LAMS under Outcome 3 to aid public and private investment decision- making and 
crowd in investments in climate-resilient, high- value and sustainable 
agriculture.  Single sub -
national 
area within 
a country  
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  • Smallholder farmers and other 
local value chain actors , 
particularly women, have limited access to high- value markets 
that could offer significant opportunities for improving their adaptive capacity due to a lack 
of strategic support from the 
public and private sectors.  
 
• Financial support mechanisms  
dedicated to smallholder farmers low • Smallholder farmers  and other local value chain actors involved 
in the target crop production and processing are provided with 
highly targeted, climate- resilient, and gender -responsive 
certification- based (e.g., CamGap, GI and organic, SRP. W+, 
ISO 2200, and HACCP)  value chain development  and strategic 
capacity support through PSPPs (i.e., regulatory control, input  
quality control, skills training, contract farming and purchase 
agreements ) to strengthen their adaptive capacity with 
increased income and enhanced agricultural livelihoods.   
 
• Agricultural unions, ACs, FAs, and PGs, including CPAs and 
CFs in the project target areas  receive support for developing • The project will develop  climate -
resilient high- value market  and value 
chain development and an innovative 
a climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism (i.e., FARM) 
to increase access to finance, knowledge and technologies  in a 
gender -responsive manner  under  
Component/Outcome 2.  Single sub -
national 
area within 
a country


---
*Page 71*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
  
  
 and other local value chain 
actors (without collateral and/or 
guarantor) are limited to support 
their transition to climate-
resilient, high- value and 
sustainable agriculture.  and operationalizing crop -specific and climate -resilient 
business plans in an inclusive and gender -responsive manner 
and procuring the technologies and infrastructure assets 
essential for implementing their business plans under the 
FARM. The FARM will support each beneficiary group in establishing a trust fund account with a local commercial microfinance bank. Disbursements from the trust fund will be used to advance the beneficiary group’s business plan implementation. The beneficiary groups may use the acquired 
assets and trust fund accounts as group collateral to access financial products and services from commercial banks and 
insurance providers.  
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country -
driven manner  • Current policy, regulatory and 
institutional framework for the existing certification standards 
and processes (e.g., CamGap, 
GI, organic certification, ISO 2200, and HACCP) lack full consideration of climate risks and a systematic approach for a wide-spread application of these 
standards to support the instigation of transformational change towards climate- resilient, 
high- value and sustainable 
agriculture.  
 
• Limited institutional support structures for smallholder farmers and other local value 
chain actors, particularly women, 
for increasing their access to the necessary financial resources for transitioning to climate- resilient 
and higher -value agricultural 
production and processing.  medium  • Regulatory , institutional and sectoral coordination systems are 
strengthened to ensure enabling conditions - regulatory and 
institutional arrangements and capacity - to support the 
integration of climate- resilient practices and technologies into 
certification programs and promote effective PSPPs for climate- resilient and premium value chain development that 
includes smallholder farmers and other local  value chains.     
 
       
• Public and private financial institutions establish a dedicated 
loan program with a harmonized application screening process that considers climate resilience and sustainability as crucial 
eligibility criteria over collateral or/and guarantee to ease 
financial access for  smallholder farmers and other local value 
chain actors.  The project will ensure the necessary  
enabling regulatory conditions and institutional arrangements for climate-resilient  and high- value agriculture 
development for smallholder farmers 
and other value chain actors through 
climate- adapted certification standards, 
increased PSPPs, and improved financial access  under Outcome 3.  National 
level (one 
country)  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  • No harmonized and centralized 
system or process exists to capture and share lessons learned and best practices to 
promote climate- resilient and 
high- value practices and 
technologies , which impedes 
effective knowledge transfer and 
incremental progress.  low • Relevant lesson s learned and best practices for climate -
resilient and high- value agriculture are available and accessible 
through a clearinghouse that gathers, harmonizes, and consolidates information from various sources using the Internet of Things (IoT) technologies. Lessons learned and best practices are regularly applied by smallholder farmers and 
other local value chain actors through multiple mediums in an 
inclusive and gender -responsive manner to incrementally The project will establish a 
clearinghouse and develop information 
gathering, processing, and 
dissemination capacities  to increase 
knowledge availability, accessibility, replicability, and scalability to support the timely adoption of climate- resilient 
and high- value practices and 
technologies under Outcome 2.  National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 72*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
  
  
 advance the project beneficiaries' transition to climate -resilient 
and high- value agriculture.  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs)  
 
Project/ programme 
results (outcomes/ 
outputs)  Project/ programme 
specific Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  Assumptions/ Note  
Mid-term  Final  
Outcome 1: Farmers’ capacities are enhanced to manage climate impacts and related risks  
Output 1.1: Availability and 
access to 
agrometeorological advisory 
services tailored to target 
value chains improved 
among smallholder farmers 
and local value chain actors, 
particularly women farmers 
and value chain actors.  Number of necessary 
institutional 
arrangements and 
procedures for 
harmonized 
production and 
dissemination of 
agrometeorological 
advisory information 
through crop- specific 
standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) 
involving public and 
private partners, 
including extension 
providers and NGOs.  SOP documents 
for the target 
crops, SOP 
preparation 
completion report ,  
Pre-and post -
intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative)  
survey results.  0 SOPs for the four (4) 
target crops fully 
developed and agreed 
upon among public 
and private partners 
and partially  
operational.  Crop -specific 
agrometeorological 
information for the 
four (4) target crops is  
fully available and 
accessible through 
operationalization of 
SOPs. 
 • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant  ministries and 
across TWG -AW. 
• MAFF and MoWRAM continue with their 
extension capacity strengthening.  
• Strong interest and support from the 
private sector are present.  
 
Note:  
• Currently, no crop- specific  
agrometeorological information is 
available, and advisory services lack 
harmonization and are not based on 
robust data and analysis. The last mile 
service capacities to disseminate and 
deliver advisory information are either 
absent or scarce at best . 
 Percentage of 
targeted smallholder 
farmers and other 
local value chain 
actors regularly 
accessing and 
applying the 
agrometeorological 
advisory services in 
farm management and 
value addition 
activities . Pre-and post -
intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative)  
survey results.  0% 15 % of targeted  
smallholder  farmers 
and other local value 
chain actors (50% 
women).   Over 40 % of targeted 
smallholder  farmers 
and other local value 
chain actors (50% 
women) . • MAFF continues with its extension 
capacity strengthening.  
• Targeted beneficiaries are interested and 
available (especially women and other 
socially excluded minorities).  
• Public and private communication 
infrastructure is available and accessible 
by most beneficiaries.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the pre -
intervention survey.  
Outcome 2:  Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly vulnerable women farmers, is increa sed through market incentives that promote climate -
resilient, higher -value, diversified, and sustainable production and processing


---
*Page 73*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
  
  
 Output 2.1: Premium market 
access opportunities for 
cashew, mango, organic 
rice, and vegetable 
producers and processors 
increased through climate-
resilient and high- value 
certification programs 
(linking to Sub- components 
2.2. and 2.3 for financing 
and technical capacity 
building).  Number of ACs, FAs, 
PGs, CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions 
supported to prepare 
and implement crop-
specific 
action/business plans 
in an inclusive and 
gender -responsive 
manner, to access 
premium price market 
opportunities based 
on specific certification 
programs.  Baseline 
assessment at 
inception,  
developed and 
updated 
action/business 
plans and 
implementation 
progress reports . 0 
 
 100 ACs, FAs, PGs, 
CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions 
with fully  developed 
action/business plans, 
and at least 6 0% of 
them are fully 
operational.  124 ACs, FAs, PGs, 
CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions 
with fully developed 
action/business plans, 
and at least 95 % of 
them fully operational.  • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant ministries, sub-
national governments, NGOs and private 
actors.  
• Strong interest and support from the 
private sector are present.  
• Targeted beneficiary groups are interested 
and have robust governance capacity and 
active participation of members ( especially 
women and other  socially excluded 
minorities).  
 
Note:  
• Despite the growing premium price market  
opportunities and their climate change 
adaptation potential, these opportunities 
are mainly unavailable to smallholder 
farmers and other local value chain actors 
in the NTSB, partly due to their lack of 
strategic planning and quality control 
capacity based on market knowledge.  
• The average membership size of AC, FA, 
PG, CA P, CF, and union is 150.  
Percentage increase 
in the number of 
contract farming 
arrangements and 
direct purchase 
agreements signed 
with traders/exporters, 
and local retailers, 
hoteliers, and 
restauranteurs 
increased through 
action/business plan 
implementation.  Baseline 
assessment at 
inception,  
contracts and 
direct purchase 
agreements, p re-
and post -
intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
survey  results.  0% 
 
 At least a 15 % 
increase in contract 
farming arrangements 
and direct purchase 
agreements against  
the inception baseline.   More than a 30 %  
increase in contract 
farming arrangements 
and direct purchase 
agreements against  
the inception baseline.   • Strong in terest and support from the 
private sector are present.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
• While contract farming and direct 
purchase agreements are practical tools 
to increase access to premium price 
markets, such agreements are, however, 
primarily absent among mango, cashew 
and vegetable value chain actors and can 
also be further expanded among organic 
rice producers.


---
*Page 74*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
  
  
 Output 2.2: Access to 
technologies for climate-
resilient agriculture and 
value chain development 
improved among smallholder 
farmers and other local 
value chain actors, 
particularly women farmers 
and value chain actors 
(linking to Sub- component 
2.1 to support the business 
plans of ACs, FAs, PGs, 
CPAs, CFs and agricultural 
unions).  Number of ACs, FAs, 
PGs, CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions 
supported through 
FARM  to adopt 
climate- resilient and 
high- value 
technologies  and have 
increased access to 
finance and 
agricultural insurance.  
  Baseline 
assessment at 
inception, 
documentation of 
procured 
technologies and 
infrastructure 
assets, FARM 
trust account 
transaction 
reports, pre- and 
post-intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative)  
survey results.  0 
 
 60 ACs, FAs, PGs, 
CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions  
supported through 
FARM to acquire 
technologies/assets 
and establish trust 
fund accounts with 
increased access to 
lending and 
insurance.  124 ACs, FAs, PGs, 
CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions 
supported through 
FARM to acquire 
technologies/assets 
and establish trust 
fund accounts with 
increased access to 
lending and 
insurance.  • FAO's procurement system and 
operations work effectively.  
 
Note:  
• Despite their climate change adaptation 
potential, premium price market 
opportunities are mainly unavailable to 
smallholder farmers and other local value 
chain actors in the NTSB, partly due to 
their limited access to finance to adopt 
climate- resilient and high- value 
technologies and risk finance measures . 
• The average membership size of AC, FA, 
PG, CAP, CF, and union is 150.  
Output 2.3: Awareness and 
knowledge of climate-
resilient and sustainable, 
high- value agriculture 
increased among farmers 
and other local value chain 
actors, particularly women 
farmers and value chain 
actors (linking to Sub-
component 2.1 to support 
the operationalization of 
business plans by the ACs, 
FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs and 
agricultural unions)  Percentage of 
targeted smallholder 
farmers and other 
local value chain 
actors with increased 
knowledge of climate-
resilient and high-
value farming and 
processing techniques 
and successfully 
incorporated them into 
their practices.  Baseline 
assessment at 
inception, 
demonstration 
site monitoring 
reports, pre- and 
post-training 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
survey results , 
and uptake 
monitoring 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
reports . 0% 
 
 40 % of targeted 
smallholder farmers 
and other local value 
chain actors (50% 
women) with 
increased knowledge, 
and a 20 % increase 
in the uptake of 
practices against the 
inception baseline.   85 % of targeted 
smallholder farmers 
and other local value 
chain actors  (50% 
women) with 
increased knowledge, 
and a 60 % increase 
in the uptake of 
practices against the 
inception baseline.  • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant ministries, sub-
national governments, NGOs and private 
actors.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
• Despite their climate change adaptation 
potential, premium price market 
opportunities are mainly unavailable to 
smallholder farmers and other local value 
chain actors in the NTSB, partly due to 
their limited knowledge of climate- resilient 
and high- value farming and processing 
techniques and ways to integrate them 
into their existing practices to increase 
their resilience and output value.  
Percentage of the 
climate- resilient and 
high- value practices 
promoted through 
training and 
demonstration 
activities  tailored to 
specific needs of 
female farmers and 
value chain actors . 0 At least  15 % of 
promoted practices 
especially tailored for 
women farmers and 
value chain actors 
against the inception 
baseline. 
  Over 25 % of 
promoted practices 
especially tailored for 
women farmers and 
value chain actors 
against the inception 
baseline.  
  • Targeted beneficiaries are interested and 
available.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
• Currently there are no dedicated 
agricultural extension services cater to 
women's specific needs, which limits the 
overall uptake of alternative practices


---
*Page 75*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
  
  
 considering that nearly 50% of the farmers 
in the NTSB are women.  
Output 2.4: Improved agro -
ecological conditions and 
connectivity  Extent (hectares) of 
catchment areas 
protected and 
restored.  Restoration and 
protection activity  
completion 
reports, forestry 
inventory/NFMS, 
biodiversity 
survey, pre- and 
post-intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
survey results.  0   
 
 2,500 hectares of 
catchment restored 
and protected by a 
network of 20 CPAs 
and CFs  7,600 hectares of 
catchment restored 
and protected by a 
network of 20 CPAs 
and CFs.  • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant ministries, sub-
national governments, and NGOs and 
communities . 
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
• There are no areas subject to landscape-
level efforts and mechanisms  to restore 
and protect  critical catchment forests and 
other sensitive ecological zones through a 
harmonized and systematic approach to 
support a network of CPAs and CFs to 
improve catchment functions and 
downstream agroecological conditions 
and reduce hazards . 
Outcome 3:  Regulatory and institutional frameworks and capacities for climate -resilient agricultural certification, cross -sectoral coordination for increased PSPPs and smallholder financing, and 
climate -informed investment support are strengthened  
Output  3.1: Regulatory and 
institutional arrangements 
and capacity relevant to 
developing certification-
based value chains 
strengthened to provide 
enabling conditions for 
adopting climate- resilient, 
high- value and sustainable 
agriculture and food security.  Numb er of certification 
standards  with 
officially adopted 
supplementary 
climate- resilience 
guidelines/tools, 
online certification 
registration 
/traceability tools)  to 
promote climate-
resilient and high-
value agriculture 
based on 
certifications.  Baseline 
assessment at 
inception, officially 
adopted 
guidelines and 
institutional 
arrangements, 
official minutes , 
progress  
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
report s. 0 Two (2) target ed 
production- focused 
certification standards 
with officially adopted 
supplementary 
guidelines/tools, 
establishing online 
certification 
registration, and 
traceability tools  . Two (2) target ed 
processing- focused 
certification standards 
with officially adopted 
supplementary 
guidelines/tools, 
establishing online 
certification 
registration, and 
traceability tools . • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant ministries, sub-
national governments, NGOs and private 
actors.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will b e updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
• There are not structured efforts by the 
RGC to harness climate- resilient and high-
value agriculture by providing clear 
procedural guidance to make currently 
operational certification standards climate-
resilient and the application of the 
guidance and related tools user -friendly to 
increase private sector support and PSPP 
opportunities.


---
*Page 76*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
  
  
 Number of financial 
institutions adopted a 
harmonized financial 
scorecard to consider 
climate resilience, 
inclusivity, gender 
responsiveness, and 
sustainability as key 
eligibility criteria in 
screening loan 
applications.  Adopted  
scorecard, signed 
memorandums  of 
understanding, 
official  minutes, 
and progress 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
reports . 0 At least one (1) 
commercial bank with 
memorandums of 
understanding (MoUs) 
signed to 
operationalize the 
scorecard.   
. At least three (3) 
commercial banks  
with memorandums of 
understanding (MoUs) 
signed to 
operationalize the 
scorecard.   
 • Strong interest and support from the 
private sector and public institutions are 
present.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
• There are no structural efforts to increase 
public -private partnerships in the 
agricultural finance sector to 
systematically increase financial  access 
for smallholder farmers and other local 
value chain actors, particularly women. 
The lack of a systematic approach to 
expanding financial access for these less 
resourceful agricultural value chain actors 
hinders the country's  transition to climate-
resilient and high-value  agriculture.  
Output 3.2: Gender -
responsive  
landscape- level agroecology 
monitoring system (LAMS) 
developed to crowd in public 
and private investments in 
climate- resilient, high- value 
and sustainable agriculture.  Number of LAMS 
users (e.g., value 
chain investors, 
financiers, regulators, 
and policymakers) 
regularly applying its 
information for 
planning and 
investment decision-
making. Baseline 
assessment at 
inception, uptake 
monitoring 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
survey.  0 
 
 1,000 users (50% 
women) regularly 
using LAMS for 
planning and 
investment decision-
making.  2,500 users  (50% 
women) regularly 
using LAMS for 
planning and 
investment decision-
making. decision-
making.  • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant ministries, sub-
national governments, NGOs and private 
actors.  
• Strong interest and support from the 
private sector and public institutions are 
present.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
• No integrated decision- support 
tool/system exists for systematically 
monitoring climate risks and suitability 
shifts (integrating Sub- component 1.1), 
identifying investment gaps and 
opportunities, and monitoring progress to 
increase public and private investment in 
critical areas to accelerate the transition 
towards climate- resilient, inclusive, 
gender -responsive, and high- value 
agriculture.  Such information is scarce 
and challenging to locate to make it non-
user-friendly to prevent evidence- based 
investment planning for climate- resilient 
agriculture.


---
*Page 77*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
  
  
 Project/programme co- benefit indicators  
Co-benefit  Project specific 
Indicator  Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions/ Note  Mid-term  Final  
Agricultural production  and 
processing and 
agroecological management practices are improved to contribute to GHG emissions reductions.  Number  of hectares  of 
forests under 
sustainable forest 
management and 
cropland under 
enhanced soil 
management, 
including postharvest 
residue management 
and optimized fertilizer 
application, reduced 
volume of chemical 
fertilizer use , and 
postharvest loss  
(Note: Activity data 
(area) can be used to 
estimate its emission 
reduction 
contr ibution.).  Baseline 
assessment at 
inception, activity  
completion 
reports under 
Outputs 2.1, 2.3 
and 2.4, 
BUR/BTR, NFMS  According to Cambodia's 
First Biennial Update Report (BUR) (2020), the 
NTSB was responsible for roughly 30 million tonnes of CO2 emissions (at Ti er 
2) from forest and other 
land use and 96,000 tonnes of CH4 emissions  
(at Tier 1) from aggregate sources from agricultural land in 2016. 2,500 hectares of 
terrestrial tropical rain 
forest under 
sustainable forest 
management,  and 
65,000 hectares of 
cropland under 
enhanced soil 
management  7,600 hectares of 
terrestrial tropical rain 
forest under 
sustainable forest 
management and 
135,000 hectares of 
cropland under 
enhanced soil 
management  • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant ministries, sub-
national governments, NGOs, and private 
actors.  
• Targeted beneficiaries are interested and 
available (especially women and other 
socially  excluded minorities).  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
 
Gender considerations are 
fully internalized into climate-resilient value chain development practices.  A number of ACs, 
FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, 
and agricultural unions 
with business plans 
that demonstrate 
specific gender 
considerations and 
women's 
empowerment 
strategies as part of 
their climate- resilient  
value chain 
development and 
market access 
improvement 
strategies.  Baseline 
assessment at 
inception, training 
completion 
reports , pre- and 
post-training 
survey results , 
Gender Action 
Plan progress 
report, and 
qualitative and 
quantitative 
assessments . Women farmers and value 
chain actors are visibly active across the NTSB; however, gender norms remain barriers to accessing the necessary information, technologies, 
and capacity development 
opportunities to increase their resilience to climate change based on their specific needs. More women agro- business 
leaders are needed to unlock opportunities for women farmers and other 
value chain actors.  At leas t 50 ACs, FAs, 
PGs, CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions.    At least 62  ACs, FAs, 
PGs, CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions.    • Effective coordination and collaboration 
exist between relevant ministries, sub-
national governments, NGOs, and private 
actors.  
• Targeted beneficiaries are interested and 
available.  
 
Note:  
• Baseline will be updated after the baseline 
assessment.  
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables


---
*Page 78*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
  
  
 Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1: Increase the 
spatial scale of 
agrometeorological data collection and capacity for data processing to produce enhanced agrometeorological forecasts and advisory services tailored for target value chain crops.  Upgraded agrometeorological data 
collection and processing capacities will enable an analysis of real -time 
weather and climate information, seasonal forecasts, historical records, crop parameters, soil moisture and temperatures, and pest and disease characteristics through relevant methodologies to provide crop- specific warnings and advisory 
services.  Sub-activity 1.1.1.1: Mobilize the TWG -AW, led by MAFF 
and MoWRAM, with additional experts from other relevant entities, including private sector partners, value chain actors, and cooperative/association/union representatives, to review baseline conditions and capacity and data gaps to validate the priority stations for additional sensor upgrades, strategic locations for adding new agrometeorological stations, and training needs for station managers, data 
analys ts and system administrators.  A report by the expert working group with recommendations on capacity 
upgrades and personnel training needs and programs.  
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2: Upgrade existing hardware and 
software at the selected priority stations and data storage and processing locations, and install new agrometeorological stations identified by the expert working 
group (a private- sector partner/service provider be selected 
for installation and regular maintenance).  Upgrade and installatio n completion reports, 12 existing stations 
upgraded with additional sensors, eight (8) new agrometeorological 
stations installed.  
Sub-activities 1.1.1.3: Design and roll out an annual training 
program for station managers, data analysts, and system administrators to improve their capacities to manage and maintain the upgraded and newly installed stations and instruments and data storage and processing facilities and collect and process raw data. (Two international scholarships for outstanding staff members from the training and based on their performance reviews for earning graduate degrees/certificates in hydrometeorology/ 
agrometeor ology.  An annual training program, seven (7) annual training workshops with 
specific curricula for station managers, data analysts, system administrators over the project lifetime, training completion reports, and 150 station managers, data analysts, and system administrators trained. (Two staff members with graduate degrees/certificates)  
Activity 1.1.2: Develop SOPs 
for the production and dissemination of agrometeorological advisory services and data sharing needs and architecture, targeting cashew, mango, rice, and vegetables through a variety of mediums.  Crop -specific SOPs will allow 
farmers to grow the target crops and 
other local value chain actors to anticipate yields and processing volumes with reliable information and consistent advisory services to make the target value chains less vulnerable to climate change. The SOPs will ensure coordination 
among public and private extension services and provide highly tailored information through multiple mediums.  
 
The crop- specific SOPs will be 
placed under the existing SOP for 
general hydrometeorological Sub-activity 1.1.2.1: Mobilize the TWG -AW, led by MAFF 
and MoWRAM, together with additional stakeholders, including MoC, MoWA, MoE and National Committee for 
Disaster Management (NCDM), and their provincial, district, and commune counterparts, selected cooperatives, associations and unions and private- sector entities (e.g., 
private extension providers, including NGOs and media services) to develop the SOPs for the production and dissemination of crop- specific agrometeorological advisory 
information (e.g., information type, source, and flow channels), including mechanisms to collect feedback from extension providers, farmers and other local value chain 
actors to improve service quality.  Four (4) SOPs for agrometeorological advisory services and feedback 
mechanisms for cashew, mango, organic rice, and vegetable producers and processors.  
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2: Establish a central database based on 
harmonized data management and sharing agreements under the SOPs among relevant institutions and private-
sector partners with dedicated information dissemination Data management and sharing agreements, more  than four (4) dedicated 
information dissemination and outreach channels, including Tonle Sap App, Chamkar and EcoKasksekor, established for public and private


---
*Page 79*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
  
  
 advisory services, developed by the 
regional FAO project and the 
University of Queensland and WMO 
project, to provide highly tailored 
information.  
 
The SOPs will establish clear crop-specific information parameters, 
administrative and procedural rules, 
and processes for producing and disseminating advisories and 
warnings (e.g., information type, 
frequency, format, roles, responsibilities, dissemination 
mediums, quality control measures).  and outreach mediums (e.g., web pl atform hosted by MAFF, 
mobile apps (i.e., Tonle Sap App , Chamkar and 
EcoKasksekor  ), social media channels, TV and radio 
programs, community bulletins, community speakers, FFS curricula, and private advisory services through contract 
farming and input supp ly sales).  extension providers, including NGOs, far mers, and local value chain 
actors.  
Sub-activity 1.1.2.3: Conduct annual training of extension 
officers from PDAFF, PDoWRAM, PDoC , PCDM and district 
administration, commune and village extension agents, and private extension providers, including NGOs on the SOPs to operationalize harmonized agrometeorological services and 
collect end- user feedback through dedicated information 
disse mination and outreach channels.  Training program for public and private extension officers, seven (7) 
annual training events in each of the four provinces during the project lifetime, training completion reports, 500 public extension officers, and 
400 pri vate extension providers, including NGOs trained.  
Activity 1.1.3: Increase 
awareness of 
agrometeorological advisory 
services and the benefits of 
the application in farm management and value 
addition activities to support 
decision- making and reduce 
smallholder farmers and 
other local value chain 
actors' vulnerabilities to climate change, particularly women farmers and value 
chain actors.  Increased awareness of available 
services and their application among 
smallholder farmers and other local 
value chain ac tors will effectively 
reduce their climate vulnerabilities in 
agricultural production and 
processing. Increased service 
demand and user feedback will also create an enabling environment for 
progressively improving service 
quality and options.  Sub-activity 1.1.3.1: Prepare and roll out TOT curricula, 
including a feedback mechanism, through FFS to raise 
awareness of advisory services, including how to access 
them, and promote the application of agrometeorological 
advisory services, including market -related advisories 
among smallholder farmers and other local value chain 
actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors.  TOT curricula, including a feedback mechanism, for smallholder farmers 
and other local value chain actors, training completion reports , and 3,000 
smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors trained (ca. 10- 15 
representatives (40- 60% women) per AC, FA, PG , CPA, CF, and union).  
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2: Support peer -to-peer knowledge 
sharing and training to further promote advisory services among other members of targeted ACs, FAs, PGs , CPAs, 
CFs, and agricultural unions with their respective TOT -
trained representatives.  Peer -to-peer knowledge sharing and training completion reports and an 
accumulative total of 24,000 farmers and other local value chain actors (40-60% women) supported.  
Activity 2.1.1: Develop and 
operationalize inter -value-
chain- actors roadmaps at 
the provincial level and action/business plans for climate- resilient, inclusive 
and gender -responsive 
premium value chain development and identify specific certification 
programs as key vehicles.  Inclusive and gender -responsive 
value chain development roadmaps, 
linking various value chain actors, 
will establish strategic directions at 
the provincial level for supporting ACs, FAs, PGs , CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions in adopt ing 
climate- resilient, high- value and 
sustainable agriculture. Each roadmap will assess and identify 
appropriate certification programs as 
essential vehicles for accessing premium price markets.  
 
ACs, FAs, PGs,  CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions in the ta rget Sub-activity 2.1.1.1:  Establish an inter -value -chain 
committee with members from input suppliers, farmers, 
millers, collectors, traders/exporters, local retailers, 
hoteliers, restauranteurs, and extension providers, including 
NGOs to prepare provincial -level roadmaps, including the 
necessary feasibility studies to identify a t arget certification 
program(s) for inclusive, gender -responsive, climate-
resilient and high -value value chain development.  Four (4) provincial -level roadmaps developed, including feasibility studies 
for identifying target certification program(s) and stakeholder validated for 
operationalization.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2:  Operationalize the roadmaps by 
establishing institutional arrangements, product 
specifications, quality control mechanisms for the selected certification schemes (e.g., CamGap, PGS, GI, SRP and 
organic for production, and ISO 2200 and HACCP for 
processing) and marketing tools (e.g., logos, brochures, 
websites), ensuring legal registration, and conducting 
training.  Four (4) provincial -level roadmaps fully operational and updated with 
operational lessons learned.


---
*Page 80*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
  
  
 districts will prepare their crop -
specific action/business plans, 
guided by their district roadmaps to 
increase market access. Their 
business plans will feed into Activity 
2.2.1.  Sub-activity 2.1.1.3: Support the provincial -level inter-value -
chain committees with focus on ACs, FAs, PGs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions to carry out branding, marketing (e.g., 
attending trade fairs, consumer awareness -raising, and 
brokering purchase agreements) and sourcing and quality 
control activities.  At least two (2) inter -value -chain brands developed, and branding 
materials and product specifications.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.4: Support the provincial -level inter-value -
chain committees with focus on CP As to carry out branding, 
marketing (e.g., attending trade fairs, consumer awareness -
raising, and brokering purchase agreements) and sourcing 
and quality control activities.  At least one (1) inter -value -chain brands developed, and branding 
materials and pr oduct specifications.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.5: Conduct annual training of extension 
providers at the provincial level to operationalize the 
roadmaps to roll out the roadmaps through FFS curricula 
and other support programs for smallholder farmers and 
other  local value chain actors, particularly women farmers 
and value chain actors (e.g., private extension services).  Seven (7) annual training events in each province over the project’s 
lifetime, training materials, training completion reports, 550 public 
extension officers, 400 private extension providers, including NGOs (40-
60% women) trained.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.6: Assist 78 ACs, FAs, PGs, including up 
to 2 agricultural unions in preparing crop- specific action 
plans/business plans to operationalize the provincial -level 
roadmaps in an inclusive and gender -responsive manner. 
Action plans/business plans are linked to Commune 
Development and Investment Plans (CDPs and CIPs).  Total of 78 ACs, FAs, PGs, including up to 2 unions of cooperatives with 
crop- specific action/business plans, linked to CDPs and CIPs.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.7: Assist 30 ACs, F As, and PGs and 4 
CFs in preparing crop- specific action plans/business plans 
to operationalize the provincial -level roadmaps in an 
inclusive and gender -responsive manner. Action 
plans/business plans are linked to Commune Development 
and Investment Plans (C DPs and CIPs).  Total of 30 ACs, FAs and PGs and 4 CFs with crop -specific 
action/business plans, linked to CDPs and CIPs.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.8: Assist 16 CPAs in preparing crop -
specific action plans/business plans to operationalize the 
provincial -level roadmaps in an inclusive and gender -
responsive manner. Action plans/business plans are linked 
to Commune Development and Investment Plans (CDPs 
and CIPs).  Total of 16 CPAs with crop -specific action/business plans, linked to CDPs 
and CIPs.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.9: Assist ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs in 
forming crop- specific agricultural unions, where appropriate 
and strategic, to leverage pooled resources and capacities 
through action and business planning processes. The 
project will work with the Preah Vihear Meanchey Union of 
Agricultural Cooperatives (PMUAC) for organic rice.  Up to three (3) crop -specific agricultural unions (i.e., cashew, mango, and 
vegetables) established to participate in Sub- activity 2.1.1.4 and FARM 
under Activity 2.2.1.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.10: Organize national and provincial 
annual dialogues between the beneficiary bodies (i.e., ACs, 
FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions) and direct 
purchase agreement providers (i.e., traders/exporters, Dialogue reports, partnership agreements, joint marketing, promotional 
materials, and a 30% increase in contract farming and direct purchase agreements.


---
*Page 81*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
  
  
 retailers, hoteliers, and r estauranteurs) to establish 
operational partnerships for market development and 
implementing crop -specific action/business plans.  
Activity 2.1.2: Develop 
voluntary add- on 
supplementary guidelines, 
tools, and training materials 
to consider specific climate 
risks and strategies for the 
certification programs 
identified under Activity 2.1.1. (e.g., CamGap, G I 
and organic for production, and ISO 2200 and HACCP for processing) for the target value chains (linking to 
Activity 3.1.1. on PLR and 
institutional arrangements 
concerning these certification programs).  Climate -proofing of the agricultural 
certification programs identified in 
the provincial roadmaps will be crucial for harnessing their market 
potential for assisting smallholder 
farmers and other local value chain 
actors in adopting climate- resilient, 
high- value, and sustainable 
agriculture and livelihoods . Sub-activity 2.1.2.1:  Establish a technical working group 
(TWG) for the certification programs identified in the 
provincial roadmaps with members from regulatory bodies, independent verifiers, ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, 
agricultural unions, extension prov iders, consumer groups, 
and expert organizations to review and update/develop relevant supplementary guidelines, training materials, and 
tools to ensure that climate- related risks, climate- resilient 
approaches, and interventions are fully considered in the 
certification programs.  TWG, TORs, meeting reports, supplementary guidelines, training 
manuals, and tools for CamGap, GI, organic certification, and at least one of the food processing standards (i.e., ISO 2200, HACCP).  
Sub-activity 2.1.2.2:   Prepare and implement training 
programs for regulatory and independent verification bodies 
for operationalizing the voluntary supplementary guidelines, 
training materials, and tools.  Training materials, training completion reports, 150 individuals trained - 
regulators (60%) and verifiers (40%).  
Sub-activity 2.1.2.3:  Prepare and implement TOT programs 
for public and private extension providers, including NGOs 
and representatives of ACs, FAs, PGs,  CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions to operationalize the supplementary 
guidelines, training materials, and tools through FFS and 
demonstration activities (Note: public extension providers 
include PDAFF extension officers, PDoWRM, PDoC and 
PDoE officers, district administration officers, commune and 
village extension agents).  Training materials, Training completion reports, 500 public extension 
officers, 400 private extension providers, including NGOs, 1,000 AC, FA, PG, CPA, CF, and union representatives (8 per body) (40- 60% women) 
trained.  
Sub-activity 2.1.2.4: Explore the possibility of adopting and 
operationalizing W+ Standards to empower women farmers, 
particularly in the vegetable sector.  A feasibility report, operational action plan, and awareness  and training 
materials.  
Activity 2.2.1: Establish a 
Farmer -led Agricultural 
Resilience Mechanism (FARM),
 for ACs, FAs, PGs,  
CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions to assist their 
members' transition to 
climate- resilient and high-
value agriculture in an inclusive and gender -
responsive manner.  An innovative climate adaptation 
asset acquisition mechanism, FARM, 
will be established to support the 
operationalization of the action plans/business plans developed by ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions  under Activity 
2.1.1. This will include the 
preparation of technical 
specifications and procurement 
packages in consultation with 
beneficiary groups and procurement 
of identified infrastructure assets and 
technologies. In preparing the 
technical specifications and Sub-activity 2.2.1.1: Train  ACs, FAs, PGs,  CPAs, CFs, and 
unions of cooperatives annually to develop financial and 
business literacy and entrepreneurial skills  (with  particular 
focus on youth, women, and other  socially excluded 
minorities) for preparing and updating business plans,  
including maintenance and operation plans and private 
finance and insurance plans.  
(Note: this will be done in conjunction with Sub- activity 
2.1.1.4).  Sixteen (16) training events in each province  over the project’s lifetime , 
training materials, training completion reports, 124 ACs, FAs, PGs,  
CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions trained to demonstrate their financial 
and business literacy and entrepreneurial skills (with  particular focus on 
youth, women, and other  socially excluded minorities) through approved 
business plans, including asset management and repayment plans under 
a climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism.  
Sub-activity 2.2.1.2: Procure an initial set of agricultural 
infrastructure assets based on the approved business pl ans 
to operationalize FARM (average cost of USD 50,000 per beneficiary group
 with co -financing of between 5 –  20% by 
the beneficiary group ; however, an agricultural union or a 
group of cooperatives/associations may access a larger Up to 124 assets procured based on approved business plans as an 
initial investment to establish FARM accounts.


---
*Page 82*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
  
  
 procurement packages, attention will 
be paid to the specific and different 
needs of men and women.  amount by pooling funds (e.g., a group of 10 cooperatives 
may access up to USD 500,000).  
Sub-activity 2.2.1.3: Establish a FARM account (trust fund) 
for each beneficiary group for advancing its business plan 
with clearly defined governance arrangements and ongoing 
business development support (i.e., FARM grants manual, 
Board of trustees, disbursement eligibility criteria, fiduciary 
and performance monitoring mechanisms).  Up to 1 24 FARM accounts established/124 beneficiary ACs, FAs, PGs,  
CPAs, CFs, agricultural unions supported, with  the FARM grants manual, 
Boards of trustees, disbursement eligibility criteria, fiduciary and performance monitoring mechanisms and responsibilities.  
Activity 2.2.2: Assess the 
feasibility of developing additional risk finance options for cashew, mango, 
and vegetable producer s, 
particularly women farmers.  A feasibility study will be conducted 
to assess risk financing opportunities 
for cashew, mango, and vegetable producers to lessen their financial 
risks due to climate- induced crop 
loss and damage. The activity builds on the existing agricultural (index -
based) insurance products for rice 
and other crops.  
 Concurrently, the lack of insurance products for supporting agricultural 
unions, often providing internal 
quality control for meeting 
certification standards in bad harvest 
years, will be addressed to ensure 
business continuity in assisting 
individual farmers.  Sub-activity 2.2.2.1: Train PDAFF, PDoE and PDoC staff, 
including extension officers, district administration officers, commune and village extension agents, and NGOs, t hrough 
TOT programs on the costs and benefits of index -based and 
other insurance products to raise awareness among smallholder farmers and local value chain actors, 
particularly women farmers and value chain actors.   550 PDAFF, PDoE and PDoC staff, includ ing extension officers, district 
administration officers, commune and village extension agents, and NGOs trained, the awareness of 75,000 farmers and other local value chain actors (40- 60% women) increased, training materials and 
completion reports.  
Sub-activity 2.2.2.2: Establish an expert working group with 
members from MAFF and other relevant public institutions, agronomic research organizations, and private insurer(s) to 
identify index -based risk financing parameters linked to 
agrometeorological i nformation for cashew, mango, and 
vegetable production and explore the possibility of 
developing and piloting prototype index -based insurance 
products for these crops in partnership with a private insurer(s) under the National Crop Insurance Program. At least one of such products may aim to support agricultural 
unions’ operations that are critical to implementing 
certification programs.  Risk financing parameters for cashew, mango, and vegetable producers 
and feasibility of 3 prototype insurance products developed and piloted 
and targeting individual farmers and their representative bodies (i.e., ACs, FAs, PGs,  and agricultural unions).  
Activity 2.2.3: Raise 
awareness of available 
financial support products 
and services in Cambodia 
systematically among smallholder farmers and 
local value chain actors, 
particularly women farmers 
and value chain actors.  A comprehensive list of various 
financial institutions as well as types of financial support and risk financing 
options will be made available for 
ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, CFs, unions, 
and their individual members to 
ensure the beneficiary groups have 
the information necessary to make 
the needed trust account arrangements and access 
complementary financial products 
and insurance services.  Sub-activity 2.2.3.1: Compile and regularly update a menu 
of financial support and insurance products and services 
available for ACs, FAs, PGs, , CPAs, CFs  and agricultural 
unions and their individual members in NTSB as part of FFS 
curricula and demonstration activities and through existing user interfaces (i.e., Tonle Sap App, Chamkar and 
EcoKasksekor ). A regularly updated menu of financial support and insurance products 
and services incorporated into the FFS curricular and made accessible 
through the existing user interfaces (i.e.,  Tonle Sap App, Chamkar and 
EcoKasksekor ), 60% of targeted farmers and other local value chain 
actors (40- 60% women) regularly referring to the menu.  
Activity 2.3.1: Develop a 
clearinghouse system, 
consolidating existing 
knowledge systems, for 
harmonized knowledge A consolidated and impr oved 
clearinghouse will systematically 
collect and disseminate relevant 
lessons learned and best practices 
from all past and ongoing pertinent Sub-activity 2.3. 1.1: Consolidate and improve existing 
knowledge systems to established a semi -automated 
clearinghouse system based on the combination of algorithm and manual analysis (in partnership with, e.g., 
ICRISAT), to collect, process, and disseminate relevant A consolidated and improved clearinghouse with specific information 
dissemination formats for various dissemination channels with full 
consideration of inclusivity and gender responsiveness.


---
*Page 83*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
  
  
 management and systematic 
dissemination of lessons 
learned and best practices in 
climate- resilient, inclusive, 
gender -responsive, and 
high- value agriculture for 
supporting the 
implementation of the 
roadmaps and action plans under Activity 2.1.1, and for 
raising awareness of the 
practices and technologies under Activity 2.3.2 and associated economic and 
social benefits.   initiatives for promoting climate -
resilient, high- value, and sustainable 
agriculture practices and 
technologies. The centralized system 
will assure the quality control and 
harmonization of information through 
various mediums, including FFS 
curricula, Facebook, YouTube 
channels, and mobile apps (e.g., Tonle Sap App, Chamkar and 
EcoKasksekor) so that farmers and 
other local value chain actors have 
reliable sources of consistent technical guidance and interactively 
provide feedback and information. 
The information is also used to 
promote buyers’ informed purchasing 
and sourcing of agricultural products.
 lesso ns learned and best practices in climate -resilient, 
inclusive, gender -responsive, and high- value production and 
processing practices and technologies. Partnerships with 
private sector entities might be sought for content creation 
to ensure that information and formats are appropriate for 
different target audiences (i.e., extension officers, ACs, FAs, PGs,  CPAs, CFs, unions, farmers, buyers). (Note: the 
clearinghouse will build on the existing systems with a focus on improving the accessibility and consistency of 
information.)  
Sub-activity 2.3.1.2: Promote through FFS curricula, 
Facebook, YouTube channels, and mobile apps (e.g., Tonle 
Sap App, Chamkar and EcoKasksekor ) for on- demand 
information access among smallholder farmers, other local 
value chain actors and buyers, particul arly women farmers 
and value chain actors.  Training materials, reports, brochures, social media platforms, and over 
60% of target beneficiary farmers and local value chains, particularly 
women farmers and value chain actors, trained and regularly referring to on-demand services for tips.  
Sub-activity 2.3.1.3: Conduct annual training seminars for 
retailers, hoteliers, restauranteurs, and traders/exporters to increase their awareness of the benefits of climate- resilient, 
inclusive, gender -responsive, and high- value agriculture to 
promote informed purchasing and sourcing.  Seven (7) seminars, training materials, completion reports, and 1,200 
retailers, hoteliers, restauranteurs, and traders/exporters trained.  
Activity 2.3.2: Provide 
horizontally and vertic ally 
harmonized and targeted extension services, linking 
the provincial, district, 
commune, and village levels 
and public and private 
extension providers, to 
promote the adoption of 
climate- resilient, inclusive, 
gender -responsive, and 
high- value practices and 
technologies relevant for the 
implementation of roadmaps 
and action plans developed under Activity 2.1.1 and financed under Activity 2.2.1.  For successful implementation of the 
provincial -level value chain 
roadmaps and crop- specific 
action/business plans prepared by 
ACs, FAs, PGs,  CPAs, CFs,  and 
agricultural unions  and financed 
through FARM under Activity 2.2.1 
must be coupled with consistent and 
coordinated extension services to 
promote highly relevant production 
and processing practices and 
technologies that are climate-resilient, inclusive, gender -
responsive, and high- value. Such 
practices and technologies will include the application of stress -
tolerant varieties, small -scale 
irrigation systems, horticultural techniques (net house, raised bed 
production, drip irrigation), on- farm 
and homestead multi -use ponds, 
composting and organic fertilizer production, elements of the system 
of rice intensification, solar water Sub-activity 2.3.2.1: Design inclusive and gender -
responsive training curricula, including manuals and tools, 
tailored for four target groups -  1) public extension officers 
at the provincial, district and commune and village levels, 2) 
privat e extension providers, including NGOs, 3) 
trainer/model farmers and local value chain actors, and 4) female farmers and value chain actors -  to promote the 
adoption of climate- resilient and high- value practices and 
technologies in line with provincial -level value chain 
roadmaps and action/business plans of individual AC, FA, PG, CPA, CF and unions (Note: lessons and best practices 
under Activity 2.3.1 feed into the curricula).  Four (4) training curricula with training manuals and tools, including a 
dedicat ed curriculum for female farmers and value chain actors.  
Sub-activity 2.3.2.2: Conduct biannual training of public 
extension officers (PDAFF extension officers, PDoWRM, 
PDoE and PDoC officers, district administration officers, commune and village extension agents) for identifying, 
demonstrating, and promoting cl imate- resilient and high-
value practices and technologies relevant for the action/business plans, prepared by the ACs, FAs, PGs,  
CPAs, CFs, and agricultural unions .  Total of 5 annual training events in each province over the project’s 
lifetime, training c ompletion reports, an accumulative total of 550 public 
extension officers (40- 60% women) trained.  
Sub-activity 2.3.2.3: Conduct annual training of private 
extension providers, including NGOs (e.g., input suppliers, 
retailers, and buyers) to mainstream climate- resilient and 
sustainable practices and technologies and clearinghouse Total of 5 annual training events in each province over the project’s 
lifetime, training completion reports, accumulative total of 400 private extension providers, including NGOs (40- 60% women) trained.


---
*Page 84*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
  
  
 pumps and storage tanks, integrated 
livestock waste management, IPM, 
climate- resilient post -harvest 
storage, value- addition facilities, and 
traceability and labeling.  knowledge into their se rvices in an inclusive and gender -
responsive manner.  
Sub-activity 2.3.2.4: Conduct biannual TOT training of 
representative farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors from ACs, FAs, PGs, CFs, and unions (15 representatives per 
group per year) on demonstr ating and promoting climate-
resilient and high- value practices and technologies relevant 
for their action plans implementation. TOT training 
curriculum includes a half -day session specially tailored for 
female farmers and value chain actors.  Ten (10)  biann ual TOT training events per district, including dedicated 
sessions for female farmers and value chain actors, training completion reports, over an accumulative total of 3,270 representatives of ACs, FAs, 
PGs, CFs, and unions trained.  
Sub-activity 2.3.2.5: Conduct biannual TOT training of 
representative farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors from 
CPAs (15 representatives per group per year) on 
demonstrating and promoting climate -resilient and high-
value practices and technologies relevant for their action 
plans implementation. TOT training curriculum includes a 
half-day session specially tailored for female farmers and 
value chain actors.  Ten (10) biannual TOT training events per district, including dedicated 
sessions for female farmers and value chain actors, training completion 
reports, over an accumulative total of 480 representatives of CPAs 
trained.  
Sub-activity 2.3.2.6: Establish model farmer and processor 
demonstration si tes with TOT trained representatives with 
support from district and village councils across 24 target 
districts to promote the adoption of climate- resilient, 
inclusive, gender -responsive, and high- value best practices 
and technologies (this demonstration w ill also include the 
use of agrometeorological advisory services by linking to 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1).  A total of 100 demonstration sites established across 24 target districts.  
Activity 2.4.1: Restore and 
protect critical forest catchments in upper waters hed areas where the 
target crops are produced (this activity will build directly 
on and extend the existing 
conservation and catchment protection efforts by MoE, 
WCS and others).  Establishing an inter -district 
integrated watershed management 
(IWM) program with relevant district 
councils in upper catchment areas of 
where the target crops are produced 
will enable both the restoration and 
protection of critical catchment 
forests and other sensitive ecological zones and improvement of 
agroecological conditions , including 
water availability and quality, while 
also reducing hazards, for 
downstream targeted farmers. Such 
restoration efforts will also increase 
the livelihood quality of upstream Sub-activity 2.4.1.1: Establish an inter -district IWM 
framework to identify priority areas and interventions for restoring and protecting critical catchment forests and other sensitive ecological zones in upper watershed areas where 
the target crops are produced. IWM activities will build on 
and enhance CPAs' and CFs' management plans.  An inter -district IWM framework agreement among participating districts, 
including agreed roles and responsibilities and resource contributions, 
priority restoration and protected areas, including CPAs and CFs, and strategic interventions for each identified area.  
Sub-activity 2.4.1.2: Design restoration and protection plans 
and provide capacity development in an inclusive and gender -responsive manner for the identified CPAs and CFs 
through agroforestry, other revenue- generating 
conservation activities (e.g., apiculture, agroforestry -based 
(fruits) tourism, NTFP value addition), and contract work.  Total of 16 CPAs and 4 CFs with  restoration and protection plans 
engaged in and benefiting from critical forest catchment conservation and protection.   
Sub-activity 2.4.1.3: Support 4 CFs to implement and 
monitor their restoration and protection plans.  Restoration and protection plans of 4 CFs implemented with biannual 
monitoring reports.


---
*Page 85*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
  
  
 communities through improved 
ecosystem services and alternative 
livelih oods development (e.g., 
apiculture, agroforestry -based (fruits) 
tourism, NTFP value addition).  Sub-activity 2.4.1.4: Support 16 CPAs to implement and 
monitor their restoration and protection plans.  Restoration and protection plans of 16 CPAs implemented wit h biannual 
monitoring reports.  
Sub-activity 2.4.1. 5: Establish a methodological approach 
and mechanism to identify baselines, monitor the impacts of catchment protection and restoration, and identify issues for 
improvement under the inter-district IWM framework.  Total of 7,600 hectares of critical forest catchments under restoration and 
protection regimes with a monitoring mechanism.  
Activity 3.1.1: 
Upgrade/establish an enabling regulatory and institutional framework for the climate- proofed 
certification programs under Activity 2.1.2. to operate effectively.  The updated guidelines, training 
manuals, and tools for the target certificat ion programs under Activity 
2.1.2. must be fully underpinned by appropriate regulatory conditions and institutional arrangements to operate effectively and ensure long- lasting 
impacts.  Sub-activity 3.1.1.1: Mobilize the TWG, established under 
Sub- activity 2.1.2.1, to identify areas of improvement and 
recommend actions for ensuring an enabling regulatory and institutional environment (e.g., online certification/traceability tools) for promoting climate- resilient, inclusive, and gender -
responsive agricultural  certification programs.  Technical Review Committee, TORs (e.g., for online 
certification/traceability tools), review report with recommendations.  
Sub-activity: 3.1.1.2: Organize a stakeholder validation 
meeting(s) for the recommendations and submit stakeholder validated recommendations for amendments in the regulatory and institutional framework to the policymakers 
for their consideration.  Stakehol der validation report, validated recommendations, an official 
request for amendments.  
Activity 3.1.2: Demonstrate a 
harmonized sectoral approach to climate- resilient, 
inclusive, and gender -
responsive finance to complement Activity 2.2.1 for rolling out the FARM.    This approach will promote and 
demonstrate harmonized practices across the agricultural finance sector to mainstream climate and sustainability considerations as critical de- risking measures by 
developing and adopting a scorecard system to increase financial access for smallholder farmers and other 
local value chain actors, particularly 
women farmers and value chain actors, with limited to no collateral assets.   Sub-activity 3.1.2.1:   Establish a working group with 
members from public and private financial institutions servicing the agriculture sector to design a lending scorecard system together with a user manual to consider climate- resilience and sustainability as main eligibility 
criteria for screening loan applications from smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors with limited to no 
collateral.   A scorecard system and a user manual.  
Sub-activity 3.1.2.2:  Facilitate agreements (i.e., MoUs) with 
at least three public and private financial institutions to set aside 2% of their overall lending portfolios for issuing loans to smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors, based on the scorecard system on a pilot basis (Note: Operations 
will initially be limited to t he NTSB).  MoUs signed with at least three (3) financial institutions to pilot the 
scorecard.   
 (Also, the project will support ARDB in developing 
social and 
environmental policy and transparency and accountability guidelines  i n 
order for ARDB to champion this activity).  
Activity 3.1.3: Increase 
private sector engagement in sub- national planning for 
improved PSPPs.
 Effective PSPPs for the development 
of climate- resilient, high- value, and 
sustainable value chains for smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors and ensuring food 
security depend on enabling 
conditions that forge coordination and collaboration across relevant 
sectors (i.e., agriculture, finance, food, retail, hospitality, and trade) and between national and sub-national governments. Another such 
condition is to respond to citizens' Sub-activity 3.1.3.1: Strengthen the provincial public forum 
mechanisms by increasing private sector engagement to facilitate open dialogues between governments, the private sector, and citizens (notably smallholder farmers and local value chain actors) to forge effective PSPPs in areas, 
including agrochemical control, agricultural certification, 
contract farming, finance, insurance, and traceability.   A dedicated private sector session in each provincial foru m, session 
materials, completion report, at least two successful PSPP models, 
demonstrated.   
Sub-activity 3.1.3.2: Establish a sub -committee to serve 
NCSD and NCDD to strengthen cross -sectoral and vertical 
coordination and institutional arrangements by improving a feedback mechanism between national policy processes and sub- national forums on PSPPs for climate- resilient, 
inclusive, gender -responsive, and high -value agriculture and A sub -natio nal committee, TOR, committee meeting reports, tri -annual 
issue papers (21 papers over the project lifetime).


---
*Page 86*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
  
  
 voices to create and achieve shared 
social visions, and this ac tivity will 
ensure these enabling conditions.  improved food security. (Note: the sub -committee will do 
this by producing tri -annual issue papers to facilitate policy 
debates among NCSD and NCDD members).  
Activity 3.2.1: Establish a 
gender -responsive 
landscape- level agroecology 
monitoring system (LAMS) 
with an interactive web platform.  LAMS will offer a one -stop-shop 
platform for public and private investors in agriculture to make informed investment decisions. LAMS will guide investors by identifying investment gaps and opportunities in making agriculture resilient to climate change, hi gh-
value, inclusive, and gender -
responsive to maximize their investment returns and track investment progress in terms of emissions, climate resilience, and social and environmental impacts 
over time. LAMS will be operationally 
linked to other climate- related 
monitoring systems (e.g., REDD+ NFMS, NDC Enhanced Transparency Framework)  Sub-activity 3.2.1.1:  Establish an expert working group with 
technical members from institutions managing relevant databases concerning climate change, agricultural production, and related socio- economic development and 
investment activities to identify the scope of LAMS's function parameters, data needs, and sources, and data sharing and harmonization needs, roles and responsibilities 
of parties involved, and an annual operati ng budget.    LAMS's scope of function parameters, data needs and sources, data 
sharing and harmonization requirements, roles and responsibilities of parties involved, and annual operating budget.  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.2:   Facilitate data sharing and 
harmonization agreements between MAFF (a host of LAMS) and relevant data- holding institutions (NIS, MAFF, MoE, 
MoC, MWoRAM, and others).  Necessary data -sharing agreements.  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.3:   Design a gender -responsive LAMS 
operating framework (in partnership with, e.g., ICRISAT) with a web interface and an SOP for operating LAMS, including operational guidelines, roles and responsibilities, 
and training manuals.  LAMS op erating framework with a web interface, SOP, guidelines, and 
training manuals.  
Sub-activity 3.2.1.4: Train system analysts and 
administrators on the SOP to operationalize LAMS.  One week intensive training program for an initial group of 25 system 
analy sts and administrators in 1st year, followed by annual training 
events to train a total of 90 analysts and administrators over the project 
lifetime, training completion reports.    
Sub-activity 3.2.1.5: Refine the predictive models of climate 
impacts on the target crops and other key crops in AquaCrop and through AEZ methodology based on ground data to aid the identification and selection of climate- resilient 
investment options under LAMS.  Refined predictive models specific to NTSB and possibly beyond, 
indicating short (2030), medium (mid- century), and long (end of the 
century) term predictions.  
Activity 3.2.2: Promote the 
use of LAMS in public and private investment decision-making, monitoring, and reporting.  To ensure wide application of LAMS 
among policymakers, public institutions, and private investors, promotional material development (e.g., leaflets, sample analysis reports shared through social media and email listserv), and awareness-raising and end- user training events, 
including virtual resources, will be 
carried out.  Sub-activity 3.2.2.1: Develop awareness materials (e.g., 
leaflets, sample analysis performed on LAMS web platform, virtual end- user support materials on YouTube) and an end-
user training program.  Awareness materials and training program.  
Sub-activity 3.2.2.2: Conduct bi -annual end -user training 
events to promote the broad application of LAMS and collect user feedback to improve LAMS's scope and analytical functions.  Ten (10) national -level training events over the project lifetime, traini ng 
completion reports, up to 2,500 end- users (40-- 60% women) trained.  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation  arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
XIV. Monitoring and Evaluation


---
*Page 87*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
  
  
 217 In its role as the AE, FAO (specifically the FAO -GCF project supervision team) will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project per the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed between FAO and the GCF. As per the GCF Monitoring and Accountability Framework and the AMA, FAO 
will provide the GCF with an Inception Report, Annual Performance Reports, an independent Mid- term Evaluation report, a Project Closure Report, and an 
independent Final Evaluation report. FAO will also provide semi -annual and annual Financial Reports throughout project implementation.  
 218 At the technical level, responsibility for monitoring will rest with the PMU. The PMU will monitor its progress and impacts v ia: (i) georeferencing of field 
activities, allowing clear and tr ansparent identification of results and beneficiaries; and (ii) field data collection by the project’s dedicated monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) team, led by an M&E Specialist. The M&E team will deploy a combination of direct observation, participatory ass essment, and pre and 
post-intervention survey methods at the individual, household, community, and institutional levels.  
 
219 These M&E mechanisms, described in Annex 11, will enable the PSC, PMU, and EEs to demonstrate the adaptive management of the project.  Such 
practices will also be informed by its environmental and social management framework (ESMF) (Annex 6) to take anticipatory ac tion to address risks that 
may negatively impact the expected results. The PMU will also track the implementation of other re lated plans, the gender action plan (Annex 8) and 
stakeholder engagement plan (Annex 7).  
 
220 There will be a grievance redress mechanism established. The PMU will ensure that the mechanism is easily accessible for the project's stakeholders 
and beneficiaries . The system will follow FAO’s  Guidelines for Compliance Reviews, which lay out specific procedures for handling and addressing 
complaints related to its Environmental and Social Standards (FAO ESS, 2015) , and establish a designated Safeguards Specialist as a focal person for the 
grievance redress system. The Safeguards Specialist will work closely with the M&E Specialist to ensure the results -based and adaptive management of 
the project.  
 221 The PMU will coordinate with the co- EEs to prepare and submit the following reports accordingly to the PSC, NDA and GCF.  
• Inception report to ensure any necessary adjustments to bring the project up to date;  
• Quarterly progress reports;  
• Annual project performance reports; and  
• Annual financial reports on GCF grant and co- finance expenditures  
 
XV. Independent Evaluations  
 
222   To provide an external viewpoint on the progress of the project and the achievement of its objectives, and in line with the A MA signed with the GCF, 
two independent project evaluations will be conducted by FAO –  interim and final evaluations. In line with the FAO policy on evaluations, the interim 
(midterm) and final evaluations may be either managed by FAO Office of Evaluation or decentralized (under the responsibility of decentralized offices). In 
both cases , they will be carried out by a team of independent external consultants. The evaluations will also be conducted in line with the GCF Evaluation 
Policy, and will follow the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework, namely containing an assessment of the paradigm sh ift potential and its 
enabling en vironment.


---
*Page 88*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
   
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1.  Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Possible low demand due to  changes in market trends  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  High 
Description  
223 Both domestic and international agricultural/food market trends evolve at a relatively fast speed. At the same 
time, the trend towards quality and safe food and agricultural products will likely remain as the country transitions into 
a middle- income economy. Even though a thorough market vulnerability/demand assessment has been done as part 
of this project preparation, the market opportunities could shift towards other crops or the  demand relative to the 
production and value addition capacity of the project’s beneficiaries  could reduce to impact the project . 
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
224 The project has identified  and assessed  several  agricultural certification  programs  already operational in the 
country with the premium earning capacity as indicative market vehicles for instigating transformational change towards climate- resilient agriculture. S pecific certification programs will only be selected at the inception stage.  This 
is because market trends and baseline capacities and conditions are likely to evolve further between the project formulation and inception stages . Therefore, the selection of specific market instruments  will be made after updating 
market opportunities and baselines under Output 2.1. as part of the roadmap development and business planning. Similarly, the choice of specific target beneficiary groups, in addition to the potential champion groups already identified through the project formulation phase, will also be completed at that stage. This is an adaptive management 
strategy to address this risk and ensure that the project identifies the most suitable and timely match between the 
certification programs and target crops based on the most up- to-date assessment of opportunities and baselines. In 
coordination with the EEs and private sector collaborators, the project will keep a close watch on these shifts 
throughout the project to take adaptive action as required.   
 
Selected Risk Factor 2: Limited i ntersectoral coordination and institutional arrangements  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
225 Weak coordination and cooperation between sectoral ministries at the national and sub -national levels and 
between public and private actors pose a risk operationally and technically to undermine the project's effort to 
strengthen its beneficiary groups' resilience to climate change through the value chain approach. The success of this 
approach is contingent upon effective coordination and collaboration between actors along the target value chains.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
226 While having the SPC with members from the critical sectoral ministries, NGOs, and private sector at the project 
oversight level ensures effective coordination and collaboration between these actors, the project will include specific activities to mitigate this risk, including:   
• Intersectoral capacity building ( e.g., training and awareness -raising ) activities at the national and sub-
national levels to reduce sectorally siloed thinking and practices ;  
• Data- sharing agreements (i.e., Activities 1.1.2 and 3.2.1) and MoUs (i.e., Activity 3.1.2) to establish formal 
coordination and collaboration mechanisms ; and 
• Activity 3.1.3 to promote improved intersectoral coordination through NCSD, NCDD, and provincial 
forums.   
Selected Risk Factor 3:  Limited s takeholder engagement  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Low High 
Description  
227 The likelihood of limited engagement by the beneficiary groups, including ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, FAs and unions, 
and the private actors, in the project activities is limited given the extensive consultations with the potential beneficiary  
groups and various needs assessments during the formulation stage. However, related to the first risk identified above, shifts in market trends, opportunities, and baseline capacities and conditions could affect their engagement level.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)


---
*Page 89*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
   
 228 In coordination with the NDA and the existing workstreams of the EEs and private sector collaborators, FAO will 
keep all potential beneficiary groups updated between the project submission and inception and monitor changes in 
market trends, opportunities, and baseline capacities and conditions. During and after the inception, the project will 
continue to ensure effective two- way communications with beneficiary groups to ensure their interests and needs are 
well reflected in the project activities for effective stakeholder engagement.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4: Procurement delays under FARM operationalization (Output 2.2)  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
229 In establishing FARM Trust Funds under Output 2.2, the project plans to handle roughly 124 procurement cases 
in the first 3 years. Prompt completion of this operation is imperative for the FARM Trust Funds to provide timely and 
effective finance  for implementing the beneficiary groups' business plans; however, prolonged procurement 
procedures or failure to sign contracts for delivery the goods and infrastructure assets would cause significant delays.   
Mitigation Measure(s)  
230 The project will esta blish a dedicated team of national and international procurement experts to execute this task. 
The PMU procurement officer may also support this team when and as appropriate. FAO, together with the PMU, will closely monitor the progress of this task and apply adaptive measures to remove any operational glitches while at the same time applying FAO's standards and international best practices to ensure the quality and speed of this activity.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5: Social and environmental impacts  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Reputational  Low High 
Description  
231 Several social and environmental risks have been identified in the ESMF (Section G below  and Annex 6 ). These 
risks can negatively impact the livelihoods of the project's beneficiaries and the surrounding environment they depend 
on for its various agroecological functions . Especially,  since the project employs the value chain approach, combined 
with FARM (i.e., a a climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism), as its primary vehicle of transformation, the 
project must ensure that its effort towards the market and financial inclusion does not result in the opposite effect on 
specific groups of people and individuals, especially women and other  socially excluded  minorities.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
232 As described in the next section, the project's ESMF (Annex 6) lays out the overall strategies to mitigate/minimize 
any harmful social and environmental risks. In particular, while also enhancing positive impact, the gender action plan 
(Annex 8), stakeholder engagement plan (Annex 7), and Indigenous Peoples Plan (also under Annex 6) will prescribe 
specific measures  to address negative impact.  These strategies and efforts will be further contextualized into ESMPs 
at the project's inception to implement targeted mitigation actions.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 7: Global Pandemic  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Other  Medium  High 
Description  
233 The full effects and severity of the  COVID -19 crisis on  Cambodia are not yet known. However, what is clear is 
that this global pandemic has had both immediate to mid- term effects on livelihoods and food security and has deeply 
affected society and the country's economic systems as the pandemic continues to require restrictions for the 
movement of people and goods. These restrictions have caused significant delays and posed many logistical 
difficulties during the project formulation phase. If continued or a new pandemic emerged, these restrictions could have a considerable bearing on the implementation of the project both operationally and technically.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s)  
234 FAO, as the AE, will take stock of the lessons learned and best practices from the current pandemic in the country, 
regionally, and globally to establish enhanced protocols and procedures for operating under similar restrictions to 
ensure its business continuity. FAO will coordinate and work closely with the NDA and co- EEs to ensure that they 
have comparable protocols and procedures in place. FAO will use the PSC as the primary platform for coordination 
and collaboration for this purpose.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 8: Financial Irregularities  
Category  Probability  Impact  
ML/FT  Low High


---
*Page 90*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
   
 Description  
235 This risk is considered low to medium. Cambodia is listed by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as a 
jurisdiction with strategic deficiencies in its international anti- money laundering and combatting the financing of 
terrorism and proliferation (AML/CFT) standards. FAO as the AE is committed to mitigating this risk through several 
measures.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
236 FAO confirms that:   
• the project activities will  not be conducted in any jurisdiction which is subject to or affected by United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) resolutions.   
• No individual or entity that is listed on any UN Security Council sanctions list, including the UN Consolidated 
Sanctions list will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty, 
implementer, or benefi ciary.  
• The project will distribute directly to beneficiaries agricultural assets through the FARM. FAO's Manual 
Section 503 on Asset Management, including sub- sections on asset disposal and transfer to financial 
beneficiaries, will guide beneficiary select ion, legal agreement, and asset transfer processes and procedures 
to prevent fraudulent and illegal practices, including money -laundering and terrorist financing.  
 
237 FAO will follow the findings and recommendations of the HACT micro assessment on the co- EE (i.e., MoE and 
MAFF) to establish appropriate fiduciary management and control measures to ensure that materials or technology 
procured under this project are used only for the purposes intended and are not diverted or misused for unauthorized, improper or illicit purposes. As an additional measure, its institutional and project -
level grievance redress 
mechanisms, corporate policies on fraud and other corrupt practices, FAO Vendor Sanctions Policy (Admin circular 
2014/27), FAO Whistleblower Protection Policy  (Admin Circular 2011/05) and others listed here: 
http://intranet.fao.org/departments/oig/investigations/ including those of the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) will 
be in place to address this risk.  
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS   
G.1.  Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
238 The Environmental and Social Management Framework (Annex 6) identifies the proposed project as Category 
B, which suggests that the project contains activities with potential limited adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts that individually or cumulatively, are few, generally site- specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed 
through mitigation measures.  
 
239 The following summary highlights a few notable risks that may have potential diverse environmental and social 
impacts, which will require specific mitigation plans.  
 
 High risk linked to the undertaking of project activities within Community Protected Areas (CPAs) (less than 10,000 ha) and Community Forest Areas (CFAs) located within National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.  
 Moderate risk linked to the transport and provision of seeds and planting materials for both agricultural and forest enrichment planting as well as the establishment of planted forest s. – based on support to the provision 
of improved planting stock to agricultural cooperatives as well as work to rehabilitate Community Protected 
Areas (CPAs) (less than 10,000 ha) and Community Forest Areas (CFAs)  
 All other risks are identified as low, as the project will seek to improve activities linked to agriculture and land 
management across the target landscapes through adoption of improved practices and provision of improved support and enabling environment and thus will reduce environmental and social risk areas below business -
as-usual  levels even where linked to a risk area.  
 
240 Further information on the risk areas identified and assessed as well as responses to them is also provided in 
the table below, which follows the FAO Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) while also linking these with the IFC Performance Standards, which the GCF provisionally adopted. The project’s risk management approach will also be based around FAO’s three- phase approach of identifying activities, screening, and developing management plans 
(i.e., Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)). While the ESMF outlines the overall risk mitigation framework, more detailed assessments and ESMPs will be prepared at the activity level once specific beneficiary 
groups, locations, and standards are identified at the project inception stage.


---
*Page 91*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
   
 Table 17: Risk Assessment Matrix  
FAO Safeguard  Safeguard 
Triggered?  Justification and mitigating actions  
FAO ESS1: Natural 
Resource Management  
 
IFC PS 1. Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts  No The proj ect promotes sustainable land management to prevent or minimize land degradation through erosion 
control, integrated nutrient management, management and restoration of soil, water, and biological resources, and maintenance of ecosystem services in close consultation with local land users.  
 The project will also support improved information management and access to finance to support enhanced technologies to improve the efficiency of and reduce impacts of irrigation (including solar irrigation systems and smart irrigation systems (e.g., drip irrigation and ponds as well as rice -fish systems)) and water 
management systems within production areas (with all systems utilizing dams under 5 m and not targeting areas over 20 ha). All sub- activities proposed that will include specific irrigation actions will also be subject 
to a risk screening prior to implementation.  
 The project will promote the clarification of usufruct and tenure rights of farmers and households to reduce investment risks in adopting climate- resilient and sustainable technologies and practices. It will not result in 
a negative change to existing legitimate tenure rights, focusing on locally -based agricultural cooperatives 
and community -based protected areas and forest management groups who already have defined user rights 
but may require support in enhancing documentation of these. Any action to revise or change rights will be subject to a full screening and management plan.  
 The project will also work towards strengthening adaptive capacities and resilience of target communities through enhanced information on climate impacts and weather events, as well as improved skills and 
agricultural practices to respond to changes in climate. Through support to improved land- use practices and 
enrichment planting and regeneration, the project will also focus on enhancing GHG removals and reducing emissions.   
The exclusion list in Annex 6 further ensures the project will not finance activities deemed ´high risk.´  
FAO ESS2: Biodiversity, 
Ecosystems and Natural Habitats  
And  
IFC PS 6. Biodiversi ty 
conservation and sustainable management of living natural resources  Yes The project will work with 14 CPAs, with three of these located in National Parks, five within Wildlife 
Sanctuaries, and two within the Northern Biodiversity Conservation Corridor. While actions within protected areas are considered high risk, a number of mitigating factors exist that help to reduce the risk of implementation within these areas. These include:  
• Agricultural production systems in PAs in Cambodia pre- date the establishment of the PAs and the 
project and are permitted to remain but not expand under Cambodian law.  
• Proposed activities target both enhancing the sustainability of agricultural production systems and, as such, will support capacity building and support to reduce impacts of agriculture within these areas and the rehabilitation of degraded areas (using native and locally relevant species) of the conservation areas that have previously been impacted by shifting agriculture and or logging.   
A full ESMP will be prepared for the target areas once specific locations and support actions have been agreed upon during the implementation phase, with this being used to update and strengthen the propos ed 
management responses.  
FAO ESS 3: Plant Genetic 
Resources for Food and Agriculture  
And  
IFC PS 6. Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of 
living natural resources  Yes The project will not introduce crops and varieties that are previously  not grown in the project area or similar 
areas within Cambodia.  
 
The project will support the rehabilitation of CPA and CFAs with a focus on planting native species as well as small -scale sustainable agroforestry (e.g., woodlots and home- garden systems) to meet the growing 
household demand for fuelwood and wood products. The project will adopt and closely follow the national REDD+ safeguards framework and other relevant national legislation, including CPA and CFA guidelines, to 
minimize social an d environmental risks through forest restoration activities.  
FAO ESS 4: Animal -
Livestock and Aquatic – Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 
And  
IFC PS 6. Biodiversity 
conservation and 
sustainable management of 
living natural resources  No The projec t will not introduce non -native or non -locally adapted species, breeds, genotypes, or other genetic 
material to the project areas. The project’s support to improved use of fish ponds linked to rice irrigation will also help to enhance water management systems and reduce environmental impacts while contributing to local food security.  
ESS 5: Pest and Pesticide 
Management  
And  
 
PS 3. Resource efficiency 
and pollution prevention  No The project will promote the adoption of GI, CamGAP, HACCP, and organic certi fication compliant production 
and processing and IPM. The project will thus develop guidelines and support to farmers to reduce and improve use of pesticides based on international and local best practices. The project will not result in the procurement or  direct supply of pesticides or agrochemicals.


---
*Page 92*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
   
 FAO ESS 6: Involuntary 
Resettlement and 
Displacement  
And  
IFC PS 5. Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement  No The project will not allow any involuntary resettlement or displacement.  
 
Although no negative impacts are foreseen in proposed actions, an ESMP will be prepared once specific project intervention sites have been identified. This will ensure that no groups will be displaced from their lands or have tenure rights impacted. These risks are not anticipated as the project design focuses on working with established agricultural cooperatives and unions that have clear and identified production areas 
as well as with CPAs and CFAs that have demarcated areas and legally recognized rights of use.  
FAO ESS 7: Decent Work  
 And  
 IFC PS 2. Labor and working conditions  
 And  
IFC PS 4. Community health, safety, and security  No The project will not result in the direct employment of staff. Employment opportunities will likely be generated 
as a byproduct of the project, but not directly.  
 
The project will work within value chains and landscapes that include subsistence producers and those other 
vulnerable informal agricultural workers, as well as in situations where youth work mostly as unpaid contributing family workers may occur. Project activities are focused on improving the nature of work within these value chains , including action to help reduce incidence of SEAH and GBV  and support to enhanced 
uptake of sustainable and high- value approaches and standards that, in some cases, include improved 
working requirements and skillsets while enhanced value chain performance will also help to reduce youth migration through improved options for employment. All target groups are also established ACs, FAs, PGs, and unions that have been operational through cooperative arrangements and, as such, provide a level of equity across their production systems.
 The ESMF provides an assessment of these issues as well as key 
mitigation measures to address what risks are present.   
 However, due to the risks of action within the value chain, a full ESMP will be prepared once specific beneficiary groups, locations, and target certification systems are agreed upon. This ESMP will also review engagement in PAs as noted under FAO ESS 2 above.  
 
Occupational health and safety (OHS) activities will be taken seriously for the implementation of  the project 
activities. While most project activities are low risk, forestry and agricultural activities have a level or pre-
existing risk. Project interventions will not increase these risks with improved training and support on 
CamGAP as well as progress towards global certification standards also seen as helping to reduce these 
risks – as such, this is seen as a low risk.  
FAO ESS 8: Gender 
Equality  
And  
IFC PS 1. Assessment and management of environmental and social 
risks and impacts  No The project wi ll support gender empowerment and equality and has been designed to take into account the 
specific needs and priorities of women and girls and address key considerations linked to SEAH and GBV 
what action can be taken to address these. A gender assessment and Gender Action Plan have been developed for the project (Annex 8) that provides specific actions to be undertaken and an allocated budget. .  
ESS 9: Indigenous peoples 
and cultural heritage 
And  
IFC PS 7. Indigenous peoples (IP)  
IFC PS 8. Cultural heritage  Yes There are over 40,000 people  across 10 IP groups identified as living within the target provinces based on 
the 2019 survey information. While the specific project locations have yet to be identified and thus their impact on these IP groups cannot yet be fully assessed, a baseline Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has been developed for the project that provides the framework to guide action with further development of a specific IPP for target areas being required during project inception should they include IP groups.  
 
The plan also notes and ensures that efforts will be made to respect, include and promote IP issues during project implementation, including their right to Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) during the final 
identifica tion of intervention sites.  
 
241 Based on this screening process through the ESMF, specific risk -based ESMPs at the activity level will be 
prepared to establish specific management plans. Monitoring and reporting on the overall plan and specific sub- plans 
will be coordinated through the PMU and National Safeguard Specialist, described in Section B.4. This also includes 
the project's Grievance and Redress mechanism that will integrate closely with those existing in Cambodia, including the REDD+ system (see Annexes 6 and 7).  
 
242 This approach and assessment are based on a combination of FAO and GCF global best practice and guidance 
frameworks as well as extensive stakeholder consultation that occurred during project formulation, including specific 
ESMF and Gender assessment missions carried out to target areas.  
G.2.  Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
243 Gender Analysis.  An analysis of the gender -related aspects of the project was also undertaken during the 
development of the ESMF and Gender Action Plan (GAP) (Annex 8). The analysis shows that equality is provided for in various forms in legal documents, including the Constitution, specific policies and strategies such as the Five- Year 
Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Women's Affair as well as sector strategies and legislation, including the Climate Change Strategic Plan for Gender and Climate Change (2013- 2023), the Land Law and the Marriage and Family Law 
(2001) and the Forest Law (2001) as well as guidance on community forestry and community protected areas


---
*Page 93*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
   
 establishment which both encourage the participation of women i n management committees and their consideration 
in planning. The country is also an active signatory of several key international treaties, including the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the UN Declaration on the Right of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. National and sub-
national institutions have 
implemented their respective gender action plan adopting national strategies to accelerate gender equality in all sectors.  
 244 While t hese frameworks have supported significant progress towards gender equity, there remain a number of 
challenges both across the country and within the proposed target landscapes and value chains. The assessment has looked at these through three main areas linked to project activities – these are:  
 
i. gender gap in access to market opportunity, technology, climate risk info, skill, and credit;  
ii. gender gap in use and control over resources and assets that includes CPA, CF, AC, FA, and value chain;  
iii. gender gap in capacity development and participation  
iv. gender gap in decision making  
 
245 This information has then been utilized to identify key actions within the gender action plan.  
 
246 Gender Action Plan. A detailed GAP has been prepared for the project (Annex 8). The GAP focuses on 
supporting a fully gender -sensitive and gender -positive approach throughout the project's activity areas. It is fully 
supportive of the existing project design, which considers gender elements and prioritizes support to a number of women’s agricultural cooperatives and associations. The GAP's broader approach is based around strengthening the application and further practical development of the Government’s policies and strategies to promote gender equality as well as working with the specific needs and conditions identified with the target value chains and benefici ary groups, 
including CPAs and CFs. It also supports actions to strengthen the coordination and implementation of the project’s 
outcomes among stakeholders, specifically Outcome 3, to help ensure a more effective and gender -appropriate 
process by helping to strengthen partnerships between community, private sector, and government actors. Key 
practical tools within the GAP include – ensuring new tools, systems, and support mechanisms are developed through 
a gender lens so that they are able to effectively support different groups, ensuring gender balance in participation in project activities and within the project’s own operating structures (trainings, FARM arrangements, membership of decision -making bodies) and supporting project activities to help enact change in key institutional structures (decision 
making bodies, legislation, and regulation) so that these may become more gender -sensitive and promote better 
inclusion.  
G.3.  Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
247 As indicated above, FAO, as the AE for this proposed project, will assume fiduciary and procurement 
responsibility effectively and professionally by adhering to international standards and good practices, reflected in 
relevant FAO rules and regulations, and to the terms of FAO’s Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) with the GCF. 
FAO will ensure timely disbursement of the GCF funds and accounting and production of financial reports on the use 
of funds.  
 
248 This responsibility will also encompass financial management and procurement performed by the GDLC/MoE 
and GDA/MAFF as the project’s co- EEs. FAO has completed micro assessments of GDLC/MoE and GDA/MAFF 
under the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT), providing a common framework for UN agencies’ cash 
transf er to government and non- government partners. Both co- EEs have scored overall a moderate risk rating. 
Following the reports' specific findings and recommendations, FAO will set clear parameters for each co- EE to 
manage particular risks in its financial management and procurement of goods and services , as defined through 
HACT assessment mitigation measures as well as FAO’s OPIM Risk Mitigation and Assurance Plan (RMAP) will be 
used as a tool to monitor the risk management and mitigation during the project.  In this respect, the project will place 
a dedicated Operations Coordinator (see Table 11, Section B.4) in each co- EE to support them and ensure financial 
and operational alignment between the PMU and co- EEs.  
 
249 Further to approval of the project by the GCF, FAO will disseminate its Operations Manual and Procurement 
Procedure Manual among the members of the PMU, PSC, co- EEs, core team of area experts, and other relevant 
stakeholders before the start of the project's activities. During the project's implementation, FAO will also build the 
institutional capacities of the PMU, PSC, and co- EEs in strategic planning, technical control, financial management, 
and procurement.  
 
250 Direct procurement by FAO will be done in accordance with its Manual Section on "Procurement  of Goods, Works, 
and Services." To sub -contract the delivery of specific activities through IPs (see Section B.4) using Letters of


---
*Page 94*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
   
 Agreement, FAO operates in accordance with its Manual Section on "Letters of Agreement." Such services are 
managed under the FAO Procurement Service, which provides policy and operational support to FAO offices and 
staff undertaking these activities to ensure the Organization procures goods, works, and services based on "Best 
Value for Money" principles.  
 
251 Financial management and procurement by the two co- EEs will be overseen and supervised by the FAO -GCF 
project supervision team (see Section B.4) as per the FAO Operational Partners Implementation Modality (OPIM). 
The FAO -GCF project supervision team will undertake regular supe rvision missions and recruit a qualified, 
internationally recognized auditing firm to perform frequent spot checks and audits to ensure financial management 
and procurement by the PMU and co- EEs are being conducted in line with agreed standards and practic es. The 
frequency of such spot checks will be twice per year, while audhits will be performed once per year. This will be 
governed by the agreement signed between FAO and the co- EEs before the project becomes operational.  It should 
be noted that for the identified Operational Partners (OPs)(i.e., the co- EEs) under the FAO rules and procedures, 
budgets to be transferred to the OPs and results associated are non- binding and may change due to FAO internal 
partnership and agreement procedures which have not yet been concluded at the time of this FP submission. The AE 
fee will bear the costs of assuming the audit and spot check responsibility.  
 
252 As specified under Section E.7, the PMU will produce quarterly and annual reports on finances and purchases 
for the PSC’s review. FAO and the PSC will jointly monitor the progress towards the project objectives in financial and 
operational terms.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
 
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
 
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 95*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
   
  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no -objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2  Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable  
☒ Annex 3  Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4  Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5  Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided ) 
☒ Annex 6  E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)  
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ 
 Annex 7  Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8  Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9  Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 10  Procurement plan (temp late provided)  
☒ Annex 11  Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 12  AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 13  Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 14  Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 15  Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 16  Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 17  Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 18 Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up- scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19  Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20  First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21  Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☐ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)26 
☐ Annex X  Other references


---
*Page 96*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
   
 * Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
References  
ADB (2016) Preliminary Flood and Drought Risk Assessment Report . 
ASPIRE (2019) Agriculture Policy Research Study: Modernizing Agriculture Sector: Long- Term Vision and 
Policy Orientation.  
Bernacki, S. et al.  (2018) Restoration Opportunities Assessment Methodology for Landscape Restoration in 
Kampong Th om, Preah Vihear, and Siem Reap, Cambodia. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.  
Branca, G. and Mazzoli, E. (2022) ‘Annex 3 Economic and Financial Analysis: Public -Social- Private 
Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin of 
Cambodia (PEARL)’.  
Bunthoeun, C. (2019) ‘Japanese firm to build cashew processing plant The Toyota Tundra Police Say To Carry 
This’, Khmer Times , pp. 1 –8. Available at: https://www.khmertimeskh.com/50654880/japanese- firm-to-build -
cashew -processi ng-plant/.  
Burn, J. -M. et al.  (2018) Feasibility Study of Agricultural Certification Schemes in the Northern Tonle Sap Basin. 
Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia.  
Burn, J. -M. (2018) SUPPORT INNOVATIVE MARKET LINKAGES IN CAMBODIAN RICE VALUE CHAIN . 
CIB & CSEZB (no date) National Council for Sustainable Development Kingdom of Cambodia.  
Cramb, R., Sareth, C. and Vuthy, T. (2020) White Gold: The commercialisation of rice farming in the lower 
mekong basin, White Gold: T in the Lower Mekong Basinhe Commercialisation of Rice Farming. doi: 
10.1007/978- 981-15-0998- 8. 
Duong, G. and Khin, P. (2016) The Vegetable Sector in Cambodia: A pro- poor policy study to address risk and 
vulnerability of smallholders in Cambodia. Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia.  
FAO (2016) The Vegetabl e Sector in Cambodia.  
FAO (2021) Global outlook on climate services in agriculture: INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES TO BRIDGE THE LAST MILE GAP, Global outlook on climate services in agriculture. doi: 10.4060/cb6941en.  
FAO (2022) Climate Change Rationale: Public -Social- Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound Agriculture 
and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin of Cambodia (PEARL) . Rome.  
Forest Trends (2015) Conversion Timber, Forest Monitoring, and Land- Use Governance in Cambodia.  
Available at: http://forest -trends.org/releases/uploads/Cambodia Concessions Report small size.pdf.  
GSSD (2017) National Adaptation Plan Process in Cambodia. Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia.  
ICEM (2020) Feasibility Report: Value Driven Consumer -based Mechanisms for Cambodia.  
IFC (2010) Prospects for Cambodia ’s Cashew Sub- sector . 
IFC (2015) Cambodia Rice: Export Potential and Strategies . 
Kula, O., Turner, C. and Sar, S. (2015) An Analysis of Three Commodity Value Chains in Cambodia.  
MAFF (2013) Plan of Action for Disaster Risk Reduction in Agriculture 2014-  2018 . 
MAFF (2016) ‘Cambodia Climate Change Priorities Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Sector 2014- 2018’, (March).  
MAFF (2017) MAFF Annual Report 2016- 17. 
MAFF, CARD and FAO (2020) Rapid Assessment of COVID -19 Impact on Agriculture and Food Security in 
Cambodia. Phnom Penh.  
Mazzoli, E. and Branca, G. (2022) IMPACT OF ECONOMIC GROWTH ON THE ENVIRONMENT : 
ASSESSMENT OF A CLIMATE MITIGATION PROJECT IN . 
MoE (2006) ‘National Adaptation Programme of Action to Climate Change (NAPA )’, Environment , (October).  
MoE (2015) Cambodia’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution Cambodia.  
MoE (2020a) Cambodia’s Country Programme for the Green Climate Fund.  
MoE (2020b) Cambodia’ s updated nationally determined contribution, General Secretariat of the National 
Council for Sustainable Development, MoE . 
MoEF (2016) Report on Climate Public Expenditure Review 2013- 2014.  
NCCC (2014) Cambodia climate change strategic plan 2014 –  2023.  
Ngon, T. S. (2019) ‘Food safety draft law under study’, Khmer Times , 3 May, pp. 1– 7. Available at: 
https://www.khmertimeskh.com/600367/food- safety -draft-law-under -study/.  
NIS (2015) Census of Agriculture of the Kingdom of Cambodia 2013. Available at: 
http://www.nis.gov.kh/nis/CAC2013/CAC_2013_Final_Report_En.pdf.  
NIS (2019) ‘Cambodia Inter -Censal Agriculture Survey 2019 ( CIAS19 ) Final Report’.  
NIS (2020) Cambodia Inter -censal Agriculture Survey 2019 Selection of Thematic Maps . 
Oeurng, C. et al.  (2019) ‘Ass essing climate change impacts on river flows in the Tonle Sap Lake Basin, 
Cambodia’, Water (Switzerland) , 11(3). doi: 10.3390/w11030618.  
Rai, N. et al.  (2015a) Developing a National M&E Framework for Climate Change: Tracking Adaptation and 
 
26 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.


---
*Page 97*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
   
 Measuring Development (TAMD) in Cambodia.  
Rai, N. et al.  (2015b) National M&E Framework for Climate Change: Tracking Adaptation and Measuring 
Development (TAMD) in Cambodia. Available at: https://pubs.iied.org/10118iied.  
ResponsAbility Investments AG (2015) Organic rice from Cambodia.  
RGC (2014) National Strategic Development Plan 2014- 2018.  
RGC (2017) National REDD+ Strategy 2017- 2026. The Kingdom of Cambodia. Available at: 
https://redd.unfccc.int/files/20180813_national_redd__strategy_cambodia.pdf.  
RGC (2018a) ‘Cambodia Sustainable Development Goal (2016- 2030)’, Journal of Chemical Information and 
Modeling, 53(9), pp. 1689– 1699.  
RGC (2018b) National strategic development plan 2019- 2023.  
RGC (2020a) FIRST BIENNIAL UPDATE REPORT OF THE KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA TO THE UNITED 
NATIONS The National Council for Sustainable Development The Kingdom of Cambodia.  
RGC (2020b) IDPoor . Available at: https://www.idpoor.gov.kh/ (Accessed: 13 July  2021).  
SARAN, S. (2017) Organic Farming of Rice in Cambodia.  
Sasaki, N. et al.  (2016) ‘Forest reference emission level and carbon sequestration in Cambodia’, Global 
Ecology and Conservation. Elsevier B.V., 7, pp. 82 –96. doi: 10.1016/j.gecco.2016.05.004.  
Seak, S. (2022) National agrometeorological services and pest and disease early warning in Asia and the 
Pacific . doi: 10.4060/cb6537en.  
Thoeun, H. C. (2015) ‘Observed and projected changes in temperature and rainfall in Cambodia’, Weather and 
Climate Extremes . Elsevier, 7, pp. 61– 71. doi: 10.1016/j.wace.2015.02.001.  
UNDESA (2018) The Least Developed Country Category : 2018 Country Snapshots . Available at: 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp- content/uploads/sites/45/Snapshots2018.pdf.  
Vannak, C. (2019) ‘Mangoes next in line for China export : Ministry’, Khmer Times , 11 September, pp. 1 –8. 
WB (2015) CAMBODIAN AGRICULTURE IN TRANSITION: OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS . 
WB (2019) GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$) | Data. Available at: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD?locations=KH&view=chart (Accessed: 9 July 2019).


---
*Page 98*
---

 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 99*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information  
Project  or programme title  Public -Social -Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound 
Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap 
Basin (PEARL)  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific location (s) 
of project  or target country 
or location (s) of programme  Northern Tonle Sap Basin, Cambodia  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Thursday, September 15, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Khmer  
Explanation on language  Khmer is the official language of Cambodia and the 
language understandable to affected  peoples/stakeholders .  
Link to disclosure  English:   
https://www.fao.org/3/cc1967en/cc1967en.pdf  
 
Khmer :  
https://www.fao.org/3/cc1967km/cc1967km.pdf   
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
 
FAO Representation in Cambodia website  (in English and 
Khmer) : 
https://www.fao.org/cambodia/resources/publications/e
n/  
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management  Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Thursday, September 15, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and Khmer


---
*Page 100*
---

Explanation on language  Khmer is the official language of Cambodia and the 
language understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders . 
Link to disclosure  English:   
https://www.fao.org/3/cc1967en/cc1967en.pdf  
 
Khmer :  
https://www.fao.org/3/cc1967km/cc1967km.pdf   
Other link(s)  FAO disclosure portal:  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/  
 
FAO Representation in Cambodia website  (in English and 
Khmer) : 
https://www.fao.org/cambodia/resources/publications/e
n/  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a C ategory B 
project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Environmental and Social Management  System  (ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement 
Policy Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP  Framework (if 
applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Friday, 10 February 2023  
Place  
 A. District Governor Offices of the 24 target districts  
Province  District  Commune  Village  Location  
Kampong 
Thom  Kampong 
Svay  Prey Preal Trapaing 
Russey  
District governor office   Prasat 
Ballangk  Salavisay  Salavisay  
Prasat 
Sambo  Sambo  Sambo  
Sandan  Sandan  Sandan


---
*Page 101*
---

Santuk  Taing 
Krasaing  Thor 
Maneath  
Stueng 
Saen  Kampong Roteh  Kampong Thom  Kampon
g Thom Provincial Hall 
Office  
Oddar Meanche
y Anlong 
Veaeng  Anlong Veaeng  Ou 
Chenhchie
n District 
governor 
office   Banteay 
Ampil  Kouk Mon  Kouk Mon  
Samraong  Ou Smach  Kiri 
Mongkol  Oddar 
Meanche
y 
Provinci
al Hall 
Office  
Trapeang 
Prasat  Trapeang 
Prasat  Trapeang 
Prasat  
District 
governor 
office   
Preah 
Vihear  Chey Saen  S'Ang  S'Ang  
Chhaeb  Chhaeb  Chhaeb  
Choam 
Ksant  Choam 
Ksant  Choam 
Ksant  
Kuleaen  Kuleaen  Kuleaen  
Preah Vihear  Tbaeng Meanchey  Neak Banh Tek Preah 
Vihear Provinci
al Hall 
Office  
Rovieng  Robieb  Tang Trak  
District 
governor 
office   Sangkum 
Thmei  Chamraeu
n Tbaeng  
Tbaeng 
Mean 
Chey  Pra Meru  Pra Meru  
Siem 
Reap  Banteay 
Srei  Khnar 
Sanday  Banteay 
Srey  
Chi 
Kraeng  Kampong 
Khdey  Kampong 
Khdey  
Prasat 
Bakong  Bakong  Roluos 
Lech  
Siem 
Reap  Sangkat Slor Krom  Boeng Daun Pa  Siem 
Reap 
Provinci
al Hall 
Office  
Soutr 
Nikom  Dam Deik  Dam Deik  District 
governor 
office  Svay Leu  Svay Leu  Chup Krom  
 
B. 16 Community Protected Areas (CPA) and 4 
Community Forestry (CF)  
No CPA/CF Name  Location  
1 CPA -Kaki 
Brahoang Dang Kambet commune, Sandan 
District,


---
*Page 102*
---

(Boeng Per 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Kampong Thom  
2 CPA -Skor 
Krouch (Boeng 
Per Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Sandan commune and District, 
Kampong Thom  
3 CPA -Chhoam 
Thlork (Boeng  
Per Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Ngan commune, Sandan district, 
Kampong Thom  
4 CPA -Kbal Daun 
Krei (Prey Lang Biodiversity 
Conservation 
Corridor)  Mean Rith commune, Sandan 
district,  
Kampong Thom  
5 CF-Prey Tatei  
 Mean Rith commune, Sandan 
district, Kampong Thom  
6 CF-Prey 
O’Kranhoung  Mean Rith commune, Sandan 
district,  
Kampong Thom  
7 CF-O’Soam  Sala Visai commune, Prasat 
Balangk district, Kampong Thom  
8 CPA -Chup Tasok 
(Kulen National 
Park)  Khnang Phnom  commune, SvayLeu 
district, Siem Reap  
9 CPA -Prey Thom 
Anlung Thom 
(Kulen National 
Park)  Khnang Phnom Commune, Svay 
Leu District, Siem Reap  
10 CPA -Prey Thom 
Popel (Kulen 
National Park)  Khnang Phnom Commune, Svay 
Leu District, Siem Reap  
11 CPA/CF -Sang 
Sahakum Rokha Vorn (Sang 
Rokha Vorn 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Trapeang Tav and Koun Kriel 
Communes, Anlong Veng district, Oddar Meanchey  
12 CPA/CF -Ratanak 
Rokha (Sang Rokha Vorn 
Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Samrong and Koun Kriel 
communes, Samrong municipality 
[district], Oddar Meanchey  
13 CPA/CF -Samaki 
(Northern Biodiversity 
Conservation 
Corridor)  Trapeang Tav Commune, Anlong 
Veng district, Oddar Meanchey  
14 CPA/CF -
Thmorda O'Toek 
Khiev (Northern 
Biodiversity Conservation 
Corridor)  Ph’av commune, Trapeang Prasat 
district, Oddar Meanchey  
15 CPA -Akphivoat 
Prey Veng 
(Kulen Promtep Srayang commune, Kulen district, 
Preah Vihear


---
*Page 103*
---

Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  
16 CPA -Sambo 
Akphivoat 
(Kulen Promtep Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Srayang commune, Kulen district, 
Preah Vihear  
17 CPA -Pourieng 
(Kulen Promtep  
Wildlife 
Sanctuary)  Kulen Chheung commune, Kulen 
district, Preah Vihear  
18 CF-Prey Mloung  
 Srayang commune, Kulen district, 
Preah Vihear  
19 CF-Koh Ker Rik 
Chamroeun  Srayang commune, Kulen district, 
Preah Vihear  
20 CF-Prey Pou Mek 
Boun  Kulen Chheung commune, Kulen 
district, Preah Vihear  
 
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Monday, March 13, 2023  
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 104*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add.01 /Rev.01  
Page 104 
 
  
Secretariat ’s assessment of FP 199 
Proposal name:  Public -Social -Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound 
Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin 
(PEARL)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Cambodia  
Project/programme size:  Small 
 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat  
1. The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths  Points of caution  
An innovative climate -resilient agricultural asset 
acquisition mechanism that can give 
empowerment and ownership to farmers, while 
incentivizing them to take collective actions in 
business implementation.   
2. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum IX , titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.  
II. Summary of the Secretariat ’s assessment  
2.1 Project background  
3. The Northern Tonle Sap Basin (NTSB) is one of Cambodia ’s most important agricultural 
regions , yet it is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The Basin has experienc ed 
annual temperature increase by 0.8 °C since 1950 , while precipitation is showing a general 
decreasing trend, with large inter -annual variability , particularly in the rainy season. The  region 
is identified as one of the regions in the country most vulnerable to floods and droughts, which 
are expected to occur more frequently with increased intensity due to climate change.  These 
anticipated climate change impacts will affect the key crops in NTSB, mainly cashew, mango, 
rice and vegetables.  
4. The Public -Social -Private Partnerships for Ecologically  Sound Agriculture and Resilient 
Livelihood in Northern  Tonle Sap Basin (PEARL) project aims to tackle these identified impacts 
of climate change. The project  proposes to transform the curre nt agricultural production and 
processing practices in the NTSB into climate -resilient, high -value and sustainable produc tion . 
The project will achieve this objective through three interlinked outcomes , namely: ( 1) climate 
foresight; ( 2) market incentives; and ( 3) enabling environment.  The project will directly 
support 450,000 smallholder farmers and other actors involved in  local value chains, reducing


---
*Page 105*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add.01 /Rev.01  
Page 105 
 
  
the number of food insecure farmers by 60 per cent compared with the baseline, and restoring 
7,600 hectares of tropical rainforests with improved ecosystems and ecosystem services.  
5. The total project financing is USD  42,850,231 , with a request for GCF grants of USD 
36,231,981 . Co-financing will be provided by Cambodia’s Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries (MAFF) of USD 3,690,000 as an in-kind contribution, with USD 2,258,250 as an in-kind 
contribution by the  Ministry of Environment (MoE)  and USD 670,000 as in -kind contribution by 
the accredited e ntity  (AE) , the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 
The project is submitted under environmental and social safeguards C ategory B. 
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Outcome  1: Farmers ’ capacities are enhanced to manage climate impacts and related risks (total 
cost: USD 3.4  million; GCF cost: USD 3 million).  
6. The first outcome will deliver an improved system of agrometeorological advisor y 
services that are tailored to the project ’s target crops in seven critical areas.  As analy sed in the 
feasibility study, lack of reliable crop- specific agrometeorological forecasting and advisory 
services is one of the key barriers to carry ing out adequat e on -farm planning for farmers in the 
NTSB. As previous  projects  have worked on installing hydrometeorological stations in the 
country, the proposed activities to reach the “last  mile” would be timely interventions to expand 
and scale up the existing efforts o n climate information coverage.  
7. The outcome will bring available Internet of Things technologies for data collection, 
processing and dissemination, including through the use of apps for mobile devices . While the 
outcome  includes annual tr aining for extension officers from various related government 
departments, it would be critical to provide targeted training support to farmers in the use and 
application of the generated data, and to provide advisory services for their actual on -farm 
plan ning. The outcome proposes to undertake this training through Farmer Field Schools and 
peer -to-peer knowledge -sharing . The proposed approach is deemed appropriate because the AE 
has built experience of taking the same approach elsewhere in Cambodia, and the farmers  on 
the ground are best placed to share their expert knowledge among each other. 
Outcome  2: Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, 
particularly vulnerable women farmers, is increased through market incentives that promote 
climate -resilient, higher -value, diversified and sustainable production and processing (total cost: 
USD 33.5  million; GCF cost: USD 28.2  million)  
8. Outcome  2 comprise s four outputs: (1) increased premium market access through 
agricultural certification program mes; (2) increased access to climate -resilient and high -value 
technologies; (3) demons tration and promotion of climate -resilient, high -value and sustainable 
agricultural practices and technologies; and (4) i mproved agroecological functions at the 
landscape level. The outcome  will target in total 124 agricultural cooperatives, farmers 
associations, producer groups  and agricultural unions, translating to roughly 24,000 farmers 
and other local value chain actors involved in the target value chains over the project lifetime. 
9. The key result of this outcome is to facilitate access for smallh older farmers  to premium 
markets for cashew, mango, organic rice and vegetables. The project proposes to achieve this 
outcome through supporting farmers to obtain certification1 for organic production and 
processing. The project will also support farmers to develop sustainable business plans .  
10. Another key result under this outcome is providing  agricultural infrastructure to 
farmers through a climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism, namely Farmer -led 
Agricultural Resilience  Mechanism (FARM) . Under FARM, GCF grants will be used to support 
 
1 For example, CamGAP, PGS, GI, SRP, ISO2200 and HACCP.


---
*Page 106*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add.01 /Rev.01  
Page 106 
 
  
two areas of work: capacity- building for agricultural cooperatives, farmers associations and 
producer groups, to develop their financial literacy, entrepreneurial skills and business 
planning; the second area is to support the establishment of trust funds with local financial 
institutions to operationalize their business plans.  
11. Extensive discussions have been held between the AE and the Secretariat on the 
mechanics of the FARM model, focusing on bringing in innovation through financial 
sustainability while keeping the model within the AE ’s accreditation boundary. Initially, a  
revolving type of fund was discussed and designed with a repayment arrangement in exchange 
for asset ownership for recipient farmers, so that collected repayment can be recycled to support additional beneficiaries. That design had to be modified to fit the pr oject financial 
structure within the AE ’s accreditation limit : instead of a revolving fund, beneficiaries will set 
up their own trust funds with available local microfinance institutions , collect their own fees 
and run the trust funds for continuous implem entation of their business plans. Although 
monitoring of such trust funds would be more challenging, as there are about 124 trust funds 
that will be set up, this arrangement is deemed to be the most feasible option under the AE’ s 
accreditation scope.  
12. Overa ll, the outcome is critical to smallholder farmers  to advance from their baseline to 
climate -resilient agriculture with value addition with greater opportunities to access premium 
markets. GCF ’s concessionality is justified , considering that the proposed activities are currently 
not deemed to be bankable by the private sector. NTSB is characterized by its high poverty rate  
and vulnerability  to climate change , and its agricultural produce is losing value due to the lack of 
proper agricultural production and processing infrastructure. With technical assistance support 
being provided to the Agriculture and Rural Development Bank of Cambodia (ARDB), it is expected that the proposed project’ s activities will strengthen ARDB in wid ening its agricultural 
lending capability and that ARDB will take on the project activity by the end of the project (i.e. 
lending for procuring agricultural infrastructure).  
Outcome  3: Regulatory and institutional frameworks and capacities for climate -resilient 
agricultural certification, cross -sectoral coordination for increased PSPPs and smallholder 
financing, and climate -informed investment support are strengthened.  (total cost: USD 2.8  million; 
GCF cost : USD 2.2 million).  
13. The final outcome  will establish a clearing house  to enable and foster innovation and 
knowledge -sharing , which will be a cornerstone of the exit strategy and will drive the process of 
scaling up into other areas of the country through sharing lessons learned. The outcome  will 
introduce various training  event s, data collection and dissemination through various 
communication channels.  
14. Knowledge products and experience gained during the project will help to foster future 
investments, and an innovative financial strategy will be developed to continue the work  after 
the project ends, and so that the strategy can adapt and cater for future challenges while scaling 
up sustainable innovation and investments.  
Project management (total cost: USD 2.0 million; GCF cost: USD 1.7  million ).  
15. The GCF portion of the project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees.  
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 Impact potential                                       Scale:  N/A


---
*Page 107*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 107 
 
  
16. The project addresses the climate -induced challenges in one of the most vulnerable 
parts of Cambodia by boosting agriculture entrepreneurship and innovation across key value 
chains as well as increasing the resilience of poor and vulnerable farming communities.  
17. The project will achieve th ese milestones by directly transforming the livelihoods of 
450,000 direct beneficiaries and foster their access to finance, innovation and knowledge in the 
agriculture sector.  
18. These transformations of the local food systems and their restructured farming systems 
will generate an opportunity to reach long -term sustainability in the target region and to scale 
up the interventions across similar landscapes and vulnerable areas of the country, primarily in 
the north -east  and south -west . 
19. Through the proposed FA RM model t he project will empower local communities to be 
able to transform their local food systems and be able to cope with future shocks and climate impacts,  and continue to diversify and generate entrepreneurship and boost micro, small and 
medium- sized  enterprises .  
3.2 Paradigm  shift potential                 Scale: N/A  
20. The project proposes three innovative outcomes  that , when implemented jointly , will 
offer a strong long -lasting opportunity to keep transforming the local food systems by targeting 
the curr ent climate challenges and continu ing to boost rural entrepreneurship while paving the 
way for the target region to become a diverse and economic ally sustainable local food system 
with clear scope for replicability in the country and in surrounding countri es.  
21. The targeted value chains offer a unique opportunity to further involve communities at 
the centre of their production and marketing while strengthening food security, job creation 
and sustainable management of natural resources .  
22. The project proposes the FARM model that helps fill a current challenging gap in the 
region, providing access to finance and boosting micro -credit and future investments in the 
value chains and future niche products and markets. T hrough training and enhanced capacity, 
the targeted farmers will be able to take full ownership of how to transform their current 
farming systems and choose the necessary areas for investments and how to invest, not only 
during the project but through the established FARM model with long -term prosp ects.  
23. The proposed FARM model is unique and offers a practical yet innovative approach to 
reach ing the poorest and most vulnerable groups in Cambodia , and provide s them with key 
opportunities to design solid environmental micro investments  in the local fo od systems with 
long -term sustainable results to follow.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                   Scale:  N/A   
24. The project will deliver important solutions to boost socioeconomic benefits through the 
proposed FARM model and  will provid e access to finance and foster innovative investments. 
These will help to generate jobs, stimulate local growth and boost markets and development of 
new and improved commodities, and processing and storage , as well as generate numerous 
benefits for the target beneficiaries and  indirect beneficiaries.  
25. The project will support the design and implementation of innovative farming systems 
that will manage natural resources more sustainabl y, decrease the pressure on forests , and 
reduce water consumption and usage for rice production.


---
*Page 108*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 108 
 
  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                      Scale:  N/A   
26. The project aims at supporting vulnerable community groups in north -west  Cambodia , 
where livelihoods depend on the success and sustainability of local food systems.  
27. Through the three innovative outcomes and proposed activities the project will be able 
to lift the communities out of the poverty challenges they currently face  and support them t o 
develop and increase resilient practices to cope with current and future climate shocks and 
impacts,  and to boost their local food systems to provide opportunities to continue diversifying 
and reducing risks of food insecurity by establishing food systems  and farming practices  with 
innovative and strong species mixes.  
3.5 Country ownership                 Scale: N/A  
28. The north -west is an important region for food production in Cambodia but also one of 
the most climate vulnerable regions and the region with the country’s highest poverty levels. 
The nationally determined contribution , as well as national strategies and plans in the 
agriculture sector , have identified the need to transform the local food systems and provide 
stronger , more -resilient solutions for t he region to transform itself into a resilient and strong 
food system.  
29. ARDB will play a crucial role in implementing the project and in guaranteeing access to 
finance to community groups during the project and in the long term by acting as the pathway, 
knowledge hub and platform to ensure that farmers can successful ly transform their food 
systems.  
30. Country ownership is fully embedded into all aspects of the project and the three 
outcomes , and is one of the cornerstones of  successful implementation of the p roject. 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                     Scale: N/A  
31. The project will work with the farming communities in one of the key food -producing 
areas of the country. The project offers a unique opportunity to boost and reinvent the local 
food system s to become more diverse through local micro  investments along the supply chains,  
and by continuing to identify opportunities to boost the quality of commodities through better 
processing and storage as well strong involvement  of the local and international private sector.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards   
32. Project Brief . The project aims to enhance the climate change resilience of smallholder 
farmers and local commun ities in the Northern Tonle Sap Basin (NTSB) of Cambodia by 
increasing their access to the premium market segments while using their improved market 
access to incentivize their transition to climate -resilient practices, mainly through effective 
public -social -private partnerships (PSPP). Among the project’s co -benefits include improved 
soil quality through better residue management, enhanced agroecological conditions and 
ecosystem services through better processing and postharvest quality control and forest 
protection and restoration activities in the catchment areas.  
33. Environmental and social risk category. The AE has assigned the project an 
environmental and social (E&S) risk category of Category B based on its screening of the 
project's activities. The Secr etariat agrees with this categorization given that actual ground


---
*Page 109*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 109 
 
  
interventions are small scale and spread out and are intended to be ecologically sound and 
sustainable. The risk category is also within the AE’s environmental and social risk accreditation 
level. The environmental and social risks for activities involving restoration works and 
agricultural production will be "moderate" through careful selection of Community Protected 
Areas (CPA) and Community Forest Areas (CFA) sites, and the application of p roven best 
practices (such as the Restoration Opportunities Assessment Methodology, ROAM) among 
others, and the screening and exclusion of high -risk activities (through the adoption of an 
Exclusion List). Overall, the residual environmental and social risk s and impacts are highly 
localized and limited in footprint, largely reversible, and can be readily addressed using recognized standard management practices.  
34. Safeguard s Instrument.  The AE has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF is the appropriate instrument for this project as 
site-specific production activities/value chain investment plans under Farmer -led Agricultural 
Resilience Mechanism (FA RM), and the watershed restoration works will have to be identified 
and developed through participatory processes with the beneficiaries during project 
implementation. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared once 
the activity an d site -specific risks and impacts are identified.  
35. Compliance with the GCF Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) standards. 
The paragraphs below describe the project’s compliance with the GCF’s ESS standards:  
36. ESS1 (Assessment and Management of Environme ntal and Social Risks and 
Impacts).  The ESMF provides a general assessment of the E&S risks and potential impacts of 
the project and sets out the procedures for assessing and managing the risks and impacts of the various site -specific interventions which w ill still be identified and developed with the 
beneficiaries as part of the project implementation. The ESMF provided information about the 
baseline conditions of the physical environment (i.e., climate, geology, and soil), biodiversity, 
forest, land use, protected areas, agriculture, and water resources, poverty, and indigenous 
groups. The ESMF also describes the process for assessing and managing the E&S impacts and 
risks of individual project activities or sub -activities. The process consists of three (3 ) main 
steps: (1) activity identification; (2) E&S screening; and (3) preparation, implementation, and monitoring of the environmental and social management plan (ESMP).  
37. ESS2 (Labour and Working Conditions). The ESMF indicated that the project will not 
involve direct hiring of workers. Nevertheless, depending on the place and types of work in the 
farm and value chain enterprises and in the restoration works supported under the project, 
workers may be exposed to occupational health and safety (OHS) hazards. For instance, 
workers in watershed restoration and protected areas may be exposed to hazards associated 
with working in mountainous terrain, steep slopes, marshes, hazards from wild and poisonous 
animals, parasites, and vector -borne diseases. Workers in co nstruction activities may also be 
exposed to construction - related OHS hazards while workers in the processing sector may be 
exposed to various other hazards such as repetitive motion, sharp tools, high temperature, among others. As these labor and working  conditions issues will be activity -specific, the scope of 
the E&S screening and assessment and the formulation of relevant management measures will 
have to be tailored during project implementation. The project will also conduct training and 
support activ ities to trainers and  extension staff supporting the implementation of activities 
that will include information on OHS good practices, protocols and equipment. The project will 
likewise provide training to project beneficiaries involved in the establishme nt of forest 
rehabilitation, agroforestry systems, and sustainable agricultural activities. Moreover, the project will ensure that labour and working conditions will not include harmful child labour, 
involuntary or compulsory labour, or significant occupat ional health and safety issues.  
38. ESS3 (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Control). The project is not expected to use 
large amounts of fuel, electricity, or raw materials and instead promote water conservation/ 
management practices, pollution control and in vest in energy -efficient facilities (e.g. solar -


---
*Page 110*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 110 
 
  
powered storage facilities). The project is expected to promote climate -smart irrigation systems 
(e.g. drip irrigation and ponds) and develop schedules to optimize water resources. The 
sustainable land manage ment practices that will be promoted by the project are also envisaged 
to prevent or minimize land degradation, through soil erosion control strategies. The risk 
related to pesticides use is also low given that the project will promote integrated pest 
mana gement and will not result in the procurement or direct supply of pesticides or 
agrochemicals. The project will also develop guidelines and provide support to farmers to reduce their pre -existing use of pesticides based on international and local best practices. Good 
practices will also be integrated in the production/processing activities through the promotion 
of agricultural certification programs such as the Organic Certification, the Cambodia Good 
Agricultural Practices (CamGAP), the International Organ ization for Standardization (ISO) 
22000 on Food Safety Management System, and Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) principles.  
39. ESS4 (Community Health, Safety and Security).  The project will involve members of 
the communities working and living ne ar or within the CPAs and CFAs. Hence, communities 
could be exposed to health and safety hazards from the project’s activities such as in the restoration works in these areas, the construction of small infrastructure and enterprise 
facilities, and in the p roduction and/or operation of the facilities. These could include 
construction related hazards at construction sites, pesticide residue poisoning (in instances where pesticides may still be used), and accidental exposure to unexploded ordnance (UXO). 
While  the ESMF outlines the overall risk mitigation framework, more detailed assessments and 
preparation of the ESMPs will be done at the activity level once the specific beneficiary groups and locations are identified and should ensure that the above issues ar e identified and provided 
with appropriate mitigation measures, as needed.  
40. ESS5 (Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement).  The ESMF rules out any 
involuntary resettlement or displacement impacts from the project since it “will not support 
activities that result in a negative change to existing legitimate tenure rights" and "will not 
involve the involuntary resettlement of households or activities that may involve physical 
displacement...” or “…economic and occupational displacement…” as provided in t he project 
exclusion list.  The project will also collaborate with agricultural cooperatives and unions that have clear and identified production areas and work in CPAs and CFAs that have adequate 
demarcations and legal recognitions. Nevertheless, an ESMP will be prepared once specific 
interventions and sites have been identified to ensure that no groups will be displaced from 
their lands or have their tenure rights negatively affected. The project will also adhere to the 
principles of the Voluntary Guideli nes on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, 
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security (VGGT) to clarify usufruct and 
tenurial rights.  
41. ESS6 (Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources). The project is designed to promote ecologically sound management of land 
resources. The project will also exclude the following activities: (a) activities that result in 
increases in areas under cultivation within protected areas; (b) activities that support the direct 
supply of agrochemicals; (c) activities that support the clearing of native forests; and (e) 
activities that use non -locally adapted species. In addition, a Biodiversity Management 
Framework (BMF) has been provided in the ESMF that describes how  the target CPAs and CFAs 
will be carefully selected in terms of management capacity, clear delineation of boundaries, and 
approved management plans, among others. It has also identified three main risks namely: (1) 
expansion of production areas in the CPA /CFA; (2) site -specific effects of agricultural activities; 
and (3) introduction of alien invasive species; and outlined how these will be addressed in the 
project, including subjecting each intervention to E&S screening using FAO's Screening 
Checklist. Ba sed on the result of the screening, an ESMP will be developed and will be monitored 
throughout the implementation phase.


---
*Page 111*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 111 
 
  
42. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7 Indigenous peoples . At this stage specific 
activities have not been determined, so the AE has i ncluded an indigenous peoples and social 
inclusion planning framework (IPSIPF) within the e nvironment and s ocial management 
framework. The IPSIPF includes some general baseline information for indigenous peoples that 
are present in the project target provi nces, analysis of the legal framework, and an identification 
of potential project impacts. These impacts are summarized in s ection 8 of the funding proposal 
as risks from (1) exacerbating inequalities, (2) exclusion and (3) pressure on indigenous 
peoples ’ lands. Information is included in the IPSIPF to guide the process of screening and 
preparation of an indigenous peoples  plan in the future, if this were needed, as well as guidance 
on meaningful consultations and f ree, prior and informed consent (FPIC) du ring project 
implementation. In line with their roles and functions, the Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group is 
available to provide advice to the accredited entity and executing entities.  
43. ESS8 (Cultural Heritage). The ESMF addresses potential project impac ts on cultural 
heritage within the context of indigenous peoples as regards ensuring that associated traditional knowledge are respected and benefits accruing from their use is shared. However, 
given the countries richness in cultural and historical herita ge, the screening of the activities 
under the project should ensure that information about the location and status of both tangible 
and intangible cultural heritage with respect to the target areas should be assessed in terms 
potentially being adversely af fected by project activities. Management measures including 
avoidance through eligibility screening or excluding support for developments near such sites, as well as the involvement of experts and authorities apart from communities in formulating 
any cultu ral heritage conservation plans, if necessary, should also be considered.  
44. Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH). The ESMF has 
identified potential gender -based violence (GBV) and SEAH risks linked to the overall nature of 
the proj ect and its implementation. That is while enhancing the adaptive capacity of smallholder 
farmers and other local value chain actors, it may also create power imbalances across project 
personal and between project personnel and the target beneficiaries, specifically when project 
beneficiaries accessing project activities, mobility of women and other beneficiaries increases, 
and contract farming agreements are created. The ESMF presents the common risks and 
mitigation measures to address the potential SEAH ri sks and impacts of the project. It also 
requires that specific SEAH risks be screened and addressed at sub -activity level guided by AE’s 
new framework for environmental and social management (FESM) which has explicit reference 
to SEAH. While the ESMF presents key mitigation measures on SEAH including to ensure the 
SEAH risks screening and mitigation of sub -activities, with focus on measures to reduce 
vulnerability and provide training to participants on SEAH risks; enhance awareness on gender 
roles; and imp rove access for SEAH and GBV related grievances in the grievance redress 
mechanism (GRM) established at the project level, there is no specific procedure nor referral pathways to assure survivor -centred and gender -responsive redress on SEAH incorporated in  
the project GRM and nor the GRM of FAO representation in Cambodia. As specific operational 
guidance on SEAH is being developed at the AE’s corporate level following to the recent 
adoption of its FESM, the AE is recommended to specify specific SEAH procedu res in the project 
GRM and make AE’s GRM at the institutional available to address SEAH in addition to other 
environmental and social impacts of the proposed activities.  
45. Implementation Arrangements. The ESMF discussed the implementation 
arrangements for the project which involve the establishment of a Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) comprising of representatives from relevant ministries, to be co -chaired by FAO and 
MAFF. The PSC's main responsibility  will be to provide strategic guidance and support 
coordination among government institutions and will provide general oversight for the 
implementation of the project. A PMU will also be established and will be responsible for, 
among others, ensuring the i mplementation and monitoring of day- to-day activities, 
implementing effective stakeholder engagement, and safeguarding the project and its 
beneficiaries. A National Safeguard Specialist to lead the project’s effort in mitigating negative


---
*Page 112*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 112 
 
  
social and environ mental impacts will also be engaged and Safeguard Officers will act as a focal 
points to receive grievances or feedback through various modalities. A workplan and budget for 
the ESMF implementation including the preparation of relevant management plans is likewise 
provided.  
46. Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure. The project proposal 
development was informed by several studies which had strong stakeholder engagements. 
During implementation, regular stakeholder consultations will continue to info rm stakeholders 
of the project´s progress, support capacity building and awareness raising, validate findings and present results, among other topics. At the project level, FAO and MAFF will provide regular 
updates (in Khmer and English) on the progress of  the project through their website and other 
media including print, radio, reports, and presentations. Stakeholders will also be invited to 
participate in PSC meetings. The project puts strong emphasis on participatory approach and all 
ground activities will be developed with the beneficiaries through consultations and workshops.  
47. Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).  A project -level grievance system has been 
devised which will be integrated within the Grievance Review Mechanism of the FAO in 
Cambodia. Grievan ces will first be resolved at the PMU level with the project safeguards officer 
operating as the focal point for receiving, compiling, screening, recording, and working with 
other PMU members to address the grievance. The grievance will also feature multip le means of 
lodging complaints (e.g., email, internet messaging, phone, in writing, as well as in person). The Safeguards Officer and PMU will also provide regular (quarterly) updates to the Country Officer 
Grievance Review Operator of all grievances raise d and actions taken to resolve them. 
Stakeholders will also have access to the AE's grievance redress mechanism through the Office of the Inspector -General (OIG) which has the mandate to independently review the complaints 
that cannot be resolved at the pr oject level.  In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the 
GCF indigenous peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made.  
4.2 Gender policy  
48. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender acti on plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the GCF Updated Gender P olicy.  
49. The gender assessment describes the gender issues at the country level and indicates 
the existence of the national policy environment, supportive legislation and practices to 
promote gender equality , and  describes Cambodia ’s commitment to gender equality a nd 
women ’s empowerment. The Government of Cambodia is committed to gender equality and 
women ’s empowerment. This is guaranteed through the 1993 Cambodian Constitution and 
through initiatives such as the ratification of the convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against W omen (CEDAW) ; the national strategic plan that places great 
importance to strengthening women ’s empowerment and gender equality while also supporting 
addressing the impacts of climate change on women; and the Cambodia Climate Change  
Strategic Plan 2014 –2023 , which aims to reduce gender vulnerability and risks from climate 
change impacts as well as  to ensure services address the needs of local communities, ethnic 
minorities and other vulnerable groups. The second Gender and Climate Ch ange Action Plan 
2019 –2023, and a master plan for gender and climate change (2018 –2030) are being used as a 
roadmap for formulating the projects and program mes by t he Ministry of Women ’s Affairs 
(MoWA) . MoWA  takes the role of promoting gender equality and women ’s empowerment in all 
sectors;  at the same time all sectors, non -government institutions and the private sector are 
expected to advance the commitments expressed in the national strategic plan. MoWA ’s Gender 
and Climate Change Committee is developing the capacity of relevant institution s at all levels on 
gender mainstreaming with reference to climate change.


---
*Page 113*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 113 
 
  
50. The assessment was undertaken through a desk review and stakeholder consultations. 
It confirms the disproportionate impacts of climate change on Cambodian women farmers. It 
attributes this to various issues , such as limited knowledge of and access to climate -related 
information ; limited access to extension services, finance, productive resources and 
technologies ; lower rates of literacy and mobility among women ; lower levels of involvement in 
decision -making by women;  and limited access to training. W omen are less mobile , and  
women ’s representation in decision -making remains low especially in rural areas and more 
pronounced for women of ethnic minority. The m ajority of Cambodian rural women work in 
agriculture on their own land or carry out unpaid agriculture work . Skewed norms (i.e. practices 
that are not necessarily equally shared ) allow limited space for the act ive engagement of women 
in various tasks. In addition, evidence from the stakeholder consultation indicated that women 
do not feel confident and capable of being leaders of a gricultural cooperative s owing to lack of 
capacity and their busy daily household and care work, while in general, men are considered 
appropriated for th at task due to their higher chances of mobility , access to information and so 
on. However, the fact that w omen ’s access is limited does not take away from the critical role 
and contribu tions that women play within their societies. They play a crucial role in the 
agriculture sector, particularly in food and nutrition security for their households . They also 
play a central role in wholesale and retail marketing of agriculture products; as collectors, 
and/or local traders ; and as the principal retail sellers, working in markets at the local, 
provincial and national level , with active role s in input supply agrobusiness es, and providing 
information and knowledge on the use of inputs, fertilize rs and pesticides.  
51. Based on the initial assessment conducted , the AE has developed a gender action plan 
with activities aimed at addressing the various challenges women face in the production and 
marketing of agricultural produce. The gender action plan i ncludes baseline, indicators, targets, 
timelines, gender expert and budgets. However, many of the interventions currently included in 
the gender action plan are broad , so more specific and targeted interventions will be developed 
as part of project implementation once specific target agricultural cooperatives and  community 
protected areas  (CPAs ) have been identified. A ctions within the broad framework include 
ensuring access to agrometeorological services to women; ensuring access to information and 
market opportunities; introducing changes in the agricultural system to address the concerns 
and issues of women ; and introduc ing an approach (known as the  “W+ standard ”) which would 
provide a mechanism for the project to monitor impact and a means by which beneficiaries can 
gain increased market access as well as direct financial support. The standard will ensure 
appropriate measures are in place to address  violence against women and sexual exploitation, 
abuse and harassment  issues , such as the grievance and redress mechanisms focusing on 
prevention and redress. The actions listed in the assessment are well aligned with the 
Cambodian Climate C hange Action P lan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, the n ational 
strategy , and the second Gender and Climate Change A ction Plan. 
52. A revised gender action plan, based on further assessment s, is expected to be submitted 
to the S ecretariat. The refinement of the gender action plan will enable the AE to identify 
activities that will make it possible to address specific and structural gender issues,  such as ( but 
not limited to ) access to mobile phone s, finance, technologies, leadership skills as well as actions 
towards f emale -headed households and other vulnerable groups in the communities of focus. 
The Secretariat also expects lessons to be gathered and documented on the application, benefits 
and challenges of the W+ approach that is being explored in the project.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment (medium risk)   
53. The total financing is USD 42,850,231 of which USD 36,231,981 is GCF grant financed. 
Co-financing is in -kind totalling USD 6,618,250: of which USD 3,690,000 by the Government of


---
*Page 114*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 114 
 
  
Cambodia through the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries (‘’MAFF’’) , of which USD 
2,258,250 by the Government of Cambodia through the Ministry of Environment (‘’MoE’’), and 
of which USD 670,000 by the Accredited entity. We note that co -financing ratio is 0.18 to 1 and 
15% of total financing.   
4.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity ’s capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk)  
54. FAO will act in its capacity as the Accredited Entity, and also executing entity for some of 
the activities.   FAO is the agency in the United Nations system that is specifically involved in 
agriculture issues. FAO has an extensive track record in the implementation of projects in 
developing countries including GCF projects.  
55. MAFF and MoE demonstrate experience as executing entities in another GCF project 
currently under implementation (FP076 |  Climate -Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector 
Project) and FAO has performed a capacity assessment carried out under the United Nations on 
these two entities and the results did not include any major issues in relation to executing 
entity’s ability to  carry out the project activities.  
4.3.3.  Project -specific execution risks ( medium risk)    
56. Most of the co -financing will be ultimately provided by the Government of Cambodia 
through MAFF and MoE, and is entirely in- kind which may involve technical and operational  
risks. In-kind contribution is in form of staff time, office space and facilities, noting that in -kind 
contribution will be finalized in the final business plan in agreement with local financial institutions.  
57. Under outcome  2: Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain 
actors, particularly vulnerable women farmers, is increased through market incentives that 
promote climate -resilient, higher -value, diversified, and sustainable production and processing, 
as of now there is a lack of clarity on legal and contractual arrangements to be entered into for 
execution of the Farmer -led Agricultural Resilience Mechanism (FARM) mechanism.  
4.3.4.  Project viability and concessionality  
58. Under outcome  2: Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other  local value chain 
actors, particularly vulnerable women farmers, is increased through market incentives that 
promote climate -resilient, higher -value, diversified, and sustainable production and processing, 
while the amount is small (1% of GCF funding) the  project activities will finance feasibility study 
and capacity building to help insurance providers better understand climate risks and develop 
more tailored insurance products. As a result, the project will ultimately benefit farmers: it will 
increase fa rmers’ awareness of the available financial support products to improve their 
financial access within the insurance scheme called National Crop Insurance Program, led by MAFF. GCF concessionality is justified as proposed adaptation actions are not deemed t o be 
bankable by the private sector at the current stage, as well as the project will not finance the insurance scheme.     
4.3.5.  GCF portfolio concentration risk ( low risk)   
59. If approved, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in terms of 
result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6.  Compliance risk (high risk)


---
*Page 115*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add.01 /Rev.01  
Page 115 
 
  
60. The beneficiary country, Cambodia, is not subject to United Nations Security Council 
(UNSC) restrictive measures. The AE has confirmed that project activities and its related 
counterparties do not pose significant risks with respect to UNSC sanctions. The AE, along with 
MAFF and MoE , will act as the e xecuting entity (EE). The AE has performed a comprehensive 
capacity assessment on these two ministries and  the results did not include any major issues in 
relation to the EEs’ ability to carry out the planned activities. C onsidering all capacity -related 
matters, the AE assessed its exposure to both EEs at a moderate risk. The project contains an outcom e of dir ectly distributing agricultural assets to beneficiaries through FARM . The AE 
confirmed that , for this specific element, the provisions in its manual (including those  on 
beneficiary selection and asset transfer) will be implemented to mitigate potential mis use of 
assets. In addition, the AE’s Whistleblower Protection Policy will be also implemented to allow 
for prompt reporting of any irregularities that may occur throughout the funded activity. The AE 
has assessed that money laundering, terrorist financing, prohibited practices and sanctions-
related risks are of low probability and high impact. The Office of Risk Management and 
Compliance ( ORMC )/Compliance Team notes that Cambodia continues to be listed by the 
Financial Action Task Force as a jurisdiction with strategic deficiencies in its anti -money -
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism ( AML/CFT ) regime  and,  taking into 
consideration this high exposure, it is recommended that enhanced due diligence and controls 
be embedded in all project activ ities. The ORMC/Compliance Team has conducted a review of 
the project in accordance with relevant GCF Board -approved policies and does not find any 
material issue or deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of ‘ high ” 
and has no objection to this r equest proceeding to the next steps for processing.  
4.3.7.  Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment  
Overall project/programme Medium 
Accredited entity /executing entity  capability to implement the 
project/programme  Low 
Project- specific execution  Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low  
Compliance  High 
4.4 Fiduciary  
61. FAO will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for this project and also act as the Co -EE.  
62. FAO will be responsible for the overall management of the project, including i) all 
aspects of project appraisal; (ii) administrative, financial and technical oversig ht and 
supervision throughout project implementation; (iii) ensuring funds are effectively managed to deliver results and achieve objectives; (iv) ensuring the quality of project monitoring, as well as 
the timeliness and quality of reporting to the GCF; and (v) project closure and evaluation. FAO 
will ensure these responsibilities in accordance with the detailed provisions outlined in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between FAO and GCF. 
63. Royal Government of Cambodia will serve as the Executing Entit y (EE), acting through 
MAFF (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries) and MoE (Ministry of Environment) and


---
*Page 116*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 116 
 
  
FAO to deliver the project activities. FAO as co -EE will ensure strong country -driven executing 
on project activities and execute the in -kind contribution from the FAO (LDCF and IW/GEC) and 
will also oversee the execution of selected activities funded by GCF proceeds based on its 
comparative advantages.  
64. A dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established and hosted by MAFF in 
Cambo dia. The PMU will be functional for the entire duration of the project. The PMU will 
coordinate directly with EEs and project stakeholders and will be responsible for providing support to the execution of day -to-day activities the technical quality of the project outputs, 
effective stakeholder engagement.  
65. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic guidance of 
the project. The PSC will be co -chaired by MAFF and FAO -Cambodia.  
66. FAO will execute the project in accordance with F AO rules, regulations, policies and 
procedures. Financial management and procurement under this project will be guided by 
relevant FAO rules and regulations as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master 
Agreement (AMA) signed between FAO and GCF.  
67. Financial management and procurement by the two co -EEs will be overseen and 
supervised by the FAO -GCF project supervision team as per the FAO Operational Partners 
Implementation Modality (OPIM). The FAO- GCF project supervision team will undertake regular 
supervision missions and recruit a qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm to perform 
frequent spot checks and audits to ensure financial management and procurement by the PMU and co -EEs are being conducted in line with agreed standards and prac tices. The AE fee will 
bear the costs of assuming the audit and spot check responsibility.  
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
68. The theory of change (TOC) clearly defines the project goal. The TOC’s goal statement 
and the various levels of the results chain have been improved to more clearly articulate how 
the proposal’s climate -resilient value chain approach and premium price market approach will 
address adaptation needs. The assumptions capture the most important factors underlying the 
achievement of results including how to sustain the benefits of the project. The barriers have 
been articulated and linked with the relevant set of activities to which each of these barriers 
respond.   
69. The logframe  has been designed with relevant details, as per the GCF Integrated Results 
Management Framework (IRMF). The selected GCF result areas and IRMF indicators will enable the project to capture and report on mitigation and adaptation outcomes. In particular, t he 
project will report against Core Indicator 2 Direct and indirect beneficiaries reached; 
Supplementary 2.1: Beneficiaries (female/male) adopting improved and/or new climate -
resilient livelihood options; Supplementary 2.2: Beneficiaries (female/male) with  improved 
food security; and Supplementary 4.1 Hectares of terrestrial forest, terrestrial non -forest, 
freshwater and coastal marine areas brought under restoration and/or improved ecosystems.   
70. At the GCF outcome level, the AE has strengthened the means o f verification for the 
IRMF indicators, as the Secretariat suggested. The means of verification combine where possible primary and secondary data sources, and qualitative and quantitative sources.   
71. At the output level, the logframe has been streamlined to  focus only on output -level 
indicators, while the rest will be monitored at the activities level.    
72. A few baseline figures at the outcome and output levels will be updated after a planned 
baseline study during the inception phase. Across the results level,  the AE will need to ensure 
that the unit of analysis that it will specify for the baseline will match the unit of analysis of the mid -term and final targets.


---
*Page 117*
---

 
GCF/B.3 5/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 117 
 
  
73. The M&E Plan in Annex 11 sets out the data collection techniques for each indicator as 
well as the indicative budget for each. The AE provided the required clarifications related to the 
total costs for independent evaluative data collection costs, which have been consequently  
reflected on a separate budget line in Annex 4 Project Budget in line with  the requirements of 
the Evaluation Policy.   
74. The Evaluation Plan will deliver an interim evaluation and a final evaluation consistent 
with the requirements of the Monitoring and Accountability Framework and Evaluation Policy. 
The separate provision for ev aluative data collection activities in the project budget and the 
increased evaluation budget as part of the AE fees  provide the assurance that the AE will deliver 
interim and final evaluations that meet the requirements of the IRMF and the Evaluation Policy.   
4.6 Legal assessment  
75. The accreditation master agreement was signed with the AE , and it became effective on 
4 October 2018.  
76. The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and that it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
77. The proposed project will be implemented in Cambodia, a country in which GCF is not 
provid ed with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed. A draft privileges and immunities agreement and background note were sent to the 
national designated authority of Cambodia  by courier and received by the national designated 
authority  on 30 August 2017. Negotiations on the draft privileges and immunities agreement 
have not commenced.  
78. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mec hanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities.  Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the GCF are 
made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.  
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
79. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is 
made  subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 118*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 118 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  of 
FP199 
Proposal name:  Public -Social -Private partnership s for Ecologically -Sound 
Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap 
Basin (PEARL)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Cambodia  
Project/programme size:  Small  
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
1.1 Impact potential                 Scale:  Low  
1. Cambodia is located in South East Asia, on the south -western part of the Indo -China 
peninsula . It is a low -lying country and rich in water resources. The country houses 
predominantly an agrarian society, owing to its ecological endowment. The country is served by 
the Mekong River, which supplie s freshwater, while the South East Asian monsoon brings in 
additional quantum of freshwater through its annual cycle. Although there exists a considerable 
temporal as well as spatial distribution of rainfall within Cambodia, the availability of 
freshwater help s sustain crop agriculture in the country.  
2. In recent times, Cambodia made great strides towards economic growth. Since 2004, the 
country’s gross national income (GNI) tripled to reach USD1,380 in 2018. Published literature 
suggests that much of this growth  may be attributed to export earnings, increased lending, 
public and private investments in various sectors, and favourable microeconomic policies. Agriculture sector is dominated by crop production. This sub -sector has experienced significant 
growth durin g 2004 -2012, mostly due to rapid expansion of area under cultivation. The 
expansion potential has reached almost a plateau starting 2013, which is why the growth rate in 
crop sub -sector declined with respect to that during 2004 -2012.  
3. Starting 2008- 2009, C ambodia has focused on greater value addition in crops. The 
country has started to move away from business -as-usual (BAU) rice production which was 
predominantly for local market, to find niche export market for aromatic rice, grown organically. The short -life BAU rice areas has started to transform into organic rice areas, the 
product being fragrant, lower yielding but capable of bringing home higher income for the farmers. In similar fashion, where environmental endowment is found fa vourable,  cashew is 
grown in orchards to catch international market. Mangoes are also being grown for export as 
well as for local markets, looking for organically produced special variety of mangoes with a 
premium price. Meanwhile, local hospitality industry placed much higher demands for premium 
quality organically grown vegetables, again the farmers moved away from rice based farming to 
respond to the growing niche markets for organically grown products to fetch premium price.   
4. The premium -priced aromatic rice found a readily available export market in China, the 
smallholder farmers found it relatively easy to cope with post -harvest of rice, even establishing 
value chain for aromatic rice, due to their millennia- old acquaintances involving rice farming. In 
terms of total produc tion, they accepted the apparent decline  in yield involving aromatic rice , 
while the transformation promised them greater economic returns due to achieving premium


---
*Page 119*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 119 
 
 
price. However, the farmers could not readily access the growing international market for 
cashew, due to lack of know -how, adoption of technology, inadequate investment and lack of 
proper value chain. Most of the cashew grown in Cambodia is sold at respective farm gates in 
bulk to traders, which eventually go to neighbouring countries, where bett er post -harvest 
facilities and value chains are established and the premium price is generally skimmed by the middle actors.   
5. There is no denying the fact that the GNI of the country has reached USD1,380 in 2018, 
but the country still belongs to the Least Developed Country (LDC) group. In 2009, the rate of 
poverty was 40 per cent, which has been brought down to 17.8 per cent in 2020. There exists a 
disparity between rural and urban poverty rates: the poverty rate in urban areas is 12.6 per 
cent while that the capital city Phnom Penh is only 4.2 per cent. The relatively higher rates of 
poverty in the rural areas may be attributed to high rates of engagement in crop agriculture, 
which offers employment to 60 per cent of the population living in rural areas. Ap art from rice, 
the country’s staple accounting for about 80 per cent of Cambodia’s crop production, there are other important crops: cassava, maize, soybean, mung bean and other crops. Cambodia is 
famous internationally for growing black pepper, grown most ly in the southern coastal areas.  
6. Cambodia is also vulnerable to climate change. There are changes in the climate system. 
The average surface temperature has risen by 0.8 °C between 1950 and present time. The most 
rapid rise has been recorded in the peak dr y season, while the slowest increase is recorded in 
the peak wet season. The average annual rainfall varies between 1,000 and 1,500 mm. The 
annual rainfall distribution brings in little rainfall during the long dry season.  
7. It is claimed that the micro -structure of rainfall pattern in Cambodia has been changed, 
which is exhibiting an early departure of the season resulting in extension of the dry period. 
short rainfall bursts due to intensification of rainfall episodes during peak rainfall months ( July -
September) and relatively lesser intensity during early parts of the rainy season. The funding proposal could not do justice to present meteorological analysis and evidence base to establish 
such claims . Despite the fact that the country has an offici al hydro -meteorological data 
repository, having long -term daily data sets concerning temperature and precipitation (i.e, 
rainfall). The funding proposal reportedly could not have access to such data and it resorted to citation of one article, which did not  utilize official observational data. Because of non -
availability of data, no significant temporal trend analysis regarding climatological phenomena could be presented. A vailable literature suggests that the country’s subtle changes in 
climatological param eters have already started to affect crop agriculture.  
8. According to inter -governmental panel on climate change (IPCC) , the dry season rainfall 
availability combined with rise in surface temperature will tend to increase seasonal aridity, which may be found  in an analysis involving evapo -transpiration. Although a shorter epoch of 
20 years was chosen wrongly in a bid to establish linkage with climate, the funding proposal presented an analysis involving Standardized Precipitation and Evapo -transpiration Index  
(SPEI)  to exhibit the presence of drought in Cambodia. High intensity rainfall during peak rainy 
season is likely to trigger both flooding and greater extent of sedimentation due to soil erosion, 
which might have significant detrimental effect on crop pro duction in the downstream areas.  
9. Apart from rainfall -related hazards, a rise in surface temperature is already found. 
Although the evidence base is extremely weak and not based on observation data, the surface warming has been found to increase the number of occurrences of reaching temperature 
thresholds  (such as number of days reaching temperature above 33, 35 or 36
°C). Depending on 
crop growth stages, temperatures above certain optimum threshold may cause problems in 
terms of pollination efficiency, water  transport ability, growth, wilting, etc. Eventually, crop 
yield is found to suffer due to such incidences.  
10. The projection of future climate with respect to baseline of 1980 -2005 is derived from 
Coupled Model Inter -comparison Project’s fifth stage experiment ( CMIP5 ) outputs resolved for


---
*Page 120*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 120 
 
 
near future timeline of 2011 -2040 using IPCC -promoted scenario of Representative 
Concentration Pathway 4.5 ( RCP4.5 ). The downscaling was done by Coordinated Regional 
Downscaling Experiment (CORDEX). Six CMIP5 models were run on a coarse domain (i.e, using 
0.5 degree grid size), however no attempt was taken for examining model efficiency by 
conducting model inter -compari son experiments. Since the projection on rainfall availability 
and moisture stress are the key indicators for defining the project, greater rigour in modelling 
exercise could have given reliable future climatology and impacts.  
11. The modelling outputs exhibi t much prominent rise in temperature, with more frequent 
exceedance of temperature and heat stress thresholds, although the extent of which is supposed 
to increase with much increased concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The 
annual average rainfall is expected to increase only slightly in near future (i.e, 2011- 2040) , 
however such a slight increase will not be able to dent rising evapo -transpiration , resulting in 
increased moisture stress.     
12. In terms of current crop agriculture, the model outputs indicate the following risks 
associated with climate change in the near future: (a) the heat stress due to ambient 
temperature might affect crop growth and yield potential, however the extent of which in near future will only be negligible ; (b) inc reased reference evapo -transpiration might induce water 
stress  for crops , especially for wet -season aromatic rice, only negligibly at the plant 
establishment stage of growth; however the growing evapo -transpiration before harvest might 
require supplementar y irrigation, as the available rainfall late in the season might not be 
appreciable; (c) increase in flooding, especially occasional flash flood due to sudden swelling of 
the Mekong River as a consequence of upstream rainfall runoff can have detrimental ef fects on 
crop yield; (d) the increase in surface temperature might require cool chain facilities for the 
vegetables and even for mango after summer harvests, which might reduce chance of early rotting of such perishable produces.  
13. The project aims at increasing crop -resilience and simultaneously addressing the issue 
of post -harvest and marketing by establishing value chains so that the smallholders , including 
women producers  get higher financial returns from premium products and the country can 
have greater  export earnings.  By choice, the project targets four northern Tonle Sap Basin 
(NTSB) regions with distinct product orientation: (1) the north -central region of Preah Vihear, 
which is a known aromatic rice producing area; (2) the north -western region of Od dar 
Meanchey, which houses the high value mango  orchards; (3) the Siem Reap region north of the 
Tonle Sap lake, which is known for high value vegetables; and (4) the Kampong Thom region just south of Preah Vihear, the region being the major centre for prod ucing cashew. T he relative 
productivities  of the dominant region -specific products are generally higher than that for the 
rest of the country. However, the level of poverty in these target regions is found to be generally 
higher than that for the rest of t he country. As such, the funding proposal has not provided 
accounts of climate related vulnerabilities of these target regions to justify their inclusion, however the higher rates of poverty such as in Oddar Meanchey provides for a weak 
justification of co nsidering a climate change related project  in these target regions.   
14. From the weak targeting of project locations, the approach of the project is found to be 
away from addressing either “exposure to climate change induced hazards in agriculture” or 
“sensit ivity to climate change induced hazards” to build adaptive capacity mostly through 
awareness and capacity -building actions and by increasing ability to market premium products 
so that the producers get a fair share from premium price of specific products. By examining 
various activities of the proposed project, one may infer that the primary target of the project is 
to enable the smallholder farmers to earn more and for the government to earn from export, not 
so much to reduce climate change induced vulnerabilities , as indicated in paragraph#1 2 above. 
In addition to the elements of vulnerability mentioned above, one may expect a shift  in seasonal 
pattern. However, the project will not connect agricultural research in a bid to develop varieties 
that are adjus ted to shifts in seasonal pattern so that smallholders can switch to alternate


---
*Page 121*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 121 
 
 
varieties as and when necessary. It appears rather obvious that, if the current production 
system involving the four target crop types get affected due to increased exposure and  
sensitivity to changes in climate system, the intended advisory, awareness, training, capacity -
building and strengthening of marketing skills will not be of much use towards reducing 
vulnerability.   
15. The project has three following target outcomes :  
(a) Outco me 1: Availability and access to agrometeorological advisory services tailored to 
target value chains improved among smallholder farmers and local; value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors;  
(b) Outcome 2: Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and value chain actors is increased 
through market incentives; and  
(c) Outcome 3: Regulatory and institutional frameworks and capacities are strengthened.  
16. The i ndependent Technical Advisory Panel ( TAP)  asked for further clarifications on a 
number of points highlighted by the Accredited Entity (AE) in the funding proposal package. Following the written question and answer session, the independent TAP was engaged with the 
AE Team in an interview
1. Upon the independent TAP query, the AE confir med that they 
consider the issuance of agro -meteorological advisories under Outcome 1 (i.e, Component 1) 
would directly reduce exposure and/or sensitivity to climate change induced hazards and risks. The AE is confident that Outcome 1 will be the primary m echanism to reduce farmer’s 
vulnerabilities to climate change. The funding proposal and the feasibility study report 
presented in the Annex -2 highlight the following activities under Output 1:    
(a) Activity  1.1.1: Increase the spatial scale of agro -meteorolog ical data collection and data 
processing capacity : 
(i) Mobilize Technical Working Group (TWG- AW);  
(ii) Upgrade existing hardware; and  
(iii) Conduct annual training programme.  
(b) Activity 1.1.2 : Develop Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs) for the production and 
dissemination  of agro -climatological advisory services and data sharing:   
(i) Mobilize Technical Working Group (TWG- AW);  
(ii) Establish central data base; and  
(iii) Conduct annual training; and 
(c) Activity 1.1.3 : Increase awareness regarding agro -meteorological advisory services and 
regarding benefit in farm management and value chain activities:   
(i) Prepare and roll out of training of trainers (TOT); and  
(ii) Support peer to peer knowledge sharing and training.  
17. The i ndependent TAP does not find merit of the activities listed above, singly or 
collectively, to effectively reduce either exposure or sensitivity to climate change induced 
hazards and risks that are relevant to the target region of Cambodia. If these activities are 
regarded by the proponents as the “key responses ” to directly reduce c limate change induced 
vulnerabilities and risks, the impacts of the project will be negligibly low.  
 
1 As a regular i ndependent TAP process in the assessment of funding proposals, a teleconference was organized 
involving members representing FAO and i ndependent TAP on 8 th September 2022. The meeting was also attended 
by task team working at the GCF Secretariat on the funding proposal, led by Mr. German Velasquez, the Director of 
DMA. The proceedings of the interview is recorded for future reference.


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 122 
 
 
18. The i ndependent TAP went on the enquire whether issuance of agro -climatological 
advisories could be effectively delivered from a virtual scratch, given the state of climate 
modelling and capacities within the country. The AE was reminded about the logical steps 
towards delivering such advisories: (a) developing a culture of climate modelling, including 
model parameterization and fine tuning; (b) generation of computer -aided forecasts, perhaps by 
using meso -scale models; (c ) “ground trothing”  of model forecasts to examine efficacy of the 
forecasts  (segregated by hazard type and seasonality) ; (d) formulation of advisories and 
messaging; (e ) examin ing adequacy of messages, validation of effectiveness and local 
contextual application; (f) developing regulatory aspects including institutional protocols for 
advisory dissemination (in order to avoid redundancy and establishing authority so that 
farmers consider such advisories seriously), and finally, (g) the last mile dissemination. The AE 
was asked whether the six years of implementation of the project would be adequate to perform all the above steps in order to deliver the most important modality to r educe farmers’ 
vulnerabilities.  The AE expressed that given their association with other projects, it would be 
possible for them to deliver outcome 1, as envisaged. The i ndependent TAP is of the opinion 
that, even if the activities under Output 1 were cri tically important to deliver direct 
vulnerability reduction services, the technical difficulties appeared too steep to overcome and 
the realization of the positiv e impacts would not be possible within the stipulated time -frame.  
19. The project identifies 135,0 00 smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors 
are the direct beneficiaries. The direct beneficiaries also include 450,000 farmers who would 
receive agro -meteorological advisory services under Outcome 1 as above. The total direct 
beneficiaries c onstitute about 3 per cent of the total population in Cambodia.  Since the project is 
primarily a capacity -building focused project, it’s indirect beneficiaries are expected to reach 
over 1 million people, which is about 6 per cent of the population of Camb odia.  It is expected 
that 50 per cent of the beneficiaries will be women.  
20. In the target regions, it is reported that 85 per cent of the farmers are involved in rice 
production. The cultivars under BAU -rice farming are suited to the current climate. Only 
recently, some farmers have switched to organic aromatic rice farming, again their agronomic 
requirements are by and large met by current climate. In the larger agricultural scene, cashew, 
mango and vegetables are still minor crops  along with cassava, maize and beans . As such, the 
extent of vulnerability to these crops to current extent of climate change is still low. Therefore, direct vulnerability reduction at smallholders’ level might only be facilitated if farmers access 
financial opportunity under Outcom e 2 (activity 2.2.1) and employ either irrigation or create 
access to cool chain in a bid to ensure/safeguard their production/produce. The provisioning of agro -climatological advisories (Outcome 1), awareness raising (throughout the project), and 
watershed related institutional, capacity -building for planning (activity 2.4) and strengthening 
of regulatory and institutional framework (Outcome 3) will have indirect benefits, cumulative 
over time. M uch of these benefits  will depend  on selection of right infor mation package, 
appropriate dissemination mechanisms and effectiveness of participatory governance, 
especially in the planned watershed management.  
21. The project is expected to roll out in six years with a total budget of USD 42, 850, 231 
where GCF is expected to contribute USD 36,231,981 only.  
22. Althoug h the project is targeting small holders in an LDC, due to weak linkage with 
climate change, the desired results might not be achievable in view of climate change- related 
hazards and risks. The i ndependent TAP is of opinion that the impact potential of the project is 
low.  
1.2 Paradigm shift potential     Scale:  Low to medium


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 123 
 
 
23. The project is expected to intervene in areas where there is adoption of aromatic 
premium rice, vegetables, high value mangoes and cashew. The climate advisories, awareness 
raising messages, manuals for imparting training of extension workers involving NGOs and 
public service provid ers – all these “soft response tools” can readily be replicated elsewhere, 
even without the additional financing of GCF. The right institutions are already past of the project, who are supposed to carry such replicable packages. Other than replication of s uch soft 
tools towards building adaptive capacities, the project clearly refrains from any expansion of 
areas under these premium products. A hasty and direct scaling up elsewhere, disregarding 
environmental nuances which may be extremely sensitive to location -specific realities,  could be 
quite risky. Moreover, if a larger group of smallholder farmers are persuaded to grow the same 
products with a false impression about readily available markets, some smallholders might face 
steep competition, as supply wil l tend to interplay with market price. Therefore, scaling up 
needs to be designed, if at all, with utmost care.  
24. There is a theory of change. However, as explained earlier, the focus of the project is 
deliberately placed on capacity -building of smallholder s, if not for safeguarding their 
production, for fetching higher market price. The underlying assumption must then be: 
smallholder’s possess very little know -how. The proponents have given high priority on 
Outcome 1 of the project where efforts will be mad e to deliver agro -meteorological advisories 
as a mechanism to empower farmers with knowledge regarding an impinging climate- change 
induced hazard and they would somehow manage the hazard. There is no arrangement 
provided by the project so that farmers can make the best use of advisories and safeguard their 
production. The theory of change does not give an impression that the farmers and their 
preferred products will be climate safe, following the issuance of an advisory. The i ndependent 
TAP is of opinion th at, if the production process remains as vulnerable, no matter how the post -
harvest tools and marketing channels are organized, the farmers will lose out.  
25. Responding to advisories is effective when the lead time2 is sufficient to tweak 
agronomic practices , and/or the varietal change can be done, which is subject to availability of 
alternate variety that are simultaneously profitable. Farm -level hydrological realities can be 
changed upon issuance of advisories, only if catchment -scale governance on watershed 
management is ensured by appropriate regulatory interventions on water allocation and water 
rights. Hazards such as floods in the Mekong river and its associated hazards on cropping 
cannot be ameliorated by actions considered at farm -levels upon issuance of agro -climatological 
advisories. There is no concrete intervention proposed under the project that might go beyond 
awareness and capacity -building in terms of knowledge and allow smallholder producers to 
address a hazardous situation on their own. Witho ut having any indication how these 
challenges will be met, it is farfetched to think that, without having a pool of alternative 
varieties which might be equally acceptable as premium product s, sharing advisories will be 
equally useful to reducing vulnerabi lity of the farmers.  
26. Since the major focus of the project is to build capacity of almost all the stakeholders, 
there is plenty of potential for knowledge and learning. The training for trainers, the training of 
extension workers involving non- governmental organizations  (NGO) , the information sharing 
involving central and regional level decision -makers – all will be useful in raising overall 
awareness levels. Majority of the financing for the project is going for conducting these events. 
Perhaps the most exc iting prospect lies on the formation of farmers’/producers’  groups  (PG), 
 
2 The funding proposal has not presented an analysis regarding adequacy of lead time for the agro -meteorological 
advisories. The meso -scale models which are used globally for the purpose, can be precise if the lead time is less 
(say, three days in advance). In such cases, the recipients of advisories can do only little to safeguard their standing 
crops. The forecast accuracy diminishes drastically as the lead time is extended. The probability of occurrence of a 
hazardous climatological event is reduced significantly if the lead t ime is extended beyond a week in advance. There 
are risks associated with failure of occurrence of a predicted agro -meteorological event: the farmers might not even 
trust the “messaging” issued by the advisory service providers. The issues regarding lead t ime is critical in agro -
meteorological advisories.


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 124 
 
 
especially women producers and the establishment of farmers’ field schools  (FFS) at local level, 
the latter is designed to offer platform for peer to peer learning.  However, majority of the 
knowledge base will be built for post -harvest and value chain management, which is expected to 
optimize profit from marketing, but their efficacy in climate change related activities is nominal.  
27. There are elements of building cap acities by engaging extension services. However, the 
focus is on marketing and value chain management, not on climate- safe agronomic practices. 
Moreover, extension service is deliberately driven by non -governmental actors . As the funding 
proposal highlight s it, the majority of the capacity -building training opportunities will be 
organized for the NGO -led extension workers.  This  might be a bad investment given the 
uncertainties regarding long -term sustainability of such organizations.  
28. The  informal informati on gathered through the local farmer /producers’  group s and 
more formal landscape- level agro -ecology monitoring systems (LAMS) are mechanisms that will 
contribute to the creation of knowledge, while local farmer associations and cooperatives  will 
initiate c ollective learning processes , especially through the FFSs . Although six years of 
implementation lifetime of the project is not adequate to gather information and assimilate such 
information to turn into local knowledge in a bid to address climate change related shocks and 
risks. Yet, the project will be able to initiate the process for longer term benefits beyond the 
project lifetime.  
29. All the three components of the project are designed towards contributing to enabling 
environment. The Component 1 will enab le the agro -meteorological services to generate 
information well in advance3 to make farmers aware of inclement weather, while the extension 
service providers representing public as well as NGOs will gather capacity to carry forward the 
messages to their clientele.  It is expected that agrometeorological advisory services will be 
streamlined following the capacity -building efforts. The Component 2 will primarily be 
dedicated to build enabling environment of various farmers’ groups and associations to run 
their value chains or optimize profit from such value chains. The entire Component 3 is 
dedicated for enhancing enabling environment by building regulatory and institutional 
frameworks. In this process, the efforts are expected to create greater market access for the 
premium agricultural products. However, as indicated earlier, the creation of such enabling 
environment will only tangentially be eliminating barriers to the deployment of direct 
adaptation solutions.  
30.  From a development point of view, the propo sed project is most likely to initiate a 
paradigm shift:  from a current paradigm of low profit and insignificant monetary gains from 
premium market to a new paradigm of global standard products having optimization of profit 
from greater participation in v alue chains of premium products. When climate change related 
complexities are added, there is little climate additionality which is plugged into the project 
with tangible solutions regarding direct reduction of vulnerability to climate change.  
31. The funding  proposal  also proposes a few  interventions in the area of finance via the 
introduction of the Farmer- led Agricultural Resilience Mechanism (FARM), model revolving 
trust fund with financing institutions  (FI), prototype index -based insurance products for th ese 
crops in partnership with a private insurer(s) under the National Crop Insurance Program, 
climate risk insurance, innovative financial mechanism and low -interest loan program, and the 
setting aside of “2% of their overall lending portfolios for issuing  loans to smallholder farmers 
and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value chain actors, based on 
the scorecard system on a pilot basis” . Even for accessing finance from FARM , investments for 
 
3 The funding proposal has not present an analysis regarding adequacy of lead time for the agro -meteorological 
advisories. The meso -scale models which are globally used for the purpose, can be precise if t he lead time is less 
(say, three days in advance). The forecast accuracy diminishes drastically as the lead time is extended. The 
probability of occurrence of a hazardous climatological event is reduced significantly if the lead time is extended 
beyond a w eek in advance. There are risks associated with failure of occurrence of a predicted agro -meteorological 
event: the farmers might not even trust the “messaging” provided by the advisory service providers.


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 125 
 
 
acquisition of equipment to either reduce exposure to climate change or to reduce sensitivity to 
climate change related hazards  and risks are not made a mandatory criterion. When farmers 
will be preached to practice climate resilient agriculture, or given an advisory, there is no 
guarantee that the same high value crop can still be produced safely. In such cases, the newly 
acquired information and know -how on post -harvest practices and value chain management 
might no longer be useful  if the said hazard adversely affects the production . A balance between 
creating adaptation options at different levels and the current soft approach to build adaptive 
capacity could perhaps contribute more to bring a paradigm shift.   
32. The i ndependent TAP rates paradigm shift potential of the project as medi um to low.    
1.3 Sustainable development potential       Scale:  Medium  
33. The project has elements which will contribute to sustainable development, especially 
those aspects of sustainable development where capacity -building needs are strongly felt. The 
followi ng direct linkages to contribute to various Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) are 
worth highlighting:  
(a)  SDG 1 (End poverty by increasing household income) by improving income primarily by 
participating in capacity -building for post -harvest practices and v alue chain 
management involving high value premium crops. Since some of the target areas (such 
as Oddar Meanchey  where rate of poverty is higher than national average) are among 
poverty hot spots, increase in income at household level will contribute towar ds 
eradication of poverty. However, one must not forget that, moving away from 
subsistence agriculture and embracing high value premium agricultural products 
without addressing adequately climate change related hazards can invite potential risks 
of occasio nal crop loss.  The proposal falls short of analysis to provide a clear 
understanding whether the proposed crop insurance, as a risk pooling product, will be effective or not against such crop losses ; 
(b)  SDG 5 (Achieve gender equality and empower all women) by empowering women 
farmers (involving 50 per cent of the target beneficiaries) with numerous capacity -
building efforts to participate in gender -focused production of premium crops and in 
value chain ac tivities of such premium products;  and 
(c) SDG 13 (Take enhanced management action to combat climate change) by providing 
agro -meteorological advisories, by raising awareness on climate resilient agriculture 
(CRA) practices, by creating institutional arrangements to offer a platform towards developing plans for integrated watershed management, and by creating financial 
support package so that part of the finance may be utilized for addressing management 
of drought and/or creating access to cool chains to protec t high value products from 
rotting due to high temperature. However, the project does not attach any mandatory 
criteria involving investments in averting climate risks of agricultural production, which 
may or may not lead to an action combating climate change.  
34. In addition to the above -mentioned direct linkages to SDGs, there can be other indirect 
modalities of contributing to SDGs.  For example, contribution to SDG 6 (e nsure availability and 
sustainable management of water) may occur by promoting a platfor m such as Landscape- level 
Agro -ecology Monitoring System (LAMS) with an interactive web -based data depository 
(activity 3.2), which is expected to contribute to achieve integrated water management in the 
downstream. Activity 2.4.1.1 aims at establishing an  inter -district integrated water management 
framework, which will also help sustainable management of water under SDG 6. Having a 
framework through institutional capacity -building will indeed help, however, implementation of 
the framework is not guaranteed  and no subsequent financing is earmarked in the budgetary 
allocation of the project, which is a limiting factor in this pursuit. Contribution to achieving SDG


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 126 
 
 
15 ( protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems and sustainably 
manag ed forests) is also possible by considering restoration and protection of forest catchments 
in upper watersheds (Activity 2.4).  
35. Social co -benefits: Participation of farmers, especially women farmers and traders, in 
numerous capacity -building activities will contribute to the cohesion of the social fabric. 
Particular reference may be made to the formation of farmer group s and activities under the 
farmer cooperatives and association s. Participation possibilities of marginal stakeholders such 
as women produce rs in value chain delivery under the proposed FARM is likely to boost up 
social standing of these marginal groups.  
36. Economic co -benefits: The project is all about optimizing economic benefits from 
strengthening value chains involving premium agricultural p roducts. If climate change do not 
create major production barrier by aggravating climate change induced hazards and risks in 
near term, a no -hazard scenario means much increased cash flow into the farms. It also means 
that the Government will get greater s hare of export values and revenues in terms of foreign 
exchange – a much coveted objective for a Government leading an LDC. Since the project 
documents have indicated that climate change has started to affect production cycle adversely, and the projection results indicate increased variability and change in climate systems, a no -
hazard scene does not appear to be plausible. Therefore, the economic co -benefits to be realized 
necessitates strong adaptation actions that may reduce exposure and sensitivity to c limate 
change induced hazards and risks. Heavy reliance on issuance of agro -meteorological advisories 
cannot ensure that high economic returns from premium products will continue to give high 
dividend unless risk averting tangible adaptation results are ob tained against hazards that 
affect local agriculture.  
37. The opportunities to access FARM resources for the “graduation” from poverty has an 
underlying assumption that, upon receipt of soft measures such as awareness and capacity -
building, coupled with agro -meteorological advisories, farmers will be able to operate under the 
institutional platforms such as LAMS and they will be able to implement CRAs on their own 
initiative. However, such assumptions have not plugged in presence and access to other hazard 
mana gement opportunities in the localities. There are climate driven phenomena such as flood s, 
that are triggered by heavy downpour in the upper catchment of the Mekong River  and such 
floods can wreck havoc in the agricultural scene in the northern Tonle Sap b asin, unless flood 
are contained at scale along the basin. Such issues are much beyond control of the project, however the rosy picture around economic gains might be severely undermined under such 
circumstances. An analysis involving the bigger picture needs to be carried out before 
accounting for economic co -benefits of the project.  
38. Environmental co -benefits: In a project focusing on capacity -building, direct 
contribution to environmental co -benefit is difficult to come by. Following awareness and 
capacit y-building activities, the recipients of the knowledge and know -how may or may not take 
necessary measures, especially when economic gain is the driving factor. Despite such 
uncertainties, the project has a few elements which are likely to contribute to en vironmental co -
benefits. The primary contributor will be organic farming practices, which gradually decrease 
reliance on chemical inputs, rather apply integrated pest management and bio -fertilizers so that 
international best practices and standards are fol lowed as closely as possible. By definition, 
such practices are generally less harmful to environment, if not completely benign to facilitate 
environmental harmony.  
39. Improved agro -ecological condition and connectivity is the ultimate target of activity 
2.4, which emphasize forest catchment conservation and restoration. The project will create a 
platform and build capacity to achieve this, although the project does not plan for associated 
activities beyond facilitating the platform for catchment and watershed restoration. Since there 
is no follow up activity being designed, the project has refrained from estimating emission gains


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 127 
 
 
from forest conservation and subsequent sequestration. The gender -responsive LAMS is 
supposed to be another platform which is being  promoted by the project, which is expected to 
provide for a data base that will eventually help the management of landscape level agro -
ecology in the target areas. As such these are farfetched activities that are limited to the creation 
of platforms and p romotion of their use through capacity -building.  
40. The value chain activities will help marketing of premium products even beyond the 
boundary of the country. In the BAU agricultural scene, the carbon footprint of products in 
subsistence agriculture was limited, only proportional to national average values. However, 
with added emphasis towards organic premium products, in one hand there will be reduction in carbon based chemical inputs and on the other, the carbon footprint for export of t he premium 
products is likely to escalate significantly. Even if contribution to bunker oil is taken out of the 
consideration, the average product carbon footprint might escalate significantly, for which GCF 
might find the project  about to tarnish its gree n image in global level.  
41. Gender equality and co -benefits: Inclusion of women producers in the value chains is 
likely to be the greatest strength of the project. Women are expected to play central roles in the 
project. They will receive, along with other male producers and traders, awareness and training 
on various aspects including CRA, responding to agro -meteorological advisories, receive 
information from LAMS, accessing finance using FARM opportunity to consider measures to 
strengthen value chain efforts,  post -harvest techniques, standard practices towards organic 
farming , including global identification of premium products, etc. All these opportunities are 
available to women producers.  
42. The project must be mindful regarding the fact that, women producers as potential key 
stakeholders in the project are also socially active individuals. Since a lot of arrangements will 
have to be made for building capacities of various kinds involving them, the timing for arranging 
local level training and awareness buildin g sessions needs to be designed with utmost care so 
that their family and personal lives are not disturbed because of heavy project -related 
engagements. Prior consent is needed before finalizing any local level engagement by the 
women.  
43. The number of beneficiaries including female beneficiaries is significant. The target area 
is quite large in size. Such information suggest that the project should have significant 
sustainable development potential. However, as explained in the preceeding paragraphs, there 
are risks that may negate the contribution to sustainable development. In view of the opportunities and risks, the independent TAP finds the sustainable developmentn potential of 
the project as medium.  
1.4 Needs of the recipient                Scale:  Medium  to high  
44. Cambodia is an LDC. The majority of its population is dependent on agriculture for their 
livelihoods. However, people’s dependence on rain fed agriculture is continuing, which is why 
their production system remains vulnerable to en vironmental factors. With a population of 
16.72 million (2020), Cambodia’s per capita Gross Domestic Product is US$4,421. The country is lagging behind in many social indicators, as reflected in the human development index of 0.59, 
which places Cambodia in  144
th place out of 189 countries. In terms of climate readiness 
indicator, the ND -Gain index score is 38.7 and a ranking of 149 out of 181 countries . The 
country is ranked 84th in the climate risk index (German Watch, 2021).  
45. The NTSB is comprised of provinces, a few of which have higher poverty rates than the 
rest of the country. The region is home for 20 per cent of the country’s population and one third 
of the agricultural out puts comes from the basin. Yet, a significant proportion of the population 
is poor, owing to inadequate income from agriculture- based livelihoods. In the backdrop, there 
has always been the flood susceptibility of the basin, owing to direct influence zone of the


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 128 
 
 
mighty Mekong River. If it rains heavily in the upper catchment, much of it is outside the 
borders of Cambodia, the river overtops the valleys and floodplains. As rice is the mainstay of 
crop agriculture, heavy floods generally take toll on standing  rice crops. In recent times, 
however, the number of days with ambient temperature beyond a certain threshold has been increasing, along with heat stress and resultant increase in evapo -transpiration, all of these 
changes are due to climate change and have significant implications in terms of crop production.  
46. The country and its NTSB needs international support to address climate change related 
vulnerabilities and to find ways for the farmers including female farmers to increase farm profitability and hous ehold income. The weak business model involving premium agricultural 
products are of great concerns. Aromatic rice produced in organic conditions finds its market, however the standardization processes and post -harvest management must be in place for 
acces sing greater international market and fair prices. The post -harvest management and 
subsequent processing of cashew needs a thorough overhauling in order to get better price than 
its current bulk farm gate price. The current marketing processes for leafy vegetables and mangoes are not conducive enough to fetch premium price, unless proper interventions are 
designed and executed in terms cool chain and value chain management. All these need a careful 
planning, which is difficult for Cambodia to plan and finan ce without the international support.  
47. Investment in value chain is often committed by private sector, especially if the products 
are suitable to penetrate international market to fetch home foreign currency. In general, host 
Governments create enabling pol icy environment so that the private sector can make profit, 
while protecting the rights of the producers. In case of Cambodia, a significant part of the value chain has been controlled by unorganized sector from neighbouring countries, who rely o n 
informal  handling taking advantage of poor governance and surveillance and lack of capacity to 
impose regulatory aspects related to standards applied for organic products for export markets. 
In such haphazard business condition, the local private sector is perhaps  reluctant to invest. 
Assuming that the products will be made available by defying adverse climate conditions, the 
Government must access and mobilize funds to streamline the value chains. To proceed with the 
daunting task in the absence of private sector investment, the Government must find 
international source to mobilize finance.  
48. The mandate of GCF is to mobilize finance where climate change additionality is 
explained and understood. Ideally, investments going into strengthen the production in the face of climate change related adversities are welcomed by GCF. In those cases, the needs of the 
recipients are given high priorities.  
49. The value chain related institutional mechanisms are proposed to be strengthened by 
the project. The process of development of agro -meteorological advisories is likely to 
strengthen capacity of allied national institutions. However, the exit strategy has little practical 
relevance towards restoring newly built capacities, especially modelling -related capacities, 
beyond the impleme ntation of the project. Absorbing project staff modellers in regular human 
resource deployment structures does not generally guarantee retention of modelling capacities, 
the latter being highly sought after expertise in global stage. A more innovative appr oach could 
be considered to ensure sustainability of the system well beyond the implementation timeline of the project. On similar notes, the replacement of computational equipment, the recurrent 
retention costs for softwares (unless open access codes are being used), O&M costs for 
equipment to be procured under FARM support – a succinct plan is needed to ensure that there 
will be continued financial mobilization once the project’s finance is exhausted. The institutional implementation capacity is also dependent on such arrangements, in addition to build human 
capacities through training etc.  
50. The  needs of the recipients appear  high to medium.     
1.5 Country ownership               Scale:  High


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 129 
 
 
51. The Royal Government of Cambodia is keen on implementing a project su ch as PEARL. 
In 2013, Cambodia launched its climate change strategic plan 2014 -2023. The concerns and 
priorities involving climate change is embedded in the national strategic development plan of 
Cambodia (NSDP, 2014- 2018). Sectoral ministries of the count ry are asked to develop their 
mandate -specific climate change action plans (2014 -2018) in the light of NSDP. The project is 
aligned with the sectoral climate change action plan for agriculture . Moreover, the project finds 
its linkages with national documen ts in relation to climate change, which includes the following: 
nationally determined contribution, national adaptation plan of action, national adaptation plan 
process, etc. The project is also considered as a priority project under Cambodia’s GCF Country  
Programme. While the objectives concerning safeguarding agriculture in NTSB through 
adaptation is well articulated, the primary focus of the project involving marketing and value 
chain with minimal support for adaptation makes the understanding rather con fusing. The 
climate relevance of the project is extremely diluted due to overemphasizing on making greater 
financial profit by penetrating premium market.  
52. FAO is a specialized body under the charter of United Nations, designated for its role in 
promoting a gricultural productivity and addressing food security. FAO is committed to meeting 
the 2030 agenda for achieving sustainable development and in the process, it focuses on 
sustainable agri -food systems for better production, nutrition, environment, and life , leaving no 
one behind. The country office of FAO in Cambodia has been in operation since 1979. It has extensive experience in working in NTSB. It works in close cooperation with the line ministries 
including the ministry of agriculture, forestry and fish eries (MAFF) as well as ministry of 
environment (MoE). FAO is both the AE and the Executing Entity (EE) for the project, while the 
Royal Government of Cambodia is the other EE, working through the MAFF and the MoE as  the 
two co -Executing Entiti es (Co -EEs).  
53. The MAFF has the capacity to drive the agricultural agenda within the project. Although 
the value chains for different products a re being managed primarily by the private sector, the 
MAFF has the role of formulating polices and creating enabling conditions to strengthen value chain activities. There are two distinct features found in the analysis of capabilities of the 
particular Co -EE: (1) its role in boosting agricultural production, including its extension  
services geared towards production, is praiseworthy; and (2) despite having policy frameworks 
for value chain, the regulatory functions of the wing of the ministry has loopholes, which is why 
the optimum financial gains from sustainable marketing of exportable products could not be 
achieved. However, the majority of the activities of PEARL project are targeted to address the 
weaknesses regarding value chains for premium products . 
54. The MoE is a fairly new ministry compared to other ministries with specific legal 
mandate. It has a technical wing titled Department of Climate Change (DCC) , fairly young one, 
dedicated for addressing climate change. The MoE through the DCC  has never ass umed 
responsibilities to deliver one of the key responsibilities under the project: the development 
and delivery of agro -meteorological advisories. In this regard, the EE can only offer support to 
FAO in realizing its responsibility regarding the advisorie s. The country has necessary 
knowledge base towards collection and maintaining meteorological data and perform simple 
forecasting roles such as weather forecasting. However, it does not have a proven capacity to 
provide technical support to MoE on model dr iven forecasting with adequate lead time. In any 
case, FAO has to help develop national capacities to deliver the Outcome 1.  
55. MoE has dual role in the project. As a national designated authority (NDA), the ministry 
collaborates with GCF and has forwarded th e project under the GCF Country Programme. The 
NDA has been involved in designing the project. The proponents claim that a consultative 
process has been initiated towards completing the design of the project, where stakeholders 
from different sectors inclu ding private sector, farmers; associations and farmers’ federations, 
NGOs and civil society organizations have been part of the discussions. The consultative processes have integrated views from regional and sub -national bodies and agencies . It is


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 130 
 
 
claimed that the strong focus of having almost 50 per cent women as beneficiaries is primarily 
due to involvement of gender -focused civil society organizations.  
56. The NDA is familiar with another GCF financed project namely CAVS, which is led by 
Asian Development Bank. It is suggested that the NDA will ensure a close collaboration between 
the two GCF financed projects if PEARL is endorsed. Since MoE is the focal point for projects 
under multilateral financing windows such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the 
organization will assume responsibilities to bring harmony among other projects and to make 
sure that duplication of efforts is avoided.  
57. In view of the above analysis, the i ndependent TAP finds the country ownership as high.   
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness     Scale:  Low to medium 
58. The project is proposed to be implemented in six years with a total budget of USD 
42,850,231.00, of which USD 36,231,981.00 is requested from GCF as grant. Considering the 
Cambodia is an LDC, the request for grant support is just ified. The budget is comprised of a co -
financing amount of USD 6,618,250.00  with a co -financing ratio with respect to GCF support is 
0.182.  
59. The independent TAP finds the major focus of the project is on building capacities of 
various kinds. With an except ion of building capacities in value chain of premium products, 
private sector is not generally interested in financing a project such as this. Since the Royal 
Government of Cambodia is required to finance in aspects related to poverty reduction and 
socio -economic development of the country, there is a deficit in national finance for a project 
such as this, which is why GCF financing is requested with full concessionality. Given the GCF financing policies, such grant financing is justified.  
60. An economic and f inancial analysis (EFA) is attached with the funding proposal. It is 
assumed that 60 per cent of the target beneficiaries will be able to adopt climate resilient and 
high value practices and technologies following the capacity -building interventions and di rect 
support and economic benefit of such beneficiaries are limited at farm gate level. The analysis considered a discount rate of 5 per cent. The net present value following the project lifetime (20 
years) is estimated at USD 84 million. This indicates th at the project is viable in financial terms. 
The financial internal rate of return of the project is estimated at 38.7 per cent, while the overall economic rate of return is estimated at 45.8 per cent.  
61. The robustness in  the financing is tested in the EFA.  If the adoption rate involving the 
beneficiaries is dropped below  31 per cent , only then the positive net present value starts to 
diminish. The financial internal rate of returns estimated against assumptions of 20 per cent increase in implementation costs and separately, 20 per cent reduction in benefits give strong 
signal that th e project’s financing is robust.  
62. The i ndependent TAP recognizes  the ambition on the proposed financing  program 
under FARM (as in paragraph 31 above), even without a mandatory criterion for addressing 
exposure and sensitivity to climate change induced hazar ds and risks. However , the proposal 
lack s the in -depth assessment of agri -finance market from both the formal and informal sources, 
form the insurers (indemnity type), and other private and public sector actors. The proposal  has 
not presented an informativ e baseline on issues regarding sustainable finance and potential 
challenges from both the supply and the demand side s. Questions on finance availability, 
accessibility, affordability, and acceptability remain  unanswered.  Proposing a solution in the 
form of crop insurance without a proper understanding on the market makes the proposal 
weak. Without th ese, the effectiveness of this intervention involving FARM in the agri -finance 
space remains to be seen, as the poor financial market assessment may not correct ly address 
the sustainable finance issues, challenges, barriers, and opportunities that will contribute to the


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 131 
 
 
(i) positive adaptation impact on the proposed  interventions under Outcome 2, (ii) the 
paradigm shift , because without finance it is not sustainable, (iii) the needs of the recipients . 
The FARM model , for example , is not clear if this is addressing or creating another unintended 
consequence  in the finance sector – potential crowding out FIs, or financially exclud ing the most 
vulnerable farmers . 
63. One  of the potential shortcomings of the project is having no significant provision to 
create greater access to value chain infrastructure, where the financial requirement might not 
be covered with the maximum allowable provision of FARM. Since value chain in frastructure in 
Cambodia is in its rudimentary stage for achieving international competitiveness for premium products, unless larger scale value chain facilities are in place, value c hain efforts considered at 
small -scale producers’ group level are likely to face difficulties. The target of FARM financing 
window caters the financing needs at the producers’ end, not addressing the potential needs of 
the larger scales. The absence of financing to create greater access to value chain infrastructure 
at all leve ls might reduce the effectiveness of value chain development efforts.  
64. The key question is, can this project catalyse private sector financing following the 
project’s inputs at the lowest tier? Given the fundamental weaknesses in governance in relation 
to p roduct marketing outside farm gates coupled with lack of financing in in -country 
development of value chain infrastructure, the existing value chains operating at a much lower cost than usual would continue to provide disincentives to private sector for  bring ing in new 
investments in proper value chain development. Farmer’s know -how on agro- meteorological 
advisories  (Outcome 1) , post -harvest techniques and value chain (Outcome 3) and the limited 
focus on institutional development through capacity -buildin g and developing platforms 
(outcome 3) are likely to lose out if the actors outside agriculture marketing remain  weak. 
These institutions need to be strengthened so that their roles in governance are integrated with all the tiers of value chain development  involving the premium products.  The proposal does not 
provide any answer regarding unauthorized cross border trade, involvements of middle- men, 
lack of cool chain investments, and so on.  
65. The differences in packages being offered to farmers under Out come 1  (mainly agro -
meteorological services and  other advisory services4 ) and farmers under Outcome 2 (e.g., 
premium market access, access to technologies and finance via FARM) leads to a risk of wider 
income disparities between the least and most vulnerable f armers. The AE, in its financial and 
economic analysis did not clearly highlight the NPV differences from the two farmer groups.  
66. As indicated earlier, the project in one hand would tend to reduce environmental 
externalities by promoting organic farming, es pecially involving rice and cashew. However, the 
project’s inherent objective is to exploit full potential of international value chains, part of which 
cannot be achieved without increasing carbon footprints of such premium products. Export of 
niche produc ts generally bring s home additional income, however it must pay an environmental 
cost. A potential increase in carbon footprint for the niche products might not be a desirable outcome at GCF.  
67. Building capacities for the agro -meteorological advisories is a highly technical issue and 
cannot be approached without following international best practices. The project starts with 
upgradation of its computational arrangements. However, this must be matched with 
enhancement of national capacities for modelling whic h include both modellers (i.e., trained 
human resources) and computational softwares and algorithms (which needs to be updated on a regular basis).  The associated descriptions do not indicate a full proof plan regarding 
 
4 During the interview, the independent TAP further  clarified this issue. AE responses4 , as paraphrased, are  as 
follows, advisory services provided to the other farmers include agro -met, clearing house, landscape agro -ecological  
management systems, pest and disease management, specific crops management.  Other mechanisms embedded in 
the project include the communication of benefits of improved practices, risk management advise during growing 
season, and general improvement in agricultural extension capacities. These will add value to the other farmer 
grou ps.


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 132 
 
 
continued supply of human resources for modelling, retention of modellers in the pool (the 
mechanisms), and supply of very high O&M for the computational arrangements.  
68. All the other capacity -building efforts are planned where the engagement processes 
considered generally follow  industrial best practices. One must be mindful of engaging such a 
large number of women in capacity -building and awareness raising exercises: the sessions need 
to be designed properly so that women are free to join and actively participate without affecti ng 
their household chores – the latter can have adverse impacts on women’s lives. Again, these 
sessions need to be planned following best practices.  
69. The project limits its approach within building capacities, not to address many other 
allied issues that ar e discussed in this assessment. There might be an assumption that other 
projects will take care of certain needs in due course, under autonomous development. A few 
projects are indeed being implemented in Cambodia. For example, FA O has been involved a few 
small -scale projects under Least Developed Country Fund . There are other projects, part of 
which are being implemented in NTSB. Assuming that the proposed project finds synergies with 
these projects, the positive impacts will only be consolidated. However,  one must not forget that 
the primary focus of the project is not to expand the activities in new areas for increased agricultural production, rather assisting in realizing increased value at farm gate levels by 
targeting at premium agricultural products. Since the linkages related to climate induced 
vulnerability reduction is limited through the approach and design, the effectiveness of building synergy involving other projects  on the missing grounds does not appear significant.  
70. In view of the above analys is, the i ndependent TAP is of opinion that the overall 
efficiency and effectiveness is medium to low.  
II. Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
71. The overall  merit of the proposed project  towards awarding GCF’s scarce resources is 
low. The scores of (a) impact potential, (b) paradigm shift potential and (c) efficiency and 
effectiveness are not high enough. Yet, the independent TAP has no policy guideline to object 
such a project on the bas is of its overa ll performance indicators. The independent TAP 
recommends the Board to endorsed the project  with conditions . 
72. The independent TAP has little hesitation to inform the Board that the project ideas 
deserved a better formulation. There are weaknesses that are explained in the assessment . In 
order to strengthen the project and to ameliorate risk of further reduction of effectiveness, 
corrective measures need to be in place on specific major weaknesses, as articulated in the 
following paragraphs:   
(a) Paragraph s #7 through to #10  on lack of climate understanding and contextualization;  
(b) Paragraph s #31 and #62 on lack of analyses on agro -financing and agro -insurance 
market baseline assessment,  and 
(c) Paragraph s #14, #16, #17, #31, #36, #62 and  #65 on establish ing explicit connections 
between Outcome 1 and  Outcome 2, so that direct impacts through addressing exposure 
and sensitivity to climate change induced hazards and risks could be promoted and the 
mobilization of finance through FARM mechanism could be made increasingly 
responsive to climate change ( rather than placing primary focus on value chains) as well 
as creating better response options for non -participating farmers ; and  
(d) Paragraph # 62 on strengthening eligibility criteria for selecting farmers and farmer 
organizations .


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B. 35/02/Add. 01/Rev.01  
Page 133 
 
 
73. In order to minimize the risks, the independent TAP further recommends that any 
approval of this funding proposal by the Board is made subject to the following conditions 
precedent to the second disbursement to the AE under the funded activity agreement (“FAA ”).  
(a) Delivery to the Fund by the AE, in a form and substance satisfactory to the Fund, of a 
final version of a revised climate change study , clearly providing an evidence base for 
the climate rationale, including trend analyses, on (a) heat stress due to i ncreasing 
number of days above indicative upper thresholds relevant for mango, cashew, rice and 
vegetables  in the NTSB; (b) floods in the NTSB; (c) droughts using climate epochs in the 
NTSB; and (d) ambient temperature beyond thresholds indicating where c old chains 
need to be ensured for each of the major premium products (vegetables and mangos). 
Such analyses should take into consideration available observation data from official 
hydro -meteorological data depositories as well as projection data based on application 
of validated climate models;  
(b) The delivery to the Fund by the AE, of an in -depth agro -financial and insurance market 
baseline assessment including consideration of potential challenges from both the 
supply and the demand side s,5 in a form and su bstance satisfactory to the Fund; and 
(c) The delivery to the Fund by the AE, in a form and substance satisfactory to the Fund, of a revised , single  eligibility criteria applicable for beneficiaries under both Outcome 1 and 
Outcome 2 which ensures that the agr icultural cooperatives, farmer associations, farmer 
organizations, producer groups, community protected areas, community forests and 
agricultural unions targeted under Outcome 2 are comprised of, and selected from, the 
eligible smallholder farmers targeted  under Outcome 1 (as such beneficiaries are 
identified in the funding proposal) , such that the same farmers and farmer group 
beneficiaries eligible under Outcome 1 are also the eligible and direct  beneficiaries 
participating  under Outcome 2.
 6  
 
  
 
5 Refer to comments under para 62 above.  
6 Refer to comments under para 65 above.


---
*Page 134*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 5/02/Add.01 /Rev.01  
Page 134 
 
 
 Response  from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP199) 
Proposal name:  Public -Social -Private Partnership s for Ecologically -Sound 
Agriculture and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin 
(PEARL)  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Cambodia  
Project/programme size:  Small  
 
Impact potential  
The AE would like to highlight that the project aims to support 450,000 vulnerable farmers 
including poor farmers, women, and other minority groups, in the highly vulnerable N orthern 
Tonle Sap Basin (NTSB)  to adopt climate resilient, sustainable and high value agriculture to 
respond to observed and future climate risks and build adaptive capacity. This represents ~ 
25%  of the target region’s predominantly agricultural population and ~  3% of Cambodia’s 
popul ation . As also highlighted by the high ITAP assessment rating for Needs of Recipient, the 
AE confirms that the needs of the most vulnerable in Cambodia (a Least Developed Country) 
are adequately addressed.  
As per Funding Proposal (Table 13) , around 85 perc ent of farmers in the target project areas  
grow rice, predominantly rain fed , as their main livelihood activity , while around two and 
four percent respectively grow vegetables or perennial crops such as mango or cashew as 
their major livelihood activity.  The project targets a transformation from prevailing climate 
vulnerable, low quality and low value agriculture to climate resilient, sustainable and high value agriculture.  
The project design is informed by d etailed analysis of observed climate trends and 
projections of the impact potential of climate change on the project’s target production 
systems as discussed in the Funding Proposal as well as the Feasibility Study . This analysis 
used the best available data and modelling approaches . Due to the characteristics of each 
system , the range of observed and potential impacts varies, with trends such as increased 
heat stress, precipitation variability and increased dry periods that present significant risks 
to farmers across th e target region.    
The AE would like to highlight that the climate change analysis prepared to develop this 
project has already resulted in two, unique peer -reviewed publications  – 1) Journal of 
Agronomy and Crop Science, 2022, Alvar -Beltran et al ; and 2) Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology, 2022, Alvar -Beltran et al . 
Paradigm shift potential  
The AE would like to highlight that the project targets a transformation from climate 
vulnerable, low quality and low value agriculture to climate resilient, sustainable and high 
value agriculture in Cambodia through improved climate/agro -met services, agriculture 
extension services and public -social , private partnerships  (PSPP) . These partnerships will 
draw in additional technical assistance and financial literacy  for scaling up the project’s 
proven cost -effective and strategic investments to  increase the sector's overall climate 
resilience and sustainability.


---
*Page 135*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 5/02/Add.01 /Rev.01  
Page 135 
 
 
 Based on the AE’s extensive experience with similar initiatives in Cambodia and in other 
countries, the proposal emphasizes  six mechanisms of transformation that are considered to 
be highly scalable and replic able within the NTSB and beyond, namely:  
1. Improved agrometeorolog ical advisory services and their outreach capacity 
(Outcome 1);   
2. Business and financial literacy development and climate- resilient and high -
value business planning (Outcome 2);  
3. An innovative climate adaptation asset acquisition mechanism (i.e., FARM) for 
the most vulnerable smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors 
with limited access to finance for adopting climate- resilient measures, which 
also promote high -value practices (Outcome 2);   
4. Awareness -raising, knowledge management and demonstratio n of 
appropriate farming and value- addition techniques and technologies 
(Outcome 2);  
5. Integrated watershed management for improved ecosystems resilience and 
agroecology (Outcome 2);  and 
6. An enabling environment for enhanced access to agricultural finance, PSPPs, 
and systematically leveraging private and public investment for climate-
resilient agriculture (Outcome 3).  
Sustainable development potential  
In addition to its contribution to other SDGs, as outline d by the ITAP, the project also 
contribu tes directly to reducing hunger (SDG 2) b y promoting resilient and sustainable, high 
value agriculture. The FP highlights that  food security in the target region is at risk and that 
20-60% of households in the NTSB will experience moderate to severe food s hortages due to 
crop los s and damage on an annual basis .  
Needs of the recipient  
The AE agrees with  the iTAP assessment that the NTSB is comprised of some provinces that 
have higher poverty rates than other regions of Cambodia. In addition, t he climate change 
impact potential analysis presented in the P roposal, supports the iTAP’s assessment that the 
number of days with ambient temperature beyond a certain threshold has been increasing, 
along with heat stress and resultant increase in evapo -transpiration. As the iTAP notes, these 
changes are attributed to climate change and have significant implications in terms of crop 
production in the project’s target region highlighting the timeliness and potential importance 
of the proposed project for the target beneficiaries and Cambodia.  
Country ownership  
iTAP assessment as High is acknowledged. The AE confirms  that the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) and the Ministry of Environment (MoE) have the capacity to 
work with the AE as co -executing entities. Through project support, a tailored 
agrometeorological advisory system will be implemented under the joint leadership of MAFF and the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MoWRAM) as the home of the 
national meteorological service (NMS) in Cambodia. Furthermore, based on FAO experience 
in building institutional and technical capacity for agricultural climate services, the AE 
confirms that with project support  a functional agrometeorological advisory system will be 
established in the target area within the project duration.


---
*Page 136*
---

  
       GCF/B.3 5/02/Add.01 /Rev.01  
Page 136 
 
 
 Efficiency and effectiveness  
The project  has an estimated  aggregate Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 38.7%, 
and an overall Economic Internal rate of Return (EIRR) of 45.8%. As noted in Annex 3, t hese 
estimates wer e based on the assumption that 60% of the target beneficiaries will successfully 
adopt a limited set of climate- resilient and high -value practices and technologies as a result of 
the project, and that these benefits do not go beyond the  farm -gate.  Furtherm ore, investment  
costs related to access to finance, technologies, and knowledge needed by the smallholders to 
adopt climate -resilient and higher -value practices to access additional benefits such as 
premium market segments were not included into the crop m odels used to calculate expected 
financial and economic returns  at the household level . As a result, the  AE would like to further 
highlight that the se estimates of project benefits are conservative.  
The AE considers that the feasibility of the spillover effects and the graduation model  
promoted by the project  is high, based on the extensive consultations with farmers groups , 
civil society organizations and private insurance and finance providers as well as past 
experiences with similar tiered technical assistance and investment projects in Cambodia and 
globally . 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel:  
 
The AE acknowledges  the iTAP overall assessment and welcomes the recommendation for 
Board approval.  
The AE confirms the following conditions can be addressed prior to second disbursement:  
1. Further elaborate the project’s climate change study, clearly providing an evidential 
base, including trend analyses, on:  
(a) heat stress due to increasing number of days above indicative upper 
thresholds relevant for mango, cashews, rice and vegetables in the NTSB;  
(b) floods in the NTSB;  
(c) droughts using climate epochs in the NTSB; and  
(d) ambient temperature beyond thresholds, indicating where cool chains 
need to be ensured for vegetables and mangos.  
The AE is committed to work with the GCF to expand the range of technical analysis availabl e to support assessments of climate change impact potential.  
2. An in -depth agro -financial and insurance market baseline assessment.  
3. Confirm that beneficiaries of the project agricultural cooperatives, farmer 
associations, farmer organizations, producer grou ps, community protected areas, 
community forests and agricultural unions targeted under Outcome 2 are comprised 
of, and selected from, the eligible smallholder farmers targeted under Outcome 1 (as 
such beneficiaries are identified in the funding proposal),  such that the same farmers 
and farmer group beneficiaries eligible under Outcome 1 are also the eligible and direct beneficiaries participating under Outcome 2.


---
*Page 137*
---

G
ENDER ASSESSMENT 
Public -Social -Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound Agriculture and Resilient 
Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin (PEARL) 
Ma
y 2022 Gender documentation for FP199


---
*Page 138*
---

I 
 Acronyms and Abbreviations  
 
AC  :  Agricultural Cooperatives  
ARDB   : Agriculture and Rural Development Bank  
CPA  : Community Protected Area  
CGCC   :  Committee for Gender and Climate Change  
CCCSP   : Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan  
CBO   :  Community -Based Organization  
CCWC   : Commune C ommittee for Women and Children  
FAO   : Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FGD   : Focus Group Discussion  
GMAG   :  Gender Mainstreaming Action Group  
GAP   : Gender Action Plan  
GCC SP  : Gender and Climate Change Strategic Plan  
MAFF  : Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries  
MoWRAM  : Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology  
MoE   : Ministry of Environment  
MoC   :  Ministry of Commerce  
MoWA   : Ministry of Women’s Affairs  
NSDP   : National Strategic Development Plan  
NP-SNDD  : National Program for Sub -National Democratic Development  
NCDDS   : National Committee for Sub -National Democratic Development Secretariat  
NR-V  :  Neary Rattanak V  
NGO   : Non -Government Organization  
PEARL   :  Public -Social- Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound Agriculture  
and Resilient Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin  
PDAFF   : Provincial Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries  
PDoE   : Provincial Department of Environment  
PDoWA   : Provinc ial Department of Women’s Affairs


---
*Page 139*
---

II 
 PDoWRAM  : Provincial Department of Water Resources and Meteorology  
PMUAC   : Preah Vihear Meanchey Union of Agricultural Cooperative  
UNFCCC  : United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change


---
*Page 140*
---

3 
 Contents  
Acronyms and Abbreviations  ......................................................................................................................... I 
I. Introduction  .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
II. Objectives of assessment  ...................................................................................................................... 5 
III. Methodology  ..................................................................................................................................... 5 
IV. Findings  ............................................................................................................................................. 6 
1. Country context  ............................................................................................................................ 6 
2. Policy landscape  ............................................................................................................................ 7 
3. Gender gaps and roles at community  ........................................................................................... 9 
3.1. Agricultural cooperatives committees and membership.  .................................................... 9 
3.2. Agricultural cooperative business modality.  ......................................................................... 9 
3.3. Community protected area.  ................................................................................................ 11 
3.4. Access to agrometeorological services.  .............................................................................. 12 
3.5. Access to financ ial services.  ................................................................................................ 12 
3.6. Access to technology and skill.  ........................................................................................... 13 
3.7. Access to market opportunities.  ......................................................................................... 15 
3.8. Control over resources and assets.  ..................................................................................... 15 
V. Conclusion and recommendations  ..................................................................................................... 17 
Annexes  ....................................................................................................................................................... 21 
References  .................................................................................................................................................. 26


---
*Page 141*
---

4 
  
I. Introduction 
 
The rapid growth of the Cambodian economy over the past two decades has been accompanied by 
significant steps towards gender equality in the labor market . The a gricultural sector in Cambodia 
continues to play an important role in supporting economic growth, ensuring equity, securing food 
security, and promoting the development of the rural economy. The average monthly income per 
household in Cambodia came from different inc ome sources, of which 91.3% from the primary income 
from which 54.8% from wage and salary, 36.4% from self- employment income of which agriculture is 
included1.  
Tonle Sap zone has the largest share of agricultural land in 2020. A t otal of 1,527 thousand h ectares in 
Tonle Sap zone, approximately 12.1% (185 thousand hectares) was owned by women headed households. 
About 48% of the total area of agricultural land in 2019/20 has irrigation facilities. In the wet season, about 
27% of agricultural land was irrigated for growing crops and plants2.  
Cambodian women farmers play a crucial role in the translation of the products of the agriculture sector into food and nutritional security for their households.  Women are also central in wholesale and retail 
marketing of agriculture products. They are involved as collectors, and/or local traders and are the 
principal retail sellers, working in markets at local, provincial, and national levels. Women are active 
partners in input supply agro -business, dealing directly wit h clients, providing information and knowledge 
on the use of inputs, fertilizers, and pesticides
3.  
Risks of climate change, mechanization, and migration are affecting the agriculture sector in Cambodia 
significantly, especially with regard to women’s labor and contribution to gender roles and relations. Th e 
threat of climate change has increased droughts, storms, and floods  and has been recognized as a key 
development challenge. There is eviden ce that climate change di sproportionally impacts women when 
compared to their male counterparts . This is due to a number of underlying elements of vulnerability 
including limited knowledge, and access to climate risk information and resources  often driven by lower 
rates of literac y, access to education, access to decision making and information sources as well as lower 
levels of access to finance . Women are generally not the main recipients of extension services and  have  
less access to information about effects of climate change an d relevant technological resources. They also 
have limited access to financial services and the emerging financial mechanisms which may offer support 
for climate change adaption and mitigation activities.  Mechanization and introduction of new 
technologies impact men and women farmers differently. Limited efforts are being made to train women 
in using various machiner y and new technologies.  In addition, gender norm s result  in different roles 
between men and women farmers using machiner y and technologies.  
In alignment with long- term vision of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (MAFF), and 
National Strategy to Promote Gender Equality and Women’s empowerment (known as Neary Rattanak  -
NR-V), the Gender Mainstreaming Action  Group (GMAG) of MAFF promotes gender equality and women ’s 
 
1 Ministry of Planning (201 9/2020) National Institute of Statistic, Cambodia Socio -Economic Survey  
2 Ibid 
3 Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (2016 -2020) Gender Mainstreaming Policy and Strategic Framework in Agriculture


---
*Page 142*
---

5 
 empowerment in the sector through its 5 -years gender mainstreaming policy and strategic framework. 
This policy and strategic  framework have  been communicated and operated horizontally and verticall y 
across the sector.  
The proposed project  “Public -Social- Private Partnerships for Ecologically -Sound Agriculture and Resilient  
Livelihood in Northern Tonle Sap Basin (PEARL) ” aims to enhance the climate change resilience of 
smallholder farmers and local communities in the Northern Tonle Sap Basin (NTSB)  by increasing their 
access to growing premium market segments while using their improved market access to incentivize their 
transition to climate -resilient practices, mainly through effective public -social- private partnerships. The 
project plans to support establishing a gender responsive, landscape -level agroecology monitoring system  
to crowd in public and private investment in  climate -resilient, higher- value and sustainable agriculture.  
To address gender gaps collaboratively and effectively  a gender assessment was considered as important 
to anticipate gap s and identify means to address those gaps. The current  assessment is being undertaken 
to inform development of the gender action plan (GAP) which will be operated across project’s 
stakeholders at different levels of the project.  
II. Objective s of assessment  
The gender assessment has specific objectives  as listed  below:  
a) Identify gender gap , examine gender roles and needs  in access to market opportunity, 
technology, climate risk information , skill, and financial services  
b) Identify gender gap in access  and control over  productive  resources and asset s 
c) Identify roles of stakeholders for operati on of gender action plan   
 
III. Methodology   
The assessment was conducted through engagement of different stakeholders including relevant  
national, sub-national institutions , communities,  and private sector actors  in project -identified 
provinces.  The question guides were prepared for the assessment and included  as an annex 1 of this 
report.  Different methods used for the assessment are outlined below:  
 
1. Desk review —project’s proposal  and feasibility studies , national  and sectorial polices and strategies 
were  collected and review ed. Relevan t aspects  from the existing studies, strategies and policies are  
being incorporated in the report of this gender assessment.  
2. Key infor mant interv iew— in-depth interviews were  undert aken  with various national, sub -national  
institution, private sector actor and community representatives to assess their views related to gender 
gaps  in agriculture sector and within specific scope of the proposed project. Total of 14 in-depth 
interviews with  total of 30 participants (of whom 8 participants are women) were  conducted with 
representatives of (1). MAFF ; (2). Ministry of Environ ment  (MoE) ; (3). Ministry of Water Resources 
and Meteorology  (MoWRAM) ; (4), Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA ); (5). Agriculture & Rural 
Development Bank (ARDB) ; (6). F ood and Agriculture Organization (F AO); (7 & 8 ). Provincial 
Department of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (PDAFF)  at Siem Reap and Kampong Thom ; (9 &


---
*Page 143*
---

6 
 10). Provincial Department of Environment (PDE)  at Siem Reap and Kampong Th om; (11 & 12). 
Provincial Department of Women’s Affairs (PDoWA)  at Siem Reap and Kampong Thom;  (13). Echo -
farm  at Siem Reap ; and  (14). Preah Vihear Meanchey Union of Agricultural Cooperative (PMUAC) . To 
minimize risk of COVID -19 and t ravel time, the interviews were conducted virtually  and face -to-face . 
The list of persons met is available in annex 3 of t his report.  
 
3. Focus Group discussion— A total of 4  Focus Group Discussions (FDGs) were organized at different 
communities in Siem Reap and Kampong Thom. FGDs were organized with the same arrangements at 
Siem Reap and Kampong Thom. At Siem Reap, 10 (5 women) committee members and members of 
Community Protected area (CPA)  living on top of Kulen mountain (national park) , at Svay Lue district , 
Siem Reap province  were invited to participate in FGD . A total of 18 participants  (11 women), of whom 
are the  committee members and members of Agriculture Cooperative (AC) were invited to participate 
the FGD organized at Sot Nikum district, Siem Reap province. At Kampong Thom,  12 (4 women) 
committee membe rs and members of CPA living in Prasat Sombo district were engaged in the FGD, 
and 19 (12 women)  committee members and members of AC were also engaged for FGD at Santuk 
district. Engagement of these participants was combined between  community leaders, smallholder 
farmers, value chain actors, and producers . The FGDs took  between 60 to 90 minutes , organized at 
open spaces to avoid risk of COVID -19 transmission. The FGDs were moderated by national gender 
consultant expert and supported by an assistant. All participants were requested con sent  to discuss 
on the assessment’s topics as well as  recording.   
4. Limitation : Due to time constrain , the FGDs and in -dept interviews were agreed to be conducted in 
Siem Reap and Kampong Thom , and one interview was organized virtually with farmer union at Preah 
Vihear. COVID -19 pandemic  also caused some limitations for organizing the face -to-face meetings 
with key national representatives.  
IV. Findings  
1. Country context  
Cambodia grew at an average rate of 7.6% from 1994 -2015 and became a lower middle -income economy 
in 2015.  The agriculture sector contributed about a quarter to annual GDP, it was the source of 36.4 % (or 
3.1 million jobs) of all jobs in 2016. About 46.3%  (or 3 million people) of rural population still rely on 
agriculture for employment.  Employment creation supplied by the agriculture sector grew at 2.8 % driven 
by agricultural development boosted by rising agriculture commodity prices and cultivated land 
expansion4.  The MAFF gender mainstreaming policy and strategic framework (2016 -2020) still recognizes 
 
4 2018 Job diagnostic study, the World Bank


---
*Page 144*
---

7 
 that about 82% of the households liv e in rural areas. A large majority of these households engage in rice 
based agriculture, fisheries, collection of forest products, crops, and livestock production. Agriculture 
remains central to the livelihood of small farm holders and women. Marjority of Cambodian rural women 
work in agriculture on their own land or  carry out unpaid agriculture work. There are 2.3 milion agriculture 
households in Cambodia, of which 80% are male headed and 20% are female headed.  
Cambodian women farmers increasingly supply local markets with traditional and high -value produce, but 
com pare d to men, women still face a number of disadvantage s including lower mobility, lower level s of 
literacy  (75% compared to 85% for men – figures only available for 2015) , less access to training, less 
access to market information, and less access to prod uctive resources. Lower financial literacy of women 
than men and travel safety are identified as main gender gaps in Cambodia to access to markets for 
women. To market their products, women farmers need timely, reliable, and accessible market 
information. Financial services are also essential so that women smallholder farmers can pay for inputs, 
improve farming, and develop small business enterprise s to empower themselves economically and 
support their family.  
Migration has a strong influence on gender roles and division of labor in rural areas. It can have impacts 
in the level of participation which women have had in agriculture value chain and agro -business activities. 
The key contributing factor to this change is increased migration of young women and men to garment 
factories, construction work, service industry and others. Rural households are often made up of only the 
elderly and children with working age adults, predominantly men, migrat ing outside their co mmunity.  
From an institutional and operational perspective, NR -V, has hightlighted challenges in agriculture sector. 
Gender disaggregated data and qualitative studies on the impacts of climate change to women and 
vulnerable groups have not been sufficient ly undertaken to regularly inform the implementing roadmap. 
Although, the master plan and action plan are prepared, insufficient resources remain a main challenge 
for implementing and mainstreaming gender into resilience and adapt ation to reduce risks of d isaster and 
threat of climate change. Women’s representation at decision making levels remain s low compar ed to 
men, especially in  rural areas with this more pronounced for women of ethnic minority5. As part of efforts 
to address this t he NR -V suggest s strengthening partnership and coordination mechanisms at all levels.  
2. Policy landscape   
Overall, t here are development policies supporting and shaping how Cambodia is moving forward in 
address ing gender gaps and achieving the goal of gender equality.  The Cambodian government has 
demonstrated initiatives and support for gender equality over the past two -decades. Equality between 
men and women is guaranteed  in the 1993 Cambodian Constitution. This c ommitment is also reinforced 
by Cambod ia’s ratification of the Convention on Elimination of Discrimination  against Women (C EDAW) 
in 1992. In term of Climate Change, The Royal Government of Cambodia has signed international 
conventions on women’s rights at an internationally guaranteed standard with the commitment to 
address gender issues that links with environment and climate change. One of these commitments was the signing of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in the year 1996 , the 
Kyoto Protocol in the year 2003  and the Paris Convention in December 2015 (COP21) .  
Gender equality is one of the important cross -cutting themes of the government’s socio -economic policy 
as reflected in the 2001 Land Management Law, Rectangular Strate gy Phase IV (RS -Phase IV) indicating 
 
55 Ministry of Women’s Affairs  (2019 -2023) , Neary Rattanak V, five years strategic plan for strengthening gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment


---
*Page 145*
---

8 
 for Growth, Employment, Equity, and Efficiency: Building the Foundation Toward Realizing the Cambodia 
Vision 2050. Under the commitment of RS -phase IV, the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) as 
well as the 10 -year National Program for Sub -national Democratic Development (NP -SNDD)  specify the 
need to further improve the status of women, who are recognized as the backbone of Cambodian society and economy.  
The Neary Rattanak (NR) is a national strategic plan develop ed since 1999. Its implementation is led and 
coordinated by the Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA) which aims to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment in all sectors. Currently, NR Phase V (2019 -2023) is being implemented by all 
government and no n-government institutions and private sector stakeholders to accelerate and 
strengthen gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
 
Women in agriculture is a key element in the NR -V, which placed under the strategic pillar of women’s 
economic empowerment. The NR-V also has its specific indication to support women farmers address the 
impacts of climate change.  
RGC has also developed the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan  (CCCSP) 2014 -2023 that aims to 
reduce gender vulnerability and risks to climate change impacts. Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA) is a 
participating ministry to the formation of the CCCSP which is being coordinated by the Ministry of 
Environment (MoE). The CCCSP 2014 -2023 action plan has set one of its objectives to “Reduce sectoral, 
regional, and gender vulnerabilities and health risks related to climate change impacts”. The CCCSP’s M&E 
framework has further developed a gender- sensitive target/  indicator: “By 2020, 10% of the protected 
areas, conservation areas, agro -ecosystems and forest ecosystems including mangroves, that have been 
under a lot of pressures in recent years are in an advanced state of restoration and are providing enhanced 
services, particularly to women, elders and children in local communities and indigenous ethnic minority 
groups”. The focus of this target/  indicator is on the supply of essential services, including services related 
to water, health, food security, climate change adaptation, resistance and resilience to land degradation or natural disasters and, in general, services related to livelihoods and the well- being of Cambodians. It 
emphasizes  addressing specific needs of women, local communities , ethnic minorities, and other 
vulnerable groups.  
CCCSP 2014 -2023 includes  strategies to incorporate women into decision -making on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, and natural resources management; increase awareness and relevant 
capacities on gender and climate change within MoWA and its decentralized offices and other 
stakeholders; conduct research on gen der and climate change; and deliver targeted interventions for 
women related to climate change adaptation and mitigation.  
As a follow -up to CCCSP, a Gender and Climate Change Strategic Plan (GCCSP) 2014 –2023 and a second  
Gender and Climate Change Action Pl an (GCCAP) 2019 –2023 , and a master plan for gender and climate 
change (2018 -2030)  were prepared and used as a roadmap for formulating the projects and programs  by 
MoWA. GCCAP 201 9–2023 keeps the same six priorities  as the 1
st GCCAP, including a) integratin g gender 
into climate adaptation and mitigation plans , b) i ncreasing women’s decision -making power at all levels , 
c) improving data on gendered roles in climate change adaptation , d) d esigning gender indicators for a 
national monitoring and evaluation fram ework on climate change , and e) d esigning gender -responsive 
climate change adaptation and mitigation projects.  By the end of 2019,  a master plan for gender and 
climate change (2018 -2030) , were adopted to pilot projects which focused on gender analysis, cap acity 
building for women and climate resilience and adaptation, safe water management and hygiene and


---
*Page 146*
---

9 
 disaster risk reduction during flood and drought season. Kampong Thom province is one of the piloting 
project’s areas along with three other provinces6. 
MoWA’s Gender and Climate Change Committee (GCCC) has developed the capacity of relevant institution  
staff at national and sub -national level on gender mainstreaming in climate change. The national 
guidelines on gender mainstreaming in investment for adapt ation to climate change in five inter- sectors 
have been prioritized7.  
Within national policy and strategic guidance , GMAG of MAFF developed and implemented  its five -year  
(2016- 2020) gender mainstreaming policy and strategic framework in agriculture  with three strategic 
objectives included: (1). to promote women’s economic empowerment through women’s access to goods 
and services for agricultural development and markets ; (2). to strengthen capacities, resources,  and 
commitment within MAFF to ensure effectiv e mainstreaming of gender perspectives into the agriculture 
sector; (3). to increase women’s and men’s equal representation and participation in agriculture sector.  
Currently, GMAG- MAFF is developing its updated gender mainstreaming policy and strategic framework  
(2022- 2026).  
3. Gender gaps and roles at community  
 
3.1. Agricultural cooperatives  committee s and member ship . Results from the gender assessment shows  
that women’s representation as members in AC is higher than men, approximately 70% women  
members.  Table 1 below shows number of AC,  members,  and female members  in Cambodia and the 
4 targeted provinces of PEARL project.  Table 2 shows the AC’s unions in Cambodia and the  unions in  
four provinces.  Data of w omen’s representation a s AC’s committee members /leaders , however,  is not 
available . Therefore, the FGD  with AC  conducted at Sot Nikum district, Siem Reap  province  reported 
that the AC has 376 members/households (326 women) 5 committee members and only 1 male 
member. The 4 female committee members are the  AC leader, and accountants while the male 
member works to help transport inputs and products inside the community.  
 At Santuk district, Kampong Thom province, AC has total of 148 households /members (majority is 
female member  but data is not available ), 9 committee member s of whom 2 of them are female 
members. This AC is led men and the two women work as accountant and assistant.  Once asked the 
reasons why the AC is being led by women, the women committee members indicat ed that they have 
support and motivation from their family, especially their husband and community members.  The law 
on AC 201 3 stat es that women and men serv ing as elected representatives are accountable to the 
membership. Agricultural cooperatives members  have equal voting rights. S ome women who 
attended the FGDs indicated that they do not feel sufficiently confident  and capable  to be AC leader 
considering the lack of capacity and  are busy with daily household works and cares while men are 
considered more  appropriated to take the role  due to  their  higher chance for mobility,  and access ing 
to information, technology,  and market.  In addition, m en seemed to be considered having better 
knowledge for making  decision.  
3.2. Agricultural cooperative  business modality.  Different business modalities th e two assessed ACs are  
focusing on. AC at Sot Nikum district, Siem Reap province is focusing on chicken raising, input supplies, 
 
6 Battambong, Prey Veng, Kampot  
7 1.Agriculture, 2. Rural Development, 3.  Health, 4. Water Resources, 5.  Public Works and Transport


---
*Page 147*
---

10 
 and inter -lending. Among 376 members/households, 105 are raising chicken. The business  production  
is only chicken . The AC has secured contracts with two buyer companies ( the chicken grill and Kasica 
company ). During the FGD, the committee members and members indicated their confidence in 
having good skill to raise small- scale chicken  at individual household .  
 
On average, each member household raise start 100 chicks and the members can buy chicks from 
their AC member living and producing inside the community. All members stated that they are 
confident and  motivated  to raise chicken as there is no market concern . The buyer companies always 
collect buying their chicken  inside their villages  every week  with agreed price, 1kg. chicken costs  
1,6000 riel (equal to $4). As mentioned in above, ACs have more female  members as they stay home 
for household works and care and small- scale agriculture activities while more men migrate for labor 
wage. Indicated during the FGD, female members indicated that raising chicken can help them to 
make additional incomes , and at the same time, they can also spe nd time for household works and 
other agriculture activities such as rice and home -garden.  
 
Indicated in the discussion, most of members have land for producing rice but their main constrain t 
is the lack of water sources and irrigation  support, which mean s farmers  can only produce rice once 
a year and rely on rainfall. The committee and members stated that they want to extend their business 
to rice as they can see the potential of market and land availability  among farmers. They considered 
the technical su pport and training needed  for higher product -price will be given by various 
stakeholders including government and non -government institutions. They also tried to calculate 
input and production costs  with support of water sources testing  and found that rice production is 
another pot ential agri- business for their community.  Once aske d about challenges the AC and its 
members may face , if engaged to this sector, most of them indicated that they can be technically 
confident as the y found technical supports, if  water sources  made available. The female members 
indicated that they might  need to work on rice production with men  in term of  access to  technologies 
and machineries.  
 
This AC shows very strong management structure and operation. Therefore, the AC committee wish es 
to support their members to access to financial services for extension of their productivity and 
improving income.  The AC is trying to extend their product ion capacity to better supply the buyer 
companies. The committee also wishes to increase more members to increase their production 
capacity  to larger scale.  
 
AC at Santuk district, Kampong Thom province focuses  on a single modality which is cashew . All FGD’s 
participants  stated that all lands for cashews have no land’s titl e or ownership certificate while their 
lands for rice are legal8. All farmers feel unsecured for cashew lands,  but they can only continue using 
it. As stated above, this AC is being led by male leaders  while female members are working to support 
the AC.  The AC has its own land and cashew nuts warehouses, of which the AC spent their own budget 
for buying the land and building two small warehouse s, and one bigger newly built warehouse was 
funded by the government and people of Japan  in July 2021.  The biggest challenge this AC faces is the 
lack of capital  to start -up their business  operation , to collecting /buying  cashew nuts from each 
member/household and sell to the contracted buyers /companies . Without its  financial capacity, all 
 
8 Lands for rice and cashew are at  different sites of national road . Farmers indicated that cashew lands are more costly than lands for rice.


---
*Page 148*
---

11 
 warehouses haven’t been used yet and the farmers still sell their cashew nuts to middlemen and local 
traders with unstable low prices. Once asked about cost calculation in production of cashew  nuts, the 
AC committee and members see med to be unclear. However, some of members indicated that an 
average of one hectare land  per year with cashew  production , farmer can earn  approximately $300 -
$500,  after labor costs .  
 
3.3. Community protected area.  A total of 31  Community Protected Areas  (CPA) are identified  in 
Cambodia, whic h are divided by areas/zones. All these protected areas have total of 309 ,463 hectares. 
The 31 CPAs have total of  182 communities,  with 55,446 members/households and 1,802 committees, 
of which 339 are female committee mem bers (equal to 19%)9. Once asked during the FGDs, both men 
and women at Kunlen mountain CPA (national park) stated that the ir CPA has more male committee 
members and more females as members. Although, the participants indicated that women and men 
living in this area can go into forest for taking forest product s in equal opportunity but still more men 
play the leadership roles given consideration that men are more able to move across the areas , 
participate in meeting s and make decision s while more women are accepted to stay home tak ing role 
of household work and care . In addition, women and men still consider gender norm has limited 
women’s access to information related to agriculture and opportunity in b eing a community leader.  
 
The CPA  at Prasat Sambo district , Kampong Thom province  has only one female committee member  
out of six committee members . The CPA is reportedly  more than 10km from a community, which 
causes more concerns and limitation for women  to be ranger and to participate in patrolling  with their 
male counterparts. It was noted in discussion that the  female committee member never joins  the 
ranger group with men given a consideration that a single woman is inappropriate to go into the fo rest 
with men , especially at nighttime .  
 
Ministry of Environment’s Prakas 066 (article 13) stat es that women are encouraged to participate in 
committee vote. Therefore, MOE, PDoE and FGD’s participants indicated that each CPA  should 
encourage women’s part icipation in CP A’s committee s and attending the forest  patrol s. Due to 
gender norm s linked to movement in remote areas as well as roles within household (food 
preparation, childcare) as well as limited experience / capacity in engagement in decision making  
forum and patrol activities there are lower levels of engagement and opportunities for women within 
the CPA structures. Even where women are rangers their roles may be limited to cook ing for other 
male rangers . Representatives of MoWA and PDoWA also observed  the same,  with  gender norm s still 
limit ing opportunity and access of women.  
 Both CPAs at Kulen mountain and at Prasat Sambo district have their farming land, of which each 
member has approximately 1 -2 hectare s per household. These lands are mostl y used for cashew and 
the farmers can earn similar amount annually which is $300 -$500 per hectare, after labor cost.  As 
indicated, most of household  member s produce cashew  without using fertilizer or pesticid e, partially 
due to price of these inputs compar ed to cashew  price s. Most of FGD’s participants  indicated that 
price of agricultural inputs  almost double d during COVID -19, however, price of their outputs 
decreased . Almost all members indicated that producing cashew  requires less time compared to rice 
and other crops,  but farmers  need to use external labors ( women and men seasonal migrants, and 
 
9 Data on information of community protected areas in Cambodia, Ministry  of Environment (2021)


---
*Page 149*
---

12 
 laborers living in the same community) during harvest season which is costly (approximately $10 -12 
per person/day) . 
 
3.4. Access to agrometeorological services . Climate risk information is frequently shared from provincial 
department through telegram to the committee members/leaders and then shared to other 
members , as indicated by AC in Sot Nikum district, while AC in Santuk district , and the two  CPAs can 
only access through the frequent announcement  of the ministry and its provincial department 
(through TV, radio, Facebook, etc.,).  In addition  to this, the circulation of climate risk information is 
still broader (regional/zon e level) than specific forecast s which farmers need to access and adapt into 
their daily agricultural production. As indicated by  representative s of Ministry of Water Resources and 
Meteorology  (MoWRAM) , climate risk information can be technically forecast and circulate d to more 
specific areas. The ministry also has commitment to train sub -national staff, especially women to 
provide responsive agrometeorological services to farmers.  
Some members  of AC and CPA  are poor and vulnerable households, and most of them do not have 
smart phone to access for information, especially, climate risk information, technology, and market 
price. The PDAFF representatives indicated that  to increase productivity, and  get higher -price , farmers 
need to be “ smart ” using technology, machineries,  and access to  responsive  climate information. 
Farmers can access to climate information and market price once they have smart phone and know 
how to access it . However, it is acknowledged that women still face number of disadvantages in their 
agricultural production including access to climate information, market, and technology.  
Although, the climate risk information is often shared to members, female farmers still have lower 
access to this inform ation and lack of capacity to interpret it into their adaptation and p roduction. 
Female farmers indicated that they take all responsibility of household works and care every day. Since many men migrat e for labor intensive works, female farmers experience a  greater burden from  
household and care  work,  and agricultural production. Some farmers seemed to acknowledge that 
they did not take enough caution to climate risk s, which can impact  their production.  
3.5. Access to financial service s. Based on the AC ’s internal regulation  (AC at Sot Nikum district) , each 
member/household can put more than one share in  the amount of 50,000 riel or $12.5. Within this 
share, each member/household can access AC’s loan with  a maximum  amount of 200,000 riel or $50 
per share . Of this limitation  of inter -lending amount, the members still need to access  a loan with a 
Micro -Finance Institution (MFI), of which they are required to deposit their collaterals. As indicated 
in the FG D, most of AC’s members access to loan with MFI with different amounts.  
As above mentioned, AC at Santuk district is facing their biggest challenge related to financial 
resources to start -up their AC’s business  operation  with cashew nuts and later investment is c ashew 
wine. During the FGD, the committee and members indicated they need approximately  $500,000 to 
$700,000. AC’s committee members ( all men) have tried to reach out to MFI and Agricultur al and 
Rural Development Bank (ARDB) to access to loan  but no signif icant results have been received. The 
contributing constrain  factors  are considered to lack of collaterals, new start -up with a large amount 
of capital and business modality needs to be more  convincing. The AC committee are still unclear how 
they can gain access to this level of finance.  
When asked about individual member s in FGDs with  AC and CPA , most members have taken loan s 
from MFI  to buy their agricultural inputs, household consumable mater ials, schooling,  and cultu ral


---
*Page 150*
---

13 
 and traditional participation (i.e., wedding and funeral events). Some FGD participants indicated that 
they themselves and other members also buy the agricultural inputs from the suppliers by paying 
them during the harvest season, with an interest rate  as compared  to the direct payment. Based on 
MFI’s requirements to access loan s, farmers need to deposit their collaterals and prepare a series of 
supportive  documents  (administrative letters, business plan and business operation principal, etc.) , 
which all need the agreement and fingerprints of both wife and husband.  
Table 1: Agricultural Cooperative  
Agricultura l Cooperative  
Location  # of AC  Total AC 
member  Female 
member  Total 
share  Total amount 
of share  Govt. grant  Non -govt. 
grant  Other 
grants  Total 
amount  
Cambodia  1,217  155,859  98,900  2,001,158  50,174,093,700  761,495,000  28,674,349,  
659 22,780,117,  
408 102,390,055,  
767 
Kampong 
Thom  77 10,683  7,249  79,183  3,983,609,700  98,116,400  2,306,573,  
099 1,192,365,  
720 7,580,664,  
919 
Siem Reap  58 8,688  6,817  63,314  1,802,030, 000 53,402,000  1,750, 563,  
700 755,116,  
069 4,361,111,  
769 
Preah 
Vihear  43 10,635  7,046  191,854  3,887,640,000  13,485,600  1,076 ,886,  
100 1,530, 733,  
834 6,508,745,  
534 
Oddar 
Meanchey  36 4,596  2,888  13,441  888,250,000  13,050,000  1,061,733,  
300 442,43 4, 
462 2,405,467,  
762 
Source: General Directorate of Agriculture , Department of Agriculture Cooperative Promotion ( February 2022)  
Table 2: Agricultural Cooperative Union  
Agricultural Cooperative Union  
Location  # Of 
AC 
Union  Total 
AC Private 
company  # Of 
share  Amount of 
share  Govt. 
grant  Non -govt. 
grant  Other grants  Total amount  
Cambodia  15 272 04 1,703  1,809,500,000  1,000,000  389,439,600  1,183,057,743  3,382,997 ,343  
Kampong 
Thom  1 20 0 21 21,000,000    2,000,000  23,000,000  
Siem Reap  2 38 0 535 535,000,000  1,000,000   43,263,927  579,263, 927 
Preah 
Vihear  1 25 0 52 52,000,000   79,955,200  961,886,186  1,093,841,386  
Oddar 
Meanchey  1 16 0 60 60,000,000   9,960,000  4,803,400  74,763, 400 
Source: General Directorate of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture Cooperative Promotion (February 2022)  
3.6. Access  to technology and skill . The AC at Sot Nikum district  has received multiple supports from 
PDAFF, and NGOs on chicken raising skills. In the community  there are village volunteers as   focal 
person/trainer (the volunteers are also members of AC)  who provide s short technical training to other 
farmers/members on a variety of topics, including  chicken  raising , vaccinat ion, and disease  risk redu ction . 
Purchasing companies can also provide capacity development opportunities,  free of charge. As  stated 
during the FGD, there is only one chick producer in the area and this does not have the capacity to supply 
enough chicks to all AC members.  While skills can be transferred to other members, this opportunity is 
hindered by the need for investment s to be made .


---
*Page 151*
---

14 
 The AC at Santuk district, Kampong Thom province, indicated that the  majority of farmers still rely o n 
traditional practice s to produce cashew nuts. Some farmers can afford to buy and use fertilizers and 
pesticides , but other far mers prefer growing  cashew without other inputs  due to financial reason . 
However, the AC noted  that the production capacity for its  members is still very low, with  an average 
production of 2,800kg/year  per hectare .  
According to participants, the current production of cashew is only  about half of what the AC could 
potentially produce . AC members indicated the need for improving their technical  skills on cashew and 
other production lines around cashew (peeling cashew, cook ing by machine, and packaging, etc., ). The AC 
has invested in agricultural  machin eries  to meet the  local  demand  of end user buyers  for cashew products . 
Although, majority of committee members are men,  but more women members are using these 
machineries for cashew nuts production  as they were trained by NGO partners on how to use them 
correctly , and men seemed to spend more time for access to market and financial support  with mobility 
and m eeting outside their community.   
However, some female members indicated that they need to improve their access to technology and use 
of machinery  and quality of the cashew nuts to compete with private sector cashew nuts producers.  The 
committee indicated that once financial resources are in place, they will be able to create more job s for 
female members through cashew processing and the engagement in different product lines. As 
mentioned  earlier in the report , the AC and their key committee members receive technical training and 
support from different stakeholders. One of those support is to process  cashew fruits to be wine.  
The ACs seem ed to have different levels of access to skill and technology , based on the delivery 
mechanisms and geographical coverage of rural services . The business  of the AC in  Sot Nikum district 
appeared to be functional , with an  active and productive committee, the regular engagement of its  
members , and the provision of various support from government provincial  departments, NGOs and  
private actors . According to the respondents, t echnological and technical support is always available and 
easy -to-access by male and female farmers  at their community .  
The village volunteers who are local trainer and/or focal person s are well trained and accessible at village -
based level. At  the FGD both men and women acknowledge d that, although more women are involve d in 
agricultural production , they have lower access to technology and skill to enhance  production levels and 
price . This gap was attributed to gender norms where women are socially expected to take household 
work and care dut ies and men are expected to work outside home and have better mobility inside and 
outside their community.   
The CPA’s committee and members who are mostly producing cashew tend to rely on traditional methods , 
using either none or a small amount of fertilizer and /or pesticide. All members living in the two assessed 
areas produce cashew only and sell cashew nuts to local traders or middlemen .  
Respondents indicated that when training are organized in  the community , men seem to be more likely 
to attend based on the local  perception  that men already have a good knowledge and  absorb  it faster, 
they have a greater mobility, and are responsible for m aking decision s. On the other hand, women  are 
considered to attend training only when t he man is not available . Household work and care dut ies are 
contributing factors  to limit women’s access to skill and technology. This gender gap is considered by AC , 
CPA and other farmer members as a disadvantage for produc ing agricultural products at their full capacity.


---
*Page 152*
---

15 
 3.7. Access to market opportunit ies. AC at Sot Nikum district, Siem Reap province has two contracts with  
buyer companies who are running their business i n Siem Reap. The contracts  were facilitated by multiple 
actors including PDAFF, NGOs, and AC’s committee leaders and members. The contracts are considered a 
strong market linkage between farmers/producers , value chain actors  and buyers. As indicated during the 
FGD, price of chicken (1,600 riel/kg) is set  for three month s. Producers/farmers and buyers can re -
negotiate every  three months. Within these contracts, the AC’s committee has good capacity to 
coordinate and manage supply an d demand si des.  
All members who attended the FGD stated that they are satisfied with contract condition, price and are 
motivated to continue and extend their production, if financial s ervices made available for them. AC’s 
committee leader and members indi cated that they need to monitor their members closely related to 
selling chicken as  all AC members can only sell to contracted buyers. In case members are found selling 
their chicken to non -contract ed buyers, those members will be dismissed from the AC.  The reason of 
doing so is because the AC require s to respect for contract’s condition and ensure sustainable price for 
their products.  
Access to market opportunity for AC at Santuk district, Kampong Th om seem ed to be a concern as all 
members are still selling their cashew nuts once a year during harvest season and to middlemen and/or 
local traders with unstable price. The AC’s committee leader and members indicated that having contract 
farming is uneasy  for them as they do not have financial resource to man age buying cashew  nuts  from 
each member household to sell in large scale to big buyer companies. As indicated, the big buyer companies prefer to buy in large quantity  of cashew  nuts —not household by household. This presents 
challenges for access to markets until financial resources to manage wholesale and retail are achieved .  
Despite  facilitation from PDAFF and other NGOs, the process of  negotiati ng contract farming remain ed 
difficu lt in Kampong Thom for cashew and rice.  Most of participants stated that producing cashew , they 
can make little income per year or if they calculate as well by including their own labor cost, they almost earn nothing from it. However, they remain ed keen to continu e the production because they do not want 
to keep land unused or at least they can  earn from it, even it is little. Representatives from PDAFF and 
AC’s committee members indicated that, even if moving their business to contract farming is challen ging, 
they prefer to  continu e pursuing contracts with  company buyers. PDAFF also showed its  commitment to 
facilitat ing contract farming for ACs and encourage d the formation of new  ACs to improve the quantity 
and quality of production and consequentially se ll the agricultural products at a higher price and/or 
pursue market opportunities .  
Farmers living in CPAs, indicated that all of the  cashew nuts they produce are s old to local traders or 
middlemen  within their community.  The price is often dictated by  buyers , of which the farmers seemed 
to have little or zero chance to negotiate the price.  At the assessed areas, farmers are not organized  as 
entrepreneur uniform  to try increase their productivity or market price. As  such, their cashew production 
result in  low margin of quantity , earning and income each year.  While m ost of farmers in the areas noted 
the importance of  contract farming, they were unaware of the process involved in attaining contract 
farming . Representatives of MoE and PDoE indicated that  institutions aim at  creating more job s for 
farmers , while ensur ing the conservation of natural resources, especially forest s. However, there are 
several challenges to address and more investment s and initiatives  are need ed to support the farmers.  
3.8. Control over resources and assets.  The national constitution and other national laws, guarantee 
equality between men and women , including on control over resources and assets. National law on land


---
*Page 153*
---

16 
 management considers equality between men and women to own their land  legally. Once farmers are 
able to access to loan s, both wife and husband are required to mutually agree to take  the loan and both 
of them are required to sign on  the loan document. Results from FGDs  showed that women and men can 
equally own their land and take benefits from it. In CPA  areas, women and men can equal ly benefits from 
forest products . However,  there are structural barriers  that may hinder the capacity of women to equally 
access  to these resources . Some participants indicated that  women could  go into forest to collect forest 
products almost every  day and that they can even collect more than men wh en the forest is near or close 
to their home ( given example of forest on Kulen mountain, Siem Reap province). On the contrary , less 
women collect forest products if  the forest is more than 10km from their village  (Forest in Prasat Sambo 
district, Kampong Thom). As such, some women can only go inside the forest with  the presence of a 
trusted man , considering their concern about safety and security during travel ( from village to  the forest ) 
and inside the forest.  
 
Once asked about control over agriculture land and other assets, both men and women (AC and CPA ) 
indicated that they have equal rights to own land, agricultural equipment and household assets , 
consider ing that  both of “their names are in land titles  and ac knowledged by authorities”. However, some 
female participants who attended the FGDs did not know the size of their land indicating that their  
husband kn ew more clearly  about this . Some participants indicated that both wife and husband can make 
equal decision to select crops, buy equipment and household expenses. However, some of the  women 
and men who attended the FGDs indicated that men have better chance to make decision as “they a re 
men ” and have  greater mobility and  better knowledge and chance to access to information . As such, men 
should be the one  mak ing the “right ” decision for agricultural products , use and  control  over resources 
and other assets.  
3.9 –Sexual  Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual  Harassment  (SEAH) and Gender Based Violence (GBV)   
Within consultations it was noted that limited feedback was provided with regard to potential risks of 
SEAH and GBV linked to project activities. However the assessment notes that these risks exist based on 
broader trends within the target population and t hat these may be exacerbated by project activities. An 
assessment undertaken by the National Institute of Statistics noted that 33% of women  over the age of 
15, in rural areas reported  experiencing violence10 and that half of Cambodian women and more than a 
quarter of men believed there were conditions that justify violence against women. While change is occurring across the project population and has done since these surveys were conducted risks remain, especially linked to project interventions which will change the existing dynamics within rural households 
and communities. These elements will include:  
Risks linked to minor labour influxes  and enhanced mobility of actors  – due to improved levels of 
productivity and enhanced value from production systems t he project may result in minor influx of labo ur 
and employment income differentials in local communities. This may increase the demand for sex work, 
including the risk for trafficking of women for the purposes of sex work; or the risk of forced early 
marriage. Furthermore, higher wages for workers in a community can lead to an increase in transactional 
 
10 National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General for Health, and ICF International, 2015. Cambodia Demographic and 
Health Survey 2014. Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General  
for Health , and ICF International. Available at  https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR312/FR312.pdf


---
*Page 154*
---

17 
 sex. The risk of incidents of sex between laborers and minors, even when it is not transactional, can also 
increase.   
The proposed project also envisages increased agricultural activities on and off the farm, improved 
productivity of critical food crops and will create short term employment opportunities in the project 
target areas, and hence mobility of both women and men will be enhanced.  In light of the cultural aspects 
and gender biases, higher mobility may expose women to more risks of GBV.   
Risks linked to changes in household labour and income balance -  Women hold primary  responsibility 
within target areas for household chores and caregivin g, which require much time and energy. They will 
be adding another task to their already full plate by participating in the project. It cannot but result in 
less time spent in household chores and caregiving, which may well cause dissatisfaction of male members of the household and lead to violence against the women.  
Women may also face opposition of their husbands and other male family members for their wish to 
participate in the project. In some households, the situation may escalate to violence. If their  spouses 
are not involved in the project, the possibility of violence is higher. Women beneficiaries may be harassed 
or attacked also by men outside their households, who are not involved in the project and take out their 
frustration on the women.  
If women ’s income increases, that fact may make men to feel insecure and turn violent against the 
women. If women refuse to give up their earnings to their husbands and other male family members, that is likely to trigger violence against the women.  
Risks linked to project personnel  and executing agencies  –  While all project related personnel are 
engaged on the condition that they follow all relevant  Codes of Conduct, including those on sexual 
exploitation and abuse, risks exist that female and male beneficiaries may be asked for sex or related 
favo urs in exchange for participation in the project or for obtaining agricultural inputs.  
Risks linked to changing household dynamics and potential for child labour  - Considering that many 
project participants are heads of households, there is potential  for children to be involved in project 
activities . FAO experiences show that almost no  agricultural intervention is neutral in terms of child 
labo ur. The children are affected by the changes in adults’ responsibilities in the field and also by the 
changes in the adults’ ability to carry out household chores, which are caused by the changes in the field.  
V. Conclusion and r ecommendations  
The assessment has noted a number of key considerations and potential r ecommendations based on 
reviews of existing literature and past project development actions as well as consultations carried out as part of the assessment. The below section summarises these and links them with the points included 
within the gender action plan and main funding proposal. It is also noted that at present many of these 
interventions remain broad with more specific and targeted interventions to be developed as part of 
project implementation once specific target agricultural cooperatives and CPA s have been identified as 
well as through development of key project products (e.g. commodity strategic plan development) , many 
of these elements will be coordinated by the National Gender Specialist with Support from FAO HQ and 
other consultants as outlin ed in the funding proposal . Key element of th e central approach however  
include:


---
*Page 155*
---

18 
 Agricultural system specific: 
Access to agrometeorological services  – there are significant limitation in womens’ capacity to access 
effective agrometeorological information due to a number of factors with main elements of this outlined 
below:  
• Capacity  – existing gender disparities (linked to lower access to education and training) as well as 
access to technology such as mobile phones has limited the capacity of women to fully access and 
understand agrometeorological information as well as other market information.  
• Quality of systems  – existing agrometeorological information systems are limited in their scope 
and level of details as well as accuracy and as such are not as useful to any farmer, including women, as they are needed to be.  
• Coverage of systems – the system currently does not cover areas in sufficient detail nor provide 
information tailored to different production systems with small scale systems, often women led, 
such as vegetable farming that have high needs for such systems often being poorly catered for.   
Recommendations  – in the development of the agrometeorological systems it is  critical that consideration 
be given to a range of different needs with this including both information production and how that 
information is disseminated.  
These recommendations have been considered and are included within the gender action plan and 
mainstreamed into the project document.  
 
Access to information and market opportunities –  as noted within the agrometeorological systems points 
above and the content of this report, women face a number of challenges linked to gender norms and 
systemic gender  issues. A number of these key issues are noted below along with recommendations on 
steps to address them and links with how these are considered within the gender action plan and main 
project document.  
• Access to information – women often have more limited  access to information due to a number 
of reasons that are both due to structural inequalities (e.g. lower access to education) as well as 
gender norms (e.g. limited roles in decision making bodies as well as lower access to technology).  
• Mobility – across all interviews lower levels of mobility for women (whether it be in terms of 
taking product to market, accessing more remote farm areas or being engaged in community PA 
patrols) was noted as a barrier to addressing a number of gender gaps .  
• Gender norms within family –  it was widely noted that women continue to full -fill many of the 
domestic roles within households and as such have less time available to undertake other activities linked to agricultural development of leadership roles.  
• Access to finance – access to finance was also noted as a challenge across genders with the specifc 
gender based issues linked to women often undertaking enterprises that were ‘new’ to the market 
or with which financial service providers had less experience and were less well adapted to 
service.  
Recommendations  – Addressing these challenges requires a combination of elements with the overall 
approach needing to target a wholistic approach to addressing gender disparities. Key elements of this include:


---
*Page 156*
---

19 
 • Impro ved access to training – it is critical that female headed house -holds and other relevant 
women gain access to training through the project with elements of this being women focused 
and catering to their specific needs.  
• Awareness raising and training on g ender issues –  it is critical that there is broad action to support 
enhanced gender awareness across key project stakeholders to enhance understanding of the 
different challenges and needs faced across genders and how these can been responded to.  
• Mainstre aming of gender based approaches into key sector and business plans as well as all 
elements of project implementation –  building on the above elements gender elements but be 
mainstreamed into key project outputs in terms of strategic plans and agrometeorol ogical and 
financial services products to ensure that these are able to both meet the needs of and help address disparities between genders.  
• Development of gender aware products across the project –  all project products from information 
and awareness rais ing materials to specific technical products should be gender aware to support 
improved access to them and that they are able to functionally support reductions in gender disparities.  
Cross cutting  
Effective quantification of the impacts of the project and changes in agricultural systems for women - – 
the project is seeking to demonstrate tangible improvements in the lives of women with many women 
within the farming community facing additional challenges linked to gender norms, including demands 
linked to domestic jobs within the household, as well as restrictions on mobility and access to information on improved agricultural techniques.  
• Recommendations  - Adoption of W+ approach – the W+ standard is the first women -specific standard 
that measures  women’s empowerment in a transparent and quantifiable manner, gives a monetary 
value to results and creates a new channel to direct financial resources to women. The standard would 
thus provide the duel benefit of providing both a mechanism for the projec t to monitor impact and a 
means by which beneficiaries can gain increased market access as well as direct financial support.  
The potential of this approach has been noted within Sub -activity 2.1.2.4: Explore the possibility of 
adopting and operationalizin g W+ Standards to empower women farmers, particularly in the 
vegetable sector . 
Violence against women (VAW), and Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment  (SEAH),  – these elements 
were not widely reported with consultations but remain a risk linked to pro ject implementation  but 
remain a risk, given the prevalence of violence against women in rural areas (with 33% of women reporting 
experiencing violence
11) as well as the changing power and operational dynamics that project 
interventions will bring (as note d in Section 3.9 of the above assessment) and as such these risks must be 
addressed within the project implementation.   
 
11 National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General for Health, and ICF International, 2015. Cambodia Demographic and 
Health Survey 2014. Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and R ockville, Maryland, USA: National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General 
for Health, and ICF International. Available at  https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR312/FR312.pdf


---
*Page 157*
---

20 
 • Recommendations – the project must ensure that there are appropriate measures in place to raises 
awareness and understanding of VAW and SEAH and support education to reduce its risk. This must 
also be done in collaboration with an effective grievance and redress mechanism .  
Grievance and redress (GRMs) – detailed information on the functioning of existing GRMs was not 
available as part of the assessment.  
• Recommendations  – as noted within the ESMF the project will utilize FAO’s CO national GRM that will 
be under implementa tion when project starts. This mechanism will be further strengthened and 
supported through the project and through expertise of the National Gender Expert also cater for 
grievances raised on VAW and SEAH.  
Sustainability  – the sustainability of gender base d interventions is  critical with impacts needed to continue 
well beyond the project lifetime.  
• Recommendations – the current project has sustainability built into its design using a model of public 
private social partnerships as a means to drive change, with actions to develop business plans and strategies that are then supported by improved access to finance, agrometeorological information 
and high value markets. These objectives are fully in line with key agricultural strategies and plans 
within Cambodia including the Climate Change Action Plan for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries 
Sector 2016 -2020 (CCPAP -AFF) and Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). From a gender 
perspective the project also aligns with the Neary Rattanak (NR) Phase V, as well as t he Gender and 
Climate Change Strategic Plan (GCCSP) 2014 –2023  and second Gender and Climate Change Action 
Plan (GCCAP) 2019 –2023, as well as the master plan for gender and climate change (2018 -2030)  that 
have been prepared and used as a roadmap for formula ting the projects and programs by MoWA.  
Based on these recommendations the following action areas were developed as part of the gender action 
plan with further information being provided in Annex 1 of the current document.


---
*Page 158*
---

21 
 Annexes  
 
Annex 1: Data collection tool  
Questions for farmers  
1. Is agriculture your main household income/employment?  
a. If yes, why?  
b. If no, what else you do for living?  
2. Are you satisfied with your agriculture production?  
a. If no, why?  
b. If yes, why?  
3. Do you think you can access to sk ill, and technology for higher quality of product and higher 
price?  
a. If yes, how can you access?  
b. If no, why?  
c. If no, what need to be done for you to improve your product?  
4. Do you think you can access or have good market opportunity for your product?  
a. If ye s, how can you access?  
b. If no, why?  
c. If no, what to do to help you?  
5. Do you know about climate risk information?  
a. If yes, do you think you are aware of or can access within your village the climate 
risk information?  
b. If yes, what is it? And who share it with you?  
c. If no, how often you need it? And what is the best way to make you fully aware of 
it?  
6. Once you want to e xtend your agriculture activities and productivities, do you access to 
credit?  
a. If yes, with whom?  
b. Do you think you can fully or easily access for it? If no, why?  
7. At your household, can man and woman make equal decision to use and control over 
resources and or assets?  
a. if yes, how is the decision made?  
b. If no, why? Please give an example.  
Specific questions for value chain actors: (questions for farmers will be used here too)  
1. What are you doing in value chain?  
2. Tell us, how do you access to skill, market info, technology, local network, credit?  
3. Do you have any constraints?  
a. If yes, what are they?  
b. If no, how can you make it smoothly?  
4. Do you have enough support to improve your value chain? Why and why not?  
a. If no, what kinds of support you need? From whom?  
b. If yes, who supported you? And how?


---
*Page 159*
---

22 
 5. Do you have enough support from your family, your spouse?  
6. Tell, us, how do you manage your time for family and work?  
7. Do you think men and women can participate equally in value chain? Why? Why not?  
Specific quest ions for CPA: (questions for farmers will be used here too)  
1. what are you doing? Tell us, what do you feel of being the committee members?  
2. What is/are the benefits you gain from participation in CPA?  
3. Do you think men and women can benefit equally in from CPA?  
a. If yes, please give example  
b. If no, why?  
4. Do you have any constraints?  
a. If yes, what are they? Please give an example  
b. If no, what made y ou do good? Please give an example.  
5. Do you have enough support from your male counterparts, family, and spouse?  
6. Tell us, how do you manage your time for family and work?  
7. Do you think men and women can participate and make decision equally in CPA? why? Why 
not?  
8. Will you encourage other women to participate in CPA ?  
Specific questions for AC committee and members: (questions for farmers will be used here too)  
1. What are you doing? Tell us, what do you feel of being part of AC?  
2. What is/are your benefits from it?  
3. Do you have any challenges?  
a. If yes, what are they? Please give an example  
b. If no, what made you do good? Please give an example.  
 
4. Do you think women and men can participate and make decision equally in AC?  
a. If yes, pleas e give example.  
b. If no, why?  
5. Do you think men and women can benefit equally in their participation in AC?  
a. If yes, please give example  
b. If no, why?  
6. Do you have enough support from your male counterparts, family and spouse?  
7. Tell us, how do you manage your ti me?  
8. Will you encourage other women to participate in AC?  
9. What is your next step to promote women’s participation in AC?  
Proposed question guides for key informant interview  
1. Tell us, what is your institution/unit doing to promote women’s participation in a griculture 
and higher productivity at community and workplace?  
2. Do you have any written policy or strategy to promote women’s participation?  
a. If yes, what are they?  
b. If no, why? And how do you operate?


---
*Page 160*
---

23 
 3. Do you have any constraints in working to promote women participation at community and 
workplace?  
a. If yes, please give an example.  
b. If no, what have been done good?  
c. Do you have any good lessons learnt to share?  
4. What have you observed about male and female  farmers, value chain actors, producers and 
ACs?  
5. Have you observed any inequality /challenge  among them?  
a. If yes, what is inequality/challenge?  
b. If no, please give example  
6. Do you think promoting women’s participation at community and workplace is important?  
a. If yes, why? what to do better for them?  
b. If no, why?  
7. Do you think promoting women’s technical skill and knowledge is important? For example, in LAMS, and agrometeorolog ical forecasting ?  
a. If yes, what is your or your institutional/unit’s plan?  
b. If no, why?  
8. How do you work with other line departments/units and stakeholders including communities to promote women’s participation, and capacity development?  
9. Do you think women and men can have equal opportunity to access to skill, market, 
technology, climate info, credit…?  
a. If yes, how they can make everything equal?  
b. If no, why?  
10. In your view, what need to be done to help women smallholder farmers, value chain actors, AC, CPA, FA, at the project areas improve their participation, skill, accessibility (i.e., info, 
market, technology, climate info), and higher product?  
11. If you need t o select three key priority challenges they are facing, tell us, what are they? And 
who are in roles to address those challenges more effectively?  
12. What do they see as some of the biggest challenges to the PA’s and CPAs in the target areas.  
13. What do they s ee as biggest risks to the CPA’s that may come out of the project support 
activities (e.g. agri expansion / stress on management committees / more people staying in 
areas?  
14. What could be done to help reduce risks of negative impacts in target areas?  
15. E.g. wh at control measures are in place to help manage risks e.g. how are agricultural areas 
in PA’s managed to help avoid expansion / impacts, what systems are in place to support 
regeneration  
16. Overall do they see there as being risks linked to the project e.g. i mpacts on protected 
areas, expansion of agriculture, increased use of chemicals etc  
17. What mechanisms are in place to allow CPAs and other groups in PAs to raise grievances 
and have them redressed, how effective is this?  
Questions for local bank and private actors  
1. What have you observed around male and female farmers, value chain actors, producers and 
ACs?


---
*Page 161*
---

24 
 2. Have you observed any inequality /challenge  among them?  
c. If yes, what is inequality/challenge?  
d. If no, please give example  
3. What is your company/bank doing to  work with or support farmers, value chain actors, 
producers and ACs?  
4. Do you have any disaggregation between women and men in your work?  
a. If yes, how do you the work?  
b. If yes, have you observed any changes, positive and/or negative results?  
c. If no, why?  
5. In your view, what need to be done to female help formers, value chain actors, producers and 
ACs to have better participation, accessibility, productivity, and market price?  
6. Do you have other suggestions?


---
*Page 162*
---

25


---
*Page 163*
---

26 
  
References  
Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), 2001. The Land Law.  
 
Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), 2008. The  Law on Protected Area . 
 Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), 2013. Law on Agricultural Cooperatives.  
 Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) , 2016-2020 . Gender Mainstreaming Policy 
and Strategic Framework in Agriculture.  
 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 2020 -2030. Policy on Gender 
Equality.  
 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 2018. Developing Gender -Sensitive 
Value Chains.   
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 2021. PEARL project proposal.  
 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 2021. PEARL Stakeholder 
Engagement.  
 
General Directorate of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture Cooperative Promotion, 2022. Data 
of Agricultural Cooperatives  
 
Ministry of Environment (MoE), 2021. Data of Community Protected Areas.  
 
Ministry of Environment (MoE), Prakas 066. G uidelines on procedures of formation of community 
protected areas.  
 
Ministry of Women’s Affairs (MoWA), 2019 -2023. Five Years Strategic Plan for Strengthening 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment (Neary Rattanak V).  
 
Ministry of Planning (MoP),  2019/2020 . National Institute of Statistic, Cambodia Socio -Economic 
Survey .  
 The World Bank, 2018. Job diagnostic study.


---
*Page 164*
---

PEARL Gender Action Plan  
 
The table below provides the Gender Action Plan for the PEARL project. The project log- frame and design integrates  and fully mainstreams gender within its targets with these elements 
providing an important guide for project implementation. As such the action plan has worked to integrate targets within those of the logframe as well as building off internal targets 
developed during project formulation.  
It is critical to note that the whole project has a strong commitment to gender with all targets focusing on a 50% / 40/60%  gender balance. As such while budget lines within the project are 
provided for key personnel including a Gender expert and consultants to conduct reviews and support mainstreaming of gender within training materials (with a total budget of $ 285,750), 
other costs linked to application of trainings are covered within the main project budget but with requirements for gender elements to be integrated within training, consultation and document review processes.  
Table 1. Gender Action Plan for the PEARL project  
Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
PMU  Training of project 
trainers/facilitators on 
GESI  Number of PMU, 
and EE staff 
trained on GESI 
to facilitate 
project gender 
interventions  0 All members of 
PMU staff and key 
EE project staff  Y1-7  PMU gender 
expert to 
conduct 
trainings, and 
ensure 
participation is 
documented.  - Mainstreamed 
in activity  
budget  
PMU  Training of project 
personnel on SEAH and 
GBV and the FAO GRM 
to handle such incidents  Number of 
project personnel 
trained on SEAH, 
GBV and project 
GRM  0 All members of 
PMU staff and key 
EE project staff  Y1-7  PMU gender 
expert to 
conduct 
trainings, and 
ensure 
participation is 
documented.  - Mainstreamed 
in activity 
budget  
Cross -cutting  Mainstream GESI and 
integrate gender -
sensitization into all 
training materials and 
trainings  Percentage of 
training materials 
and curricula 
reviewed by a 
gender specialist  0 100%  Y1-7 PMU gender 
expert to 
review all 
trainings prior 
to approval. 
Gender experts 
may be hired 
and review 
materials if 
needed.  - Mainstreamed 
in activity 
budget


---
*Page 165*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
Cross -cutting  All beneficiaries informed 
of the projects zero-
tolerance policy on SEAH, 
and the project’s 
grievance redress 
mechanism (GRM), 
including SEAH -specific 
procedures (informative 
materials, and information 
mainstreamed within 
trainings)  Percentage of 
beneficiaries 
informed.  0 100%  Y1-7 Materials 
developed by 
PMU gender 
expert, in 
coordination 
with project 
staff.  - Mainstreamed 
in activity 
budget  
Outcome 1:  Farmers’ capacities are enhanced to manage climate impacts and related risks    
Output 1.1.  Availability and access to agrometeorological advisory services tailored to target value chains improved among smallholder fa rmers and value chain 
actors, particularly women.  
Activities 
1.1.1 -1.1.3  
 Hiring of gender expert to 
support integration of 
gender considerations in 
site assessment (baseline 
conditions and capacities, 
data gaps) and in 
developing gender -
responsive criteria to 
support the selection of 
existing stations and 
areas of need.  
 
Reporting by PMU on 
gender -responsive 
approach was applied 
during the site selection 
process.  
 a. Set of gender -
responsive 
criteria for review 
of proposed 
stations and 
training locations  
 
b. Report on site 
selection process 
with a sub-
section on 
gender drafted.  a. 0 
 
b. 0 a. 1 set of criteria  
 
b. 1 report  Year 1  PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
reporting and 
hiring of gender 
expert.  
 
Gender expert 
to be hired to 
support 
elaboration of 
criteria.  45,000  Mainstreamed 
in activity  
1.1.1 -1.1.3 
budget  
Activities 
1.1.1 -1.1.3  
 Provide capacity building 
to TWG -AW, led by MAFF 
and MoWRAM, with 
additional experts from 
other relevant entities, on 
gender equality and social Percentage of 
persons (male 
and female) 
engaged in 
station design 
and development 0 80 % of  persons 
(50% women and 
50% men)  Years 1 -
3 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
consultations 
and hiring of 
gender expert.  99,000  Mainstreamed 
in activity  
1.1.1 -1.1.3 
budget


---
*Page 166*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
inclusion as well as the 
project’s policy on SEAH, 
to support the integration 
of gender considerations 
within s tation design and 
information provision.  
 trained on 
gender equality 
and social 
inclusion, and 
integrating 
gender within 
station design 
and information 
provision.   
Gender expert 
to be hired to 
develop 
training 
materials and 
conduct 
trainings.  
Activities 
1.1.1 -1.1.3  
 Gender mainstreaming, 
including gender 
sensitization and raising 
awareness of SEAH and 
the project’s zero 
tolerance policy, into all 
training of trainer (ToT) 
and training materials, as 
well as other project 
related informative 
mate rials.  Gender 
mainstreamed 
into all training 
materials for 
Component 1  
Not 
mainstreamed Mainstreamed.  Year 1 -4 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee gender 
mainstreaming, 
and external 
experts on 
topics related 
to gender 
mainstreaming.  
 
PMU gender 
expert to 
review 
materials and 
ensure gender 
mainstreaming.   Mainstreamed 
in activity  
1.1.1 -1.1.3 
budget  
Activity 1.1.2  Gender expert to revise 
all SOPs for the 4 crops to 
ensure gender equality 
and social inclusion is 
adequately 
mainstreamed/ reflected. 
All SOPs should mention 
the project’s zero 
tolerance policy on SEAH.  Number of SOPs 
with gender 
equality and 
social inclusion 
mainstreamed.  0 4 Year 4  PMU gender 
expert to revise 
all SOPs.   
99,000  - 
Activity 1.1.3  Ensure the engagement 
and participation of 
women within awareness 
raising sessions.  % of female 
farmers in 
awareness 
raising sessions  - At least 50% Annually 
assessed  PMU gender 
expert to 
monitor and 
coordinate with 
technical staff =


---
*Page 167*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
Coordinate with women’s 
organizations and 
networks to ensure 
planned awareness 
raising sessions reach 
women.  
Time meetings at suitable 
hours, considering time 
restrictions and 
challen ges for women.  to ensure 
targets are 
met. 
Outcome 2:  Adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers and other local value chain actors, particularly women farmers and value 
chain actors, is increased through climate-resilient, high-value, and sustainable agriculture.    
Output 2.1:  Premium market access opportunities for cashew, mango, organic rice, and vegetable producers and processors increased through  climate -resilient 
and high- value certification programs (linking to Sub- components 2.2. and 2.3 for financing and technical capacity building).  
Activity 2.1.1:  
 Conduct training sessions 
for key stakeholders on 
gender equality and social 
inclusion as part of 
roadmap development.  
 
Support integration of 
gender into roadmaps 
through review and inputs 
to process and 
documents.  
 
Deve lop participatory 
baseline gender 
assessment of target 
cooperatives, CPAs and 
CFs with members with 
consideration of use of 
W+ approach.   
 
Assist cooperatives, 
associations, producer 
groups, CPAs, CFs, and 
agricultural unions in 
preparing crop -specific Number of 
persons f rom 
agricultural 
commodity 
supply chains 
and provincial 
representative 
trained  
0 To be set based 
on selection 
identification of 
key stakeholder 
groups and 
individuals within 
each province and 
supply chain.  Y1-4 PMU gender 
expert to 
conduct 
training.  15,75 0         
4,243,085


---
*Page 168*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
action plans/business 
plans for operationalizing 
their respective roadmaps 
in an inclusive and 
gender -responsive 
manner.  
 
Develop gender -
responsive inter -value 
chain actor road maps at 
the provincial level. 
Support will be provided 
by gender experts to 
ensure gender is 
adequately integrated, 
including a a sub- section 
on gender equality and 
social inclusion.  
 
Invitation of women’s 
organizations to planning 
and validation workshops.  Number of 
gender -
responsive inter -
value chain actor 
road maps.  
0 4. Y7  PMU gender 
expert to 
coordinate 
invitations, and 
ensure 
mainstreaming 
within road 
maps  - 
Develop gender -
responsive action/ 
business plans for 
climate -resilient, inclusive 
premium value chains.  
 
Development of 
guidelines to support 
GESI mainstreaming 
within plans, to ensure the 
differentiated needs and 
priorities of women are 
reflected.  
 
Gender experts to review 
business plans to ensure 
gender mainstreaming.  a.. Number of 
gender -
responsive 
action/ business 
plans developed.  
 
b. Number of 
guidelines on 
mainstreaming 
GESI within 
action/ business 
plans  
 
c. Percentage of 
plans reviewed 
by a gender 
expert  a. 0 
 
b. 0 
 
c. 0 a. 124 ACs, FAs, 
PGs, CPAs, CFs, 
and agricultural 
unions with fully 
developed 
action/business 
plans, and at least 
95 % of them fully 
operational.  
 
b. 100% of plans  
 
c. !00% of plans  Y7 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
experts who 
develop 
guidelines and 
review action/ 
business plans.  -


---
*Page 169*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
Activity 2.1.2:  
 Revision and 
development of 
supplementary guidelines, 
tools and training 
materials, including a 
GESI-specific review to 
identify gaps and 
opportunities, and 
facilitate gender -
responsive and socially 
inclusive revisions. A 
gender expert will be 
hired to support these 
efforts.  
 
This review will consider 
W+ as a potential tool to 
strengthen development 
of women’s farming 
activities, enhance 
monitoring of project 
impacts as well as 
improved market access, 
results where relevant to 
support positive feedback 
in both project expansion 
and improved 
programming  
 Number of 
gender -
responsive 
voluntary add-on 
supplementary 
guidelines, tools 
and training 
materials 
developed in the 
context of the 
certification 
programs 
identified under 
Activity 2.1.1.  
0 Target to be 
determined based 
on number of 
standards 
adopted  Y4 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
monitoring and 
reporting, and 
experts hired to 
support GESI 
mainstreaming 
across tools (in 
coordination 
with relevant 
technical staff)  -             
295,300  
Activity 2.1.2  Iinstitutional capacity 
assessment of capacity to 
integrate gender 
considerations and other 
safeguard elements and 
development of training 
and support materials to 
ensure EEs have 
adequate capacity to 
mainstream gender and Acceptance of 
reports by target 
institutions.  
0 4 Y2 PMU gender 
expert to guide 
implementation  -


---
*Page 170*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
pay attention to women’s 
empowerment needs and 
gender considerations.  
 
Assessment of the private 
sector partners’ capacity 
to mainstream gender.  
Activity 2.1.2  Trainings on GESI, as 
well as the project’s zero 
tolerance policy on SEAH. 
Technical support will be 
provided to support these 
institutions to strengthen 
their capacities and 
systems related to GESI 
(e.g. strengthening 
gender -responsive 
monitoring and 
evaluation, SEAH 
policies, among others).  
 Number of 
institutions who 
participated in 
trainings and 
have 
strengthened 
capacities on 
GESI  0 Implementation of 
trainings based on 
institutional 
assessment 
reports  Y3 PMU gender 
expert to guide 
implementation  = 
Output 2.2:  Access to technologies for climate -resilient agriculture and value chain development improved among smallholder farmers and other value chain 
actors, particularly women (linking to Sub-component 2.1 to support the business plans of cooperatives, associations, producer groups, CPAs, CFs and agricultural 
unions).  
2.2.1  Assessment of gender -
gaps in accessing finance 
by female farmers, as well 
as the context for female 
farmers to participate in 
and access finance via 
CPAs, CFs, agricultural 
unions, cooperatives and 
associations. This will be 
conducted by a national 
gender expert, and the 
recommendations will be 
integrated into guidelines 
for establishing FARM 
accounts, as well as a. Gender -
assessment for 
female farmers to 
access finance, 
including through 
their membership 
in CPAs, CFs, 
agricultural 
unions,  
cooperatives and 
unions.  
 
b.. GESI 
considerations 
included in a. Not 
conducted  
 
b. Not 
integrated  
 
c. Specific 
product 
FARM not yet 
developed  a. Gender 
assessment 
conducted  
 
b. GESI 
integrated  
 
c. 60,000 women 
(approximately 
40% of farmers 
engaged in target 
value chains 
within the 
provinces.  a. Y2  
 
b. Y3 -4 
 
c. Y3 -7 
 
 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
national gender 
expert 
conducting 
assessment.  
 
PMU gender 
expert to revise 
training 
materials, 
guidelines and 
informative 
materials.  - 4,243,085


---
*Page 171*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
training materials 
(including ToT materials), 
and other awareness 
raising materials and 
strategies to strengthen 
GESI and gender -
sensitization within these 
institutions.  
 
Development and 
dissemination of 
informative materials for 
women on opportunities 
to access finance.  
 training 
materials, 
guidelines and 
awareness 
raising materials 
to increase 
womens’ 
awareness of 
finance 
opportunities, 
and to strengthen 
information 
dissemination 
and improved 
access through 
CPAs, CFs, 
agricultural 
unions, 
cooperatives and 
associations.  
 
 
c. Number of 
women informed 
on the available 
options and 
services for 
farmers and local 
value chain 
actors.  
  
PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
monitoring and 
reporting, and 
will coordinate 
with the 
respective 
technical staff 
for adaptive 
management.  
Activity 2.2.1  Trainings for women’s 
organizations, female 
farmers, and women- led 
businesses as part of AC 
ACs, FAs, PGs, CPAs, 
CFs, and unions of 
cooperatives annually 
training on financial a.. % of women 
trained  
 
b. number of 
women- only 
trainings  
 a. Low levels 
of awareness 
with no formal 
trainings  
 
b. 0 
 a. 50% of all 
training 
participants are 
women.  
 
b. 25  Y5 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
planning  
 
 -


---
*Page 172*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
literacy and business 
development.  
Activity 2.2.1  Gender assessment, 
guidelines and training for 
the FARM account (trust 
fund) to be established for 
each beneficiary group to 
advance its business plan 
with clearly defined 
governance 
arrangements and 
ongoing business 
development support (i.e., 
FARM grants manual, 
Board of trustees, 
disbursement eligibility 
criteria, fiduciary and 
performance monitoring 
mechanisms).  Number of target 
cooperat ives, 
associations, 
producer groups, 
CPAs, CFs and 
agricultural 
unions supported 
and accessing 
finance  
0 124 Y5 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
monitoring in 
close 
cooperation 
with technical 
project staff.  
 
Trainings to be 
conducted by 
technical staff, 
utilizing 
information 
developed by 
the PMU 
gender expert 
and other 
national gender 
experts.  - 
Output 2.3:  Awareness and knowledge of climate -resilient and sustainable, high -value agriculture increased among farmers and other local value chain actors, 
particularly women farmers and value chain actors (linking to Sub-component 2.1 to support the operationalization of business plans by the cooperatives, 
associations, producer groups, CPAs, CFs and agricultural unions)  
Activity 2.3.1  
 
 
 Input from gender expert 
and gender -focused 
consultations (with 
women’s groups and 
female farmers) into 
development of clearing 
house mechanism to 
ensure that it effectively 
captures gender -based 
information and provides 
fully gender responsive 
information.  
 
 a. Numb er of 
consultations 
with women’s 
groups on 
clearing house 
system, and the 
differentiated 
needs of female 
farmers and 
value chain actor  
 
b. Clearinghouse 
system is 
gender -- Yes – 
clearinghouse 
system is gender -
responsive  Y3 PMU expert to 
oversee that 
the system is 
gender -
responsive.  - 1,350,990


---
*Page 173*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
responsive, and 
includes 
information on 
best practices for 
climate -resilient, 
inclusiv e, 
gender -
responsive, and 
high- value 
agriculture  
Activity 2.3.2  Train extension officers, 
retailers, hoteliers, 
restauranteurs, and 
traders/exporters on 
gender equality and social 
inclusion that increases 
understanding of gender 
considerations within 
farming groups and 
improves quality of 
service delivery and the 
consideration of gender -
differentiated contexts 
and n eeds.  
 Number of 
extension 
officers, retailers, 
hoteliers, 
restraunteurs, 
and traders/ 
exporters trained 
on GESI  0 Accumulative total 
of 550 (40- 50% 
women) PDAFF 
and PDoC staff, 
including 
extension officers, 
district 
administration 
officers, commune 
and village 
extension agents, 
and NGOs trained 
over the project 
lifetime through 
TOT.  XYZ PMU gender 
expert to 
ensure gender 
is 
mainstreamed 
in trainings  27,000  
Activity 2.3.2  Promote gender 
responsive CRA practices 
and technologies, 
ensuring technologies are 
adequately screened and 
communicated for 
potential gender -
responsive development 
benefits (e.g. value chains 
with high representation 
of women, time- saving 
practices).  
 a. Percentage of 
beneficiaries 
(sex-
disaggregated) 
who take up 
gender -
responsive and 
climate -resilient 
agricultural 
practices and 
technologies  
 
b. Percentage of 
beneficiary a. –  
b. - a. 60% (of which 
50% are women)  
 
b. 85% (of which 
50% are women)  Y7 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
gender -
reporting in 
close 
coordination 
with project 
technical staff 
to ensure 
adaptive 
management.  - 1,377,990


---
*Page 174*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
Ensure extension 
meetings are held at 
times suitable for women 
(where possible 
communicating with 
leaders of farmer groups 
and womens 
organizations to find 
suitable times and 
locations).  
 farmers (sex -
disaggregated) 
with increased 
knowledge of 
gender -
responsive and 
climate -resilient 
agricultural 
practices and 
technologies  
Activity 2.3.2  Percentage of 
promoted 
practices that are 
tailored for 
women farmers 
and value chain 
actors against 
the inception 
baseline.  
 - 40% Y4 PMU gender 
expert to report 
in close 
coordination 
with project 
technical staff.  
  - 
Output 2.4:  Upper watershed areas restored and protected to increase agroecological functions for downstream farming activities in the ta rget areas.  
Activity 2.4.1  During awareness raising 
processes, ensure gender 
sensitization.  
 
Review of CF and CPA 
management plans to 
ensure gender sensitivity 
and support to 
enhancement and 
strengthening including 
section on gender 
considerations and SEAH 
and support to 
implementat ion and 
review of plans  Number of CPAs 
and CFs 
implementing 
plans in line with 
gender 
considerations  
0 13 Y5 PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee 
monitoring and 
evaluation. -         
2,296,110  
Outcome 3: Gender considerations and enabling conditions for climate -resilient agriculture are ensured through a coherent and 
robust policy, legal, and institutional framework.


---
*Page 175*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
Output 3.1:  Regulatory and institutional arrangements and capacity relevant to developing certification -based value chains strengthened to provide enabling 
conditions for climate- resilient, inclusive high-value and sustainable agriculture and food security.  
Activity  3.1.1   
Regulatory and 
institutional revisions to 
be accompanied by an 
assessment on GESI to 
identify challenges and 
opportunities for 
mainstreaming GESI.  
 
Conduct gender 
mainstreaming within 
revisions to regulatory  
and institutional 
framework for climate-
proofed certification 
programs, based on the 
findings of the 
aforementioned review.  
 
 a.. GESI review 
conducted to 
highlight 
opportunities and 
challenges 
related to GESI 
in the institutional 
and regulatory 
framework.  
 
b.. Revised 
regulatory and 
institutional 
framework have 
GESI 
mainstreamed 
and are gender -
responsive.  
 a..–  
 
b. GESI not 
mainstreamed  a. GESI review 
conducted  
 
b. GESI 
mainstreamed  A Y3  
 
B Y4  PMU gender 
expert to 
oversee hiring 
of gender 
expert to 
conduct review 
and support 
gender 
mainstreaming 
in the 
regulatory and 
institutional 
framework.  
 
 -             
145,600  
Activity 3.1.2:  
 Conduct gender 
assessment of lending 
scorecard and integrate 
revisions within score 
card system. .  Review 
conducted and 
amendments 
made.  No review  Review 
undertaken and 
recommendations 
acted on  Y 3 PMU gender 
expert to 
undertake.  - 400,172  
Activity 3.1.3  Ensure memorandum of 
understandings (MoU) 
with banks include also 
commitments to 
strengthen GESI.  Number of 
commercial 
banks with 
memorandums of 
understanding 
(MoUs) signed to 
operationalize 
the scorecard, 
including 
commitments to 
support GESI   
 0 At least 3  Y 4 PMU gender 
expert to 
support 
technical team 
to draft MoUs 
and support 
with GESI -
related 
outreach and 
commitments.  -             
Mainstreamed 
in Activity 
3.1.3 budget


---
*Page 176*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
Output 3.2: Gender -responsive landscape -level agroecology monitoring system (LAMS) developed to crowd in public and private investments in climate -resilient, 
high- value and sustainable agriculture.  
Activity 3.2.1  
 Undertake baseline 
assessment for LAMS 
design to ensure the 
system considers gender -
differentiated needs to 
ensure gender -responsive 
system design.  
 
Conduct consultations 
with women’s groups and 
networks to inform LAMS 
design (including the 
baseline review and 
design report), and 
ensure gender -
differentiated 
considerations are 
reflected.  Baseline review 
for LAMS desig n 
conducted that 
outlines needed 
adjustments to 
strengthen 
gender equality 
and social 
inclusion (GESI) 
within the 
system.  
 - Baseline review 
for LAMS design 
conducted, 
including with 
section on GESI  Y4 PMU gender 
expert  
 
Where 
necessary, the 
PMU gender 
expert will 
coordinate with 
the respective 
technical staff 
and service 
providers to 
ensure gender -
related 
feedback is 
integrated into 
the system.  -             
594,104  
Activities 
3.2.1 and 
3.2.2  Gender equality and 
social inclusion 
mainstreamed in 
awareness raising and 
training materials on 
LAMS.  
PMU gender expert to 
revise all materials.  GESI 
mainstreamed  in 
awareness 
raising and 
training materials 
on LAMS  Materials not 
yet developed  GESI 
mains treamed in 
awareness raising 
and training 
materials on 
LAMS Y5 PMU gender 
expert to revise 
all awareness 
raising and 
training 
materials.  - 
Activity 3.2.2  Develop a 
communications and 
information dissemination 
strategy to ensure women 
use and benefit from 
LAMS.  Gender -focused 
communications 
and information 
dissemination 
strategy 
developed  Not 
developed  Developed.  Y5 PMU gender 
expert to 
support with 
the elaboration 
of the strategy  - 53,250  
Activity 3.2.2  Conduct stakeholder 
awareness raising events 
on LAMS with women’s 
organizations, and 
female -owned businesses a. Number of 
women’s groups 
and 
organizations 
trained on LAMS a. –  
 
b. – 
 
c. - a. At least 10  
 
b. 50%  
 Y5 PMU gende r 
expert to 
oversee 
participation of 
women within -


---
*Page 177*
---

Project 
Activity GAP activity  Indicator  Baseline  Target  Timeline  Responsibility  Budget (USD)  
Exclusively 
dedicated 
for GAP  Included in 
Project 
Activity  
to ensure the system 
supports them with 
climate -informed decision -
making, monitoring, and 
reporting, and to also 
enable active 
management and 
feedb ack to ensure the 
differentiated needs of 
women are reflected 
within the tool.  and supporting 
awareness 
raising  
b. Percentage of
females
attending
awareness
raising sessions 
and trainings on 
LAMS 
c. Number of
beneficiaries
(sex-
disaggregated) 
utilizing LAMS 
regularly using 
for climate -
informed 
planning and 
investment 
decision -making..  c. At least 2,500
beneficiaries
(1,250 women,
1,250 men)  trainings and 
use of the 
platform. 
Where 
necessary, the 
PMU gender 
expert will 
coordinate with 
the respective 
technical staff 
and service 
providers to 
ensure gender -
related 
feedback is 
integrated into 
the system. 
__________