=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
/Author: Sanghyun Kim
/CreationDate: D:20220624161636+09'00'
/Creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20142
/ModDate: D:20220624161928+09'00'
/Producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (32-bit) 22.1.20142
/Title: 


---
*Page 1*
---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meeting of the Board  
17 – 20 July 2022  
Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 9  GCF/B. 33/02/Add. 01 
24 June  2022  
Consideration of funding proposals -  
Addendum I 
Funding proposal package f or FP 187  
 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts:  
a) A funding proposal titled "Ouémé  Basin Climate -Resilience Initiative (OCRI) Benin "; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat ’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’ s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and  
g) Gender documentation.


---
*Page 2*
---

G
CF/B.33/02 /Add.01 
Page b 
3 
118  
119  
121  
138  
150 Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity  
No-o bjection l etter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)  
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure  
Secretariat’s assessment  
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment   
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment  
Gender documentation  151


---
*Page 3*
---

Project/Programme title:  Ouémé  Basin C limate -Resilience Initiative (OCRI)  Benin  
Country(ies):  Benin . 
Accredited Entity:  FAO 
Date of first submission:  [2021/03/30 ]  
Date of current submission [2022/04/14]  
Version number  [V.00 7]


---
*Page 4*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 1 
Contents  
 
Section A  PROJECT / PROGRAMME  SUMMARY  
 
Section B  PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 
Section C  FINANCING INFORMATION  
 
Section D  EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E LOGIC AL FRAMEWORK  
 
Section F RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
 
Section G GCF POLIC IES AND STANDARDS  
 
Section H ANN EXES   
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template  
• Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross -
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.  
• Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annex es must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• The total number of pages for the funding proposal (e xcluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60 . Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the  usual 
service standard time.  
• The rec ommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• Under  the GCF Information Disclosure Policy , project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any in formation that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out  information on disclosure in section G.4 .    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org  
Please use the following name convention for the file name:  
“FP-[Accredited Entity  Short Name ]-[Country/Region] -[YYYY/MM/DD ]”


---
*Page 5*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 2 
A. PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme  Project  A.2. Public or 
private sector  Public  
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP)  If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals , 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+.  
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s)   
Check the applicable  GCF result area(s)  that the overall  proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co -
financers’ contribution  devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co -financers’ contributio n respectively.  
 GCF  
contribution  Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Energy generation and access  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Low-emission transport  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Forestry and land use  20 % Enter number  % 
Adaptation total  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities  20 % 40 % 
☒  Health and well -being, and food and water security  30 % 30 % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment  Enter number  % Enter number  % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services  30 % 30 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered)  - 1,783,633  
tCO2 -eq A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome  
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached)  6 million (50% women)  
330,000 direct 
beneficiaries (3% 
of total 
population) with 
50% women  5,670,000 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(47% of total 
population) with 
50% women  
3% 47% 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance2)  US$ 35, 314,576  USD   
A.9. Project size  Small (Upto USD 50 million)  
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  US$ 18, 453, 795  USD  
 
For multi -country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.  
  
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity ) to implement the project or 
programme descr ibed in the funding proposal.  
2 Refer to the Policy of Co -financing  of the GCF.


---
*Page 6*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 3 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding  Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant  Enter number   
☐  Loan  Enter number  
☐  Guarantee  Enter number  ☐  Equity       Enter number  
☐  Results -based payment    Enter number  
A.11. Implementation 
period  6 years (72 months)  A.12. Total lifespan  20 years  
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval  This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.  
 
4/13/2021  
 A.14. ESS category  Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards  to assess 
your FP category.  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP?  Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme?  Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information  The Government of Benin acting through the Ministry of Livelihood and Sustainable Development 
(MCVDD) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP)  
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)  
Fonds National pour l’Environnement (FNEC)  
 
 
A.21. Executive summary  (max.  750 words, approximately 1.5 page s) 
Climate projections indicate that temperatures in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin of Benin have steadily 
increas ing since the 1960s, and will continue to rise  during the rest of this century, by as much as 5 ºC . 
Predictions concerning rainfall vary, but all point toward longer period of droughts and more frequent dry spells  (in 
particular in Upper Ouémé) , shorter rainy seasons  with a late onset and the potential disappearance of the short rainy 
season in the Middl e Ouémé . Changes  in temperature, rainfall patterns, and shifts in seasonality require agricultural 
adaptation with an efficient management of  natural resources including soil and water, vegetation cover to reduce risks 
of damages caused by floods and flash  floods  (in particular in Middle Ouémé) , improve agricultural productivity and 
enhance the climate resilience and adaptation of the 6 million Beninese living in the Ouémé Basin.  
 
The Ouémé Basin is a key area for agriculture  production , which is Benin's m ain economic sector . This sector 
employs 61% of Ouémé population, out of which 85% are smallholders. Main crops (annual and perennial) produced 
in the area include maize, cassava, yam, cashew. The sector is particularly vulnerable to climate change  but als o has


---
*Page 7*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 4 
an important mitigation potential, representing almost half of Benin emissions . Increasing intensity and frequency of 
extreme weather events are impacting the livelihoods of small -scale farmers, agro -ecosystems are becoming more 
vulnerable and less p roductive, poverty and food insecurity are increasing  particularly in Middle Oueme and the 
transition zone of Glazoue3. As a result, farmers turn to unsustainable and high carbon practices such as  clearing of 
forest land and natural habitats to establish new fields, slash and burn technique and wood extraction for the production 
and sale of charcoal – thereby increasing pressure on the biophysical environment, reducing productivity and enhancing 
exposure to climate -related  risks and climate change vulnerability. Without GCF support to implement a  low carbon  
integrated climate -resilient management (ICRM) approach in the Upper and Middle Ouémé , the vicious cycle of climate 
change induced natural resources and community liveli hood degradation will continue  to threaten the population of the 
whole Ouémé Basin.  
 
The proposed Ouémé Basin Climate -Resilience Initiative  (OCRI) project aims to scale up prioritized climate resilient 
agriculture and low emission agroforestry practices, build waterworks to reduce soil erosion and run -off, and overall 
improve land and water management in 95,000 ha (including 89,680 ha from GCF and 5,320 ha through MAEP co -
finance via IFAD funded projects) and to reduce 330,000 small scale farmers' vulnerability to increasing climate 
disturbances and extreme weather events, in the Ouémé Basin  through implementing a mix of hard and sof t climate -
resilient measures. The project will ensure that a climate -resilience  and low emission  pathway is adopted by 
systematically addressing the barriers to promoting long -term change . The project will develop and scale -up the 
adaptive and productive c apacity of agro -ecosystems and of smallholder farmers in selected rural communities in the 
Upper and Middle Ouémé river basin. The project will also play a role in reducing vulnerability bottlenecks, by enhancing 
climate -resilient value chains for crops wi th major socio -economic and/or ecologic impacts (maize, cashew, shea, 
mango OCRI will  unlock access to finance for the scaling up of climate -resilient land management and agriculture  by 
partnering with strategic entities such as the Direct Access Entity Fon ds National pour l’Environnement (FNEC), the 
National Fund for Agricutural Development (FNDA) as well as key micro -finance institutions . Finally  it will mainstream 
climate change adaptation in local and regional development plans  in order to support the sustainability of the 
interventions.  This will result in the establishment of a resilient agriculture and food production system based on 
Sustainable  Natural Resources (soil, water, vegetation) management in the Ouémé Basin. The implementation of the 
project will lead to a total carbon balance of  – 1,783,633 tCO 2-eq over over 20 years.  
 
To achieve this, the project  comprises 3 complementary components, which will  be implemented in 5 municipalities : 
Copargo, Djougou in the Upper Ouémé ; Glazoué in the Upper -Middle Ouémé ; and Zogbodomey and Zagnanado in 
the Middle Ouémé. The project will be implemented over a six -year period at a total cost of USD 35, 314,576.   
 
Component 1. Low carbon, climate Resilient Crop production enhanced and Ecosystem services restored in 
the Upper and Middle Ouéme  This component will support the enhancement of the Ouémé basin agro -ecosystems 
resilience to climate change impacts (for maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam, shea, 
mango and cashew) , involving activities such as rain wate r harvesting and restauration of degraded land and river 
banks with trees planting. The component will also support capacity development of key stakeholders including famers, 
facilitators and master trainers using the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach. The activities will include on -farm 
traditional and innovative prioritized practices and techniques for low carbon climate -resilient agriculture (CRA), 
including the use of diversified drought -tolerant crop varieties, conservation farming, rainwater conserva tion, micro -
dams, agroforestry, improved water management, as well as ecosystem restoration, water -source and riverbank 
protection. Training on these techniques will be supported by the Training of the Facilitators (ToF) in FFS to ensure the 
continuation o f trainings beyond the project’s lifespan.  
 
Component 2. Climate -resilient and gender -sensitive value chains, supporting farmers’ livelihoods in the 
Upper and Middle Ouémé . Targeted interventions will be developed in partnership with MAEP and IFAD to stren gthen 
the following agriculture products value chains: maize, cashew, shea and mango.  These value chains were identified 
as already part of the agro -systems in the target areas; moreover, they can be strengthened for a better resilience and 
productivity under climate change conditionsand have strong market potential within and outside of B enin. The scope 
of project will be extended to other crops highly valued locally, for example cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, green 
vegetable, tomatoes, yam . These products were selected as: i) they are currently grown on the project sites and are 
part of  the local diet; ii) locally -relevant and resilient varieties  or techniques  to address  the climate stressors identified 
are available; iii) they can be produced by smallholders (providing some training and technical support); iv) there is a 
market demand - especially for those crops which value chains will be strengthened; and v) they do not pose threats 
to the local environment  (in alignment with risk category B) . The strengthening of the selected value chains will include 
training in marketing and finance  for farmers and cooperatives and developing networks between farmers and sellers. 
The project will support building the business case for climate resilient agriculture and food production using a market 
value chain approach. By demonstrating the economic benefits and market opportunities to private sector stakeholders, 
 
3 Food insecurity is especially prevalent in Middle Oueme, affecting 10 to 20% households – and over 20% in Glazoue. See WFP, Analyse 
Globale de la Vulnerabilite et de la Securite Alimentaire (AGVSA), Republique du Benin, 2017.


---
*Page 8*
---

A 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 |  PAGE 5 
and by securing the support from micro -finance institutions (MFI) through the collaboration with the National 
Agricultural Development Fund (FNDA) , farmers will be supported to sell climate -resilient agriproducts, as well as 
access to financial tools and incentives like micro -credits at lower interest rates and with 50% guarantee from FNDA  
to support and scale up their economic activities.  The introduction of appropriate tools on climate res ilience assessment 
and monitoring will be key in providing the evidence for climate -resilient and sustainable increased productivity of the 
technologies promoted by the project in the beneficiary communities . FAO has secured the support of  the Ministry of 
Agriculture, livestock and fisheries (MAEP) as co-financier through IFAD funded projects to this component given the 
strong complementarities between OCRI and MAEP  interventions , and IFAD’s experience in enhancing farmers’ access 
to MFIs . MAEP  has agreed to provide co -financing of USD 12,634,280 .   
 
Component 3.  An enabling institutional and financial environment established to promote and upscale low 
carbon climate -resilient land and water management in Benin’s Basins . This component will supp ort the 
development of an enabling environment for strengthened governance, finance and knowledge to support climate -
resilient management in the Oueme Basin. Through this component, a  multi -stakeholder platform (the OCRI platform) 
will be set up to coordin ate, under the leadership of MCVDD, on -the-ground Integrated Climate Resilient M anagement 
(ICRM) in the Ouémé Basin in coordination with the Project Management Unit (PMU). These interventions will be 
supported in the long -term through the strengthening and  climate -proofing of the existing Ouémé Master Pla n (Schema 
Directeur d’Amenagement et de Gestion des Eaux du Bassin de l’Oueme – SDAGE) . This plan will serve as an umbrella 
under which the local development plans (plans de developpement locaux – PDL) will be revised to mainstream climate 
change adaptation at the municipal level . The OCRI platform  (governance mechanism ) will blend the conditions to 
leverage responsible and sustainable investments from public and private stakeholders across the Ouémé Basin.  For 
this purpose, it will be linked to the Direct Access Entity Fonds National pour L’Environnement (FNEC).  FNEC 
uses its resources to finance climate -resilient and environmental projects in Benin. Its financial strategy will be 
strengthened to leverage more funding specifically financing climate change -related projects. Under Component 3, 
FNEC has also committed resources to provide grants as co -financing to farmers’ cooperatives and local organisations 
that will benefit from OCRI’s intervention that wish to further implement climate -resilient agriculture and ecosystem 
restoration activities in the Oueme Basin: it is envisaged that three micro -project in the targeted communes will be 
supported during the project duration. A roadmap to maintain and replenish FNEC’s fund after the project closure will 
be developed to ensure the long -term availability of finance towards ICRM in the Oueme Basin. Moreo ver, during the 
project time, FNEC’s capacity to design, identify, implement and monitor climate change related projects will be 
enhanced, thereby strengthening its capacity as an accredited entity.  
Knowledge capitalized and disseminated will foster repli cation and scaling -up of climate -resilient agro -ecosystems 
across the five municipalities, and beyond. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of progress  and impact  will be 
embedded at community level via the selection of local facilitators who will be empowe red to conduct local monitoring 
and keep track of the restoration and adoption of the technological package, whereas the OCRI platform will facilitate 
governance and institutionalization  of project interventions . The project will also reach out to other ba sins’ authorities 
in Benin (i.e. Mono, Niger and Volta Basins) to invite them on training sessions and showcase the benefits of ICRM 
across the Oueme Basin. Gender and social protection safeguards will be integrated , especially  via the increased 
participat ion of women in sustainable livelihood s related  activities. Project activities will be sustained and replicated 
over time in other localities by ensuring the targeted beneficiaries have the know -how, ownership, motivation and 
instruments to sustainably mai ntain and keep investing in the activities introduced by the project.  
 
The EX -ACT analysis was conducted and results show a  positive environmental impact due to the implementation of 
the project’s activities, The implementation of the project will increase the mitigation potential of the area resulting in 
the sequestration of 1,783,633  tCO 2-eq over 20 years.  
 
All references to MCVDD and MAEP as executing entities shall be and shall be interpreted as references to the 
Government of Benin acting through MCVDD and MAEP, as the case may be . FAO and MCVDD  will function as  the 
Executing Entit ies for the GCF proceeds. FNEC, which is a legal entity which operates under the aegis of  MCVDD, has 
agreed to provide co -financing and  will be executing entity for  the activity it  co-finances. MAEP and MCVDD will also 
be executing entities for the activities they co -finance. Care will be taken that different departments within MCVDD and 
MAEP  are involved in project implementation  (see implementation arrangements, section B.4 The Pro ject Management 
Unit will ensure coordination among Ministries and EEs, and the other project -implementing partners, as well as  
coordination with local and regional bodies. EEs will collaborate with other partners from civil society, community based -
organi sations and private companies.  
 
The project has an estimated economic rate of return of about 18%. At a 10% Discount Rate it has a Net Present Value 
of USD 69 million  and costs per beneficiary of about USD 107. As a funding development partner, the Government of 
Benin has requested that FAO function as the Accredited Entity and as one of the Executing Entities for the project .


---
*Page 9*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 6 
 
 
4 https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/least -developed -country -category/ldcs -at-a-glance.html  
5 Sonneveld B. G. J. S, et al. (2012). The impacts of climate change on crop production in West Africa: an assessment for 
the Ouémé River Basin in Benin. Water Resour Manage 26: 553 -579 B. PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
B.1. Climate con text (max.  1000 words, approximately  2 pages ) 
Benin is a Low Middle Income developing country of West Africa, extremely vulnerable to climate change , and is listed 
as Least Developed Country in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs4. In Benin, the Ouémé  Basin, which 
hosts approximately  half of the population, is key for agriculture and food production sector. Key crops  produced in this 
area are  maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam, shea, mango and cashew . The 
Ouémé River is also the most important of the country, draining parts of north, centre and southern Benin; its basin 
covers an area of more than 47,218 km2, straddling 48 communes spread over eight departments of Benin. The Basin  
supports the livelihoods of 6 million people and contributes to 65% of the national agricultural production. However, 
recurrent and increasing droughts, heavy rains, floods, flash f loods and shifting rainfall patterns, which have been 
registered since the 1970s in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin5, are increasingly threatening the livelihoods of 
millions of vulnerable people, depending on the goods and services of the Ouémé Basin ec osystems. This is particularly 
the case of the communities living in the municipalities of  Copargo, Djougou (Upper Ouémé), Glazoué ( transition zone ), 
and Zogbodomey and Zagnanado (Middle Ouémé).  The municipalities  were identified as highly  exposed to clima te 
change, and their population highly vulnerable to climate change  (see Annex 2, FS, Section 4&5).  
 
1. Emission profile of Benin  
Benin has published its Intended National Determined Contribution (INDCs) under the Paris Agreement in June 2017, 
which highlights the country's emission profile and intentions in terms of decarbonising its economy and investing in 
climate change resilienc e. The INDC indicates that Benin’s total GHG emissions amounts to approximately 14.1 Mega 
ton CO2 Equivalent (Mt CO2 eq), that is approximately 1.5 ton CO2 eq per capita in 2012, without Land Use, Land -
Use Change, Lands and Forestery (LULUCF). These emissi ons come from the sectors of energy (47.4 %), agriculture 
(45.9%),  waste (5.0 %) and industrial processes (1.6 %). Considering LULUCF, the balance of GHG emissions (14.9 
Mt CO2 eq) and absorptions (50.3 Mt CO2) shows globally that Benin remains a GHG sink with a net absorptive 
capacity of 35.4 Mt CO2 in 2012, this means that its GHG emissions are largely offset by the absorption of CO2 on the 
level of its forest cover. Even tough Benin remains a sink, its capacity of carbon sequestration is declining fallin g from 
(52.0) Mt CO2 eq in 1995 down to (41.3) Mt CO2 eq in 2005, that is a decrease of 20.6 %, and to (35.4) Mt CO2 eq in 
2012, that is a decrease of 32.0 %.  
In terms of projection of greenhouse gas emissions, in the BAU case, the tendency of overall emi ssions (without 
LULUCF) reveals an increase rate of 172.8% over the period 2012 -2030 rising from 14.1 Mt CO2 eq to 38.5 Mt CO2 
eq (Figure 1).The total of aggregate cumulative GHG emissions without any intervention over the period 2021 -2030 is 
close to 306. 1 Mt CO2 eq (without LULUCF).They would come up to 27.4% from the agriculture sector. Benin is 
committed to reduce its GHG emissions. Overall, excluding the forestry sector, Benin plans to reduce cumulative 
greenhouse gas emissions by 49.49 Mt CO2e, a redu ction of 16.17% compared to the status quo scenario on the 
period 2021 to 2030. This could be achieved through: i) implementing improved farming techniques; ii) implementing 
soil fertility - maintaining techniques on a cultivated area; and iii) promoting su stainable irrigation schemes.  
Furthermore, the implementation of the measures envisaged in LULUCF would contribute to increase its cumulative 
sequestration capacity of 32 Mt CO2 eq over the period 2021 - 2030 including 76.6% of conditional contribution, by 
limiting deforestation (23.9 Mt CO2 eq) and creating planted forests (8.1 Mt CO2 eq). Lowering the annual rate of 
deforestation would make it possible to reduce the cumulative  emissions due to the sector of forestry by 110 Mt CO2 
eq over 2021 -2030 period i ncluding 80% of conditional contribution and 20% of unconditional contribution. This could 
be achieved through: i) Protecting and preserving existing natural and planted forests to reduce deforestation rate; and 
ii) implementing reforestation.  
 
To achieve its emission reduction targets or potential, Benin will need support in terms of technology transfer, capacity 
building, National resources (public funds and private investments) will also need to be supplemented by the external 
financial support (bilatera l or multilateral). The estimated overall cost for the implementation of the mitigation -related 
measures is of USD 6,042.33 million.


---
*Page 10*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 7 
 
 
6 Benin, 2nd National Communication on Climate Change, 2011  
7 Akponikpè  PBI (2022) Climate change and Environmental Impact study in the Oueme -basin (Benin): Update of literature 
and Analysis of the perceptions of climate change and farmers adaptive strategies. FAO Consultancy report, Fev -March 
2022.  2. Historical c limate trends in Upper and Middle Ouémé  
 
Temperatures  trends over the period 1961 -2009 in the Upper Ouémé Basin show a steady increase, at 2.2° C for the 
maximum temperatures, and 1.6° C for the minimum temperatures. Similar trends are observed in Middle Ouémé, 
based on data from 1953 to 2016, with an overal l increase of the maximum temperatures by 1.40° C, and of the 
minimum temperatures by 2.5 ° C6 (Figure 1&2) .  In the Middle Oueme, the analysis of observed thermal values trends 
(maximum, mean and minimum) over the last sixty years, indicates an overall i ncreasing temperature trend of 
0.025°C/year (linear regression). In the Upper Oueme Basin, a higher temperature increasing trend of 0.039°C/year 
was observed over the last forty years in the synoptic station . 
 
 
Figure 1: Annual temperature trend at Djougou and Copargo, in the Upper Ouémé Basin  
  
 
Figure 2: Annual temperature trend in the project areas in the Middle  Ouémé  Basin  (Glazoue, Zogbodomey and Zagnanado)  
 
Changes in temperature parameters (heat and cold/harmattan) have been noticed  by farmers in all the five communes 
of the Oueme basin7. According to surveyd farmers , temperature has increased during dry seasons, leading to more 
frequent  heat waves and drought s than historically (±10 to 20 years ago, based on memory recollection) observed. The 
respondents confirmed that temperature  has significantly increased between slight and high (+1 to +3) in all the 
communes with the order Copargo > Djougou  > Glazoue > Zogbodomey > Zagnanado (Figure 3). These observations 
are consistent with scientific data indicating higher historical increases of temperatures in Upper Oueme compared to 
Middle Oueme.   
Bohicon
Tmini = +0,0263°Can + 22,086Tmoy = +0,0245°Can + 26,858Tmax = +0,0227°Can + 31,631
2022242628303234
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
AnnéeTempérature (°C)T_Mini T_Maxi T_Moy
Linéaire (T_Mini) Linéaire (T_Moy) Linéaire (T_Maxi)


---
*Page 11*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Farmers perceptions on the changes in temperature parameters5  
 
 
 
With regards to changes in precipitations , the historical (1930 -2011) spatio -temporal variability of the annual rainfall 
over the Oueme  basin, shows that the highest rainfall (1200 -1500 mm/year) occurs in the southern regions of the basin, 
compared to the northern regions (800 -900 mm/year) (fig. 3). In the upper basin, the highest precipitations during the 
year are recorded in July, Augus t and September, while January, February, November and December are the months 
with less or no rainfall. The historical (1963 -2000) analysis of the Simple precipitation intensity index (SDII) from the 
CLIMDEX database ( https://www.climdex.org/access/ ) shows that the SDII varies in average from 13 to 16 mm/year in 
the Upper part of the basin (Djougou), from 13 -15 mm/year for Glazoue and from 13 -15 mm/year for the middle part of 
the basin. In general, the histor ical trend of the SDII is not fix and show a sinusoidal pattern. M’po et al. (2017) found 
no trend of the SDII over the Oueme basin, except at the Bonou outlet (lower basin) and other few stations where an 
increasing trend is observed, while much decreasin g trends of the annual total precipitation (PRCPTOT) in the basin is 
observed.    
 
Although there is a scarcity of certainty based on scientific data regarding changes in precipitation, group discussions 
and individual interviews with farmers confirm  that rainfall amount, intensity and frequency have significantly decreased 
in the Oueme basin ( Figure  4). Farmers indicate  that there were some relatively less frequent rainfall events with high 
intensity over a short time that cause on -farm flooding, lasting for about 1 -2 weeks, and making farming activities very 
difficult. In addition, the rainfall pattern, bimodal in the past in the Southern part  (middle Oueme, Glazoue) , is now 
perceived to be unimodal, with only one rainfall season instead of two.


---
*Page 12*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 9 
 
 
8 Project GCP/GLO/207/ITA,  Project for the Strengthening of National Capacities for Monitoring Water Resources with a 
Focus on Agricultural Management, 2009  
9 UNDP; Beninese Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection (2008)  Figure 4: Farmers’ perceptions on the changes of rainfall parameters  (Decreased ( -3 High, -2 moderate, -1 slight), 0 (no change), Increased 
(+1 slight, +2 moderate, +3 High)  
 
 
 
Figure 5: Spatio -temporal variability of the annual rainfall over the Oueme basin from  
 
Source of data:  Observed climate data from Meteo  Benin  
Period:  1930 -2011.  
Source graph :  Alamou et al., 2016  
 
Flooding :  increased frequency of climate extremes  in Benin has been observed  since 1951, has caused more frequent 
droughts and flooding8. Droughts have intensified, particularly in 1970 -1980s, and rains have intensified by 100 mm/h 
enhancing soil erosion and intensifying the impacts of floods9. In particular, erratic violent rai ns increase the frequency


---
*Page 13*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 10 
 
 
10 Olivier, K., Wilfrid, V. E., & Jean -Marie, D. Caractérisation Des Risques Hydroclimatiques Dans Le Bassin Versant De 
L’Ouémé A L’exutoire De Bétérou Au Bénin (Afrique De L’ouest). Europ ean Scientific Journal May 2017 edition Vol.13, 
No.15 p 101 -118 
11 Seidou, S., Ouassa, P., Atchade, G. A., & Vissin, e. W. (2021). Caracterisation Des Risques Hydroclimatiques Dans La 
Basse Vallee De L’Oueme Au Benin (Afrique De L’Ouest).  International Jour nal of Progressive Sciences and 
Technologies , 25(2), 334 -348. 
12 UNDP  ; Beninese Minitry of Developement and economic analysis 2014 
https://info.undp.org/docs/pdc/Documents/BEN/SAP%20Rapport_Provisoire_cc_ressources_eau.pdf   and magnitude of flash floods with significant losses and damages. The increased frequency of extreme weather events 
in Benin has negatively impacted livelihoods and damaged infrastructure. Indeed, the years 1985, 1988, 1991, 1995 , 
1997, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013 and 2019 were characterized by major floods: the 2010 floods have been 
particularly devastating given their spatial extent (55 communes affected out of the 77 of the country) and the number 
of people affected (680,000 p eople). This depicts a highly increased flooding frequency reaching one flooding event 
every three years during the last three decades.  
 
In the upper valley, Olivier et al. (2017)10 on the basis of a frequency analysis of the flows of the Oueme at Béterou 
showed that the maximum rains responsible for the frequent floods are rain events with a return period greater than 
five years, with amount values greater than 39.2 mm. The corresponding flows are of the order of 459 and 628 m3/s.  
In the middle valley, the  recurrent floods observed are caused by maximum daily rainfall amounts between 25.0 and 
38.2 mm with respective return periods of 2 years and 3 years. Similarly, the frequent river floods are caused by floods 
with peak flows between 746 and 1160 m3/s, i.e . flows with return periods between 2 and 5 years11.. In economic terms, 
the impact of the 2010 floods was estimated at more than 127 billion CFA francs and a decline in the GDP growth rate 
of around 0.8 points (Benin, 2011). It is estimated that the flood s resulted in a drop of the GDP growth rate of around 
0.8 points 12.  Interviews indicated that floods are occurring more frequently and are more intense than they used to 
be, leading to significant crop and vegetable losses.  
 
Dry spell periods   The histori cal (1986 -2016) rainfall data were analysed for three different locations/regions of the 
basin: (i) Djougou (Upper Oueme), (ii) Glazoue (upper Oueme) and (iii) Zagnanado (middle Oueme). The analysis 
reveals that about 50% (15 -17 over 31) of the years were found to be dry in all the three regions. Glazoue (south upper 
Oueme basin) was found to have the highest number of dry years and the lowest SRI (hottest year). In general, all the 
three regions shared at least 1992, 1996, 2000, 2002, 2006 and 2006 as dry years . Dry years have also been 
experienced more recently and more frequently over the past few years, as indicated during farmers’ interviews.   
 
Water resources  Analysis of the inflow water anomalies in the middle/ lower Oueme  showed high variations with the 
extreme negative observed in 1990, 1997 and 2007,  and the extreme positive ones in 1995, 2012 and 2013 (fig. 6). 
Such data are not available for the Upper Oueme region.    
 
Figure 6: . Anomalies of the inflow water rates at the Oueme basin (lower basin).  
 
Source of data: Historical data from Benin -Meteo  
Period: 1987 to 2016  
Source of graph: Cocker et al., 201 9 
 
 
Strong winds:  According to Benin NDCs, strong winds are also expected to increase with climate change.  
Overall, field interviews cross -checked with scientific data tend to confirm that farmers in the Upper and Middle Oueme 
are increasingly affected by  droughts, dry sp ells (especially in Copargo and Djougou), floods  (especially in  Zagnando 
and Zogbodomey) , heat waves  and strong winds , which have become more frequent, especially over the recent years.


---
*Page 14*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 11 
 
 
13 Gilles RC Essou and Francois Brissette, 2013,  ‘’Climat e Change Impacts on the Ouémé  River, Benin, West Africa’’  
14 Government of Benin (2011) Benin: Second National Communication on Climate Change  
15 To note that the Upper Ouémé area is characterized by a single rainy season, from March to November with a peak in 
July/ August; while Middle Ouémé has two rainy seaons, which peak in June and September.  
16 Gilles RC Essou and Francois Brissette, 2013,  ‘’Climate Change Impacts on the  Ouémé  River, Benin, West Africa’’  
17 Gnangle C. P., et al. (2011). Tendances climatiques passes, modelisation, precipitations, et adaptations locales au Benin. 
Climatologie, vol. 8.  
18 Baudoin M -A., Cuni Sanchez A. and Fandohan B. (2014). Small scale farm ers’ vulnerability to  climatic  changes  in  
southern  Benin:  The  importance  of  farmers’  perceptions  of  existing institutions. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 8(19): 1195 -1207. DOI  : 10.1007/s11027 -013-9468 -9 
19 M’Po, Y.N.T.M.; Lawin, A.E.; Oyerinde, G.T.; Yao, B.K.; Afouda, A.A. Comparison of Daily Precipitation Bias Correction Method s Based 
on Four Regional Climate Model Outputs in Ouémé. Hydrology 2017, 4, 58 –71. In addition, farmers note the  delayed rainfall seasons , and the  end of the bimodal rainfall  season  (in Glazoue). These 
have increasingly negative impacts on crops and vegetables production  in the project target areas  as will be explained 
in the following sections . More information on climate change trends is available  in Annex 2 Section 3.  
 
3. Climate change projections  
 
The Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin have experienced steady increase in temperatures since the 1960s; and this trend 
will continue under climate change conditions . Projections in both project areas indicate a general upward trend in daily 
temperatures, of 1 to 3°C for the 2035 - 2064 period, and 1 to 5°C for the 2070 -2099 period13. With regards to 
precipitations, climate models indicate that mean annual rainfall is likely to increase until mid -21st ce ntury, then decline 
until the end of the century in the Ouémé Basin14. It is also predicted , based on the RCP4.5 scenario,  that the main  
rainfall season, which takes place between March/April to November in the Upper and Middle Ouémé, will become 
shorter, and the dry season longer ; a decrease in rainfall is expected during the two -three months corresponding to the 
start of the main rainy season. In addition to this, in the Middle Ouémé15, models indicate a decrease of precipitation in 
the months correspondi ng to the start of the short rainy season. Another study from Essou and Brisette (2013)16 also 
indicates a decrease in daily precipitation for the 2035 -2064 and 2070 -2099 periods, but an increase in monthly 
precipitation: the study suggests that the number  of rainy days, thereby the length of the rainy seasons, will decrease 
in the future but not the amount of rain falling over the whole season. The Middle Ouémé short rainy season will be 
more affected with a 25% to 50% drop in daily precipitations during t he beginning of the short season, leading to its 
gradual disappearance. Conversely, models predict more frequent heavy rainfall episodes during the middle and end 
of the rainy seasons in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin17. In other words, climate change wi ll lead to an increased 
frequency of extreme rainfall events and an increased occurrence and intensity of floods during the middle and end of 
the rainy seasons, affecting in particular the Middle and Lower Ouémé Basin because of overflows of the Ouémé Rive r. 
It is important to note that these shifts in the main and short rainy seasons in Benin have already been observed, 
including in the Ouémé Basin18 (Table 1) . 
 
Table  1: Variability of average rainfall patterns in Benin between the 1985 -2014 and 2018 -2050 periods (future projection obtained from 
the RCP4.5 scenario); (significance of the results at thresholds of 5% according to the Student's Test).  
 Dec Jan Fev Mar Avr Mai Jun Jui Aou Sep Oct Nov 
Copargo  - - - - - - - - - + + - 
Djougou  - - - - - - - - - + + - 
Glazouè  - - - - - - - + + + + + 
Zagnanado  - - - - - - - - + + + + 
Zogbodomey  - - - - - - - - + + + - 
 
A more recent analysis of the future climate (2020 -2050) by M’po et al. (2017) 19, in the Oueme  basin confirmed that 
in general, under the RCP 4.5 projection scenario, rainfall is projected to decrease, whereas the trend will somehow 
stay constant for RCP 8.5. In average, the annual rainfall will decrease significantly by 1.33 mm according to RCP 4. 5, 
whereas the trend is expected to significantly increase by 1.89 mm based on RCP 8.5 (Lawin et al., 2019). (fig. 5). 
However, analysis of the future (2015 -2050) total annual precipitation by M’po et al. (2017), showed no clear trend for 
RCP 4.5 scenario but a decreasing trend for the RCP 8.5.  Specifically, these clear decreasing trend (RCP 8.5) is also 
shown with the future climate trends per stations (Djougou and Glazoue -Save for upper Oueme and Zagnanado for 
middle Oueme) (M’po et al., 2016).


---
*Page 15*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 12 
 
 
20 INE (2018), "Analyse de la vulnérabilité et de  l'adaptation au changement climatique des communautés et 
agroécosystèmes aux variations actuelles du climat et aux phénomènes météorologiques extrêmes", Rapport provisoire, 
61p. Figure 7: Variation of the average annual rainfall from observations (1971 -2005) to projections (2020 -2050) based on 
the Representative Concentration Pathways RCP 4.5 and 8.5, using MPI -ESM -LR/REMO2009, ICHEC -EC-EARTH/ 
RACMO22T, CC Cma -CanESM2_CCCma/ CanRCM4 and  
 
Source of data:  Bias-corrected of 4 downscaled GCMs data. All the 4 belong to the CORDEX Africa 
(AFR -44).  
Period:  Past (1971 -2005) and future (2020 -2050)  
Source graph:  Lawin et al., 2019  
 
Regarding dry spell periods, no trend is observ ed under the RCP. 4.5 scenario, while an increasing  Consecutive Dry 
Days (CDD) trend will be observed in the future according to the RCP. 8.5. On the contrary , a decreasing trend of the 
CWD is under that same RCP. 8.5. Regarding evapotranspiration,  analysis of the climate change effects (2030 -2049) 
on these trends using the REMO model with the older SRES scenarios (B1 and A1B, comparable to the new RCP 4.5 
and RCP 6.0, respectively (Danvi et a l., 2018), showed that the surface runoff will increase by 54 -65% (7 -12 mm), as 
well as water yield, while evapotranspiration is likely moderately increase . Cocker et al. (2018) in the lower valley, 
observed a high rainfall variability, with serious conseq uences on the inflow rate and availability of water in the basin. 
For example, for a 100% rainfall water received within the lower Oueme basin, about 31 -78% is lost as 
evapotranspiration, 20 -68% is used for ground water  recharge and only 0.2 -1% flows. For Sintondji et al. (2013), runoff, 
actual evapotranspiration and the total groundwater recharge represent 7.8 %, 73 % and 18.8 %, respectively of the 
total annual rainfall at Save outlet of the Oueme catchment (near Glazoue). The potential evapo -transpiratio n (PET) 
will significantly increase by 4.51 mm and 4.92 mm according to the RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, respectively (Lawin et al., 
2019).      
 
Climate change events in the Upper Ouémé Basin have negative impacts in the Middle Ouémé Basin, and lower areas. 
While both Upper and Middle Ouémé are experiencing hotter and more arid climate, with late and heavy rains, long 
periods of heat, and prolonged  periods of dry spells20, more irregular rainfalls with an increase in climate events such 
as torrential rains and higher temperatures, already observed in the upper catchment, lead to strong erosion of the river 
banks, and more frequent floods in the lowe r areas. More information of climate change projections is available in 
Annex 2 Section 3.  
 
4. Impacts of climate change on water, crops and value chains  
 
Water  
Climate change will increasingly affect water availability . The  Oueme  discharge flow water will decrease in the future 
(2020 -2050) with probability of exceedance less than 10% compared to compared to the observed data (1971 -2005) 
(fig. 6), with the peak discharge significantly decreasing by 6.58 m3/s under RCP 4.5. But RCP 8.5 reveals a non-
significant  increase by 1.59 m3/s  (fig. 7).


---
*Page 16*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 13 
 
 
21 Biao, 2017 Assessing the Impacts of Climate Change on River Discharge Dynam ics in Ouémé River Basin (Benin, West 
Africa)  
22 Biao, 2017 Assessing the Impacts of Climate Change on River Discharge Dynamics in Ouémé River Basin (Benin, West 
Africa)  
23 Gilles RC Essou and Francois Brissette, 2013,  ‘’Climate Change Impacts on the Ouémé  River, Benin, West Africa’’  
24 Rapport  Final,  Profil  du Bassin  de l’Ouémé  et caractérisation  des sites pilotes  (analyse  des données)  FAO,  Direction  du 
génie  rurale  2009   
 
 
 
Figure 8: Variation of the observed flow 
duration compared to the future trends, from 
observations (1971 -2005) to projections 
(2020 -2050) based on the Representative 
Concentration Pathways RCP 4.5 and 8.5.  
 Figure 9: Variation of the peak flow 
from observations (1971 -2005) to 
projections (2020 -2050) based on the 
Representative Concentration 
Pathways RCP 4.5 and 8.5.  
 
Source of data:  Bias-corrected of 4 
downscaled GCMs data. All the 4 
belong to the CORDEX Africa (AFR -
44)  
Period:  Past (1971 -2005) and future 
(2020 -2050)  
Source graph :  Lawin et al., 2019  Source of data:  Bias-corrected 
of 4 downscaled GCMs data. 
All the 4 belong to the CORDEX 
Africa (AFR -44) 
Period:  Past (1971 -2005) and 
future (2020 -2050)  
Source graph :  Lawin et al., 
2019  
 
As underlined in a study conducted by Biao in 201721, more frequent extreme events such as extended droughts and 
shifts in the rainy season, with a late onset and concentration of rainfalls over the middle -end of the season, will  
increasingly  decrease water availability at -20% to - 39% by 2080. With regards to the hydrological system, the Middle 
Ouémé will likely face reduced flo w of temporary or seasonal rivers under the combined effect of the shorter rainy 
seasons, increased temperatures and silting22. Likewise, a study from Gilles RC Essou and Francois Brissette (2013)23 
has indicated an increase of mean daily temperatures in t he Ouémé Basin, accompanied by a reduction in mean 
monthly flows of the river both in the dry and in the rainy seasons . 
 
Concerning the hydrographic network, in the middle basin of the Ouémé, it is likely that temporary or seasonal rivers 
will have a reduced flow due to the combined effect of reduced rainfall and silting24. Moreover, increased length and 
frequency of dry seasons, and higher temperature and evapotranspiration especially in the Upper Oueme will have a 
negative impact on the availability of water resources. This is because of a reduction in the volumes of water 
accumulated in aquifers, natural or constructed reservoirs. Furthermore, increase in temperatures will lead to an 
increase in water consumption for irrigation and will reduce the ca pacity for drinking water supply and other uses. The 
quality of water resources will also be affected by climate change. Decreased run -off may lead to increased 
concentrations of contaminants in water due to reduced dilution capacity. In addition, increasi ngly intense  floods may 
exacerbate erosion phenomena with river transport of high quantities of sediments, which will degrade the quality of 
surface water. The increase in temperature, together with the increase in phosphate concentration in natural or


---
*Page 17*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 14 
 
 
25 https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/29 -benin/WF  
26 Climate Service Centre (2013)  
27 Lawin A. E. , Akponikpè P.B.I., Jal loh A., Nelson G.N., and Thomas T.S. (2013) Benin (Chap3) in Jalloh A., Nelson G.N., 
and Thomas T.S., Zougmoré R., and Roy -Macauley H. (Eds) West African Agriculture and Climate change: A 
Comprehensive Analysis, IFPRI, Washington USA, 408p https://www.ifpr i.org/publication/west -african -agriculture -and-
climate -change -comprehensive -analysis  constructed reservoirs, could favour the invasion of water hyacinth. This, in turn, will degrade the quality of the water 
by modifying its colour, odour and taste, due to the reduction in the level of dissolved oxygen. In some cases, this 
phenomenon could mak e the water toxic for humans, flora and fauna.  
  
With regards to groundwater, Barthel et al. (2009) found a variation of 0.2 to 1.2 mm/month as recharge capacity of 
groundwater, with the maximum recharge usually observed in July -August. Under climate change scenario, the authors 
concluded that these trends decrease for the same period of study, with a maximum of 1.0 mm/month .  As any fragile 
ecosystem, inland valleys of the Oueme basin are also sensitive to climate change and variabilities. For  example, study 
conducted by Danvi et al. (2018) showed that a large portion of the cultivated lands of inland valleys within the studied 
watersheds in the Commune of Djougou are more sensitive to climate change, resulting in about 50% (145 mm) 
decreasing of the water yield (Fig. 8). However, soil and water conservation practices such as bunded fields can 
decrease the projected surface runoff up to 5% at Kpandouga, one of the watersheds located in the commune of 
Djougou (Danvi et al., 2018). Earlier, Worou et al. (2012) have also demonstrated that the use of bunded plots improves 
soil water content, the ponded water table, as well as rice grain yield.  
 
Agriculture  
Agricultural productivity in the Ouémé Basin will be increasingly negatively affected by climate change impacts.  Agro -
ecological areas in Upper Ouémé are particularly threatened by the expansion of desert areas, as climate change 
accelerates desertificati on and desert borders are gradually expanding towards the lower latitudes . As indicated in table 
3 in Section B3 ‘’  Climatic hazards, climate change impact on crops and effective adaptation measures by municipality  
Incread temperatures will lead to reduce d soil fertility, reducted suitability of crop varirty ’’, increased temperatur es are 
impacting, and will increaslingly impact, crop production .  The rise in temperatures , especially in Upper Oueme,  will 
lead to a disturbance of crops by shortening vegetative cycles, while early flowering can significantly destabilize 
ecosystems and reduce yields .  Higher evapotranspiration and intermediate dry spells will also lead to shorter growing 
seasons . Soild fertility will be reduced and currently used seeds varieties may not be resilient to increas ing temperatures 
and lack of rains.   Increased tempertures could also increase the duration and intensity of wildfires25.  
 
At the same time, climate change impacts  on water resources could result in a 40 -60% reduction in the availability of 
water resources, further influencing food production in Benin26..  The agricultural production capacity in the highly agro -
cultural southern zone is endangered by the depletion of useful nutrients in the soil because of increased frequency 
and intensity of torrential rains in the South.  In Glazoue, Zagnanado and Zogbodomey  (Middle Ouémé) , the depletion 
of useful soil nutrients induced by floods is a high risk to agricultural productivity. Moreover, high rainfall surpluses and 
more frequent floods lead to swelling and washing of soils, which result in early rotting of crops. The late onset of the 
main rainy seasons will force a shift of the beginning of agricultural activities to April or May instead of March; while the  
short agricultural season in Middle Ouémé could completely disappear. In contrast to the start of the rains,  the mid -
season and the end of the rainy season show a significant increase in the amount of rainfall, leading to floods. Finally, 
all municipalities  will need to concentrate their cropping calendar over a shorter period of time  during the rainy season  
(due to prevalence of rain -fed agriculture – see below) , and this may affect productivity  if appropriate adaptation 
measures are not taken . In depth information of climate change impacts on agriculture and value chains (VC) is 
presented in Annex 2 Section 4.   
Climate change is impacting the targeted value chains with negative effects on the various VC links , including 
production, harvest, processing and storage and, ultimately, sale . Detailed impacts (along with adaptation needs) are 
presented in Table  3 (Section B.3),  highlighting, among others:  
- yield losses because of increased evapotranspiration, water stresses, and soil fertility losses;  
- grain conservation problems because o f increased humidity at harvest;  
- decreased sale price because of the lower quality of crops/ fruits/ vegetables as heat rises;  
- damages fruits due to heavy rainfalls.  
 
The projected impacts of climate change in the Upper and Middle Basin are likely to r educe food crop yields from 3 to 
18 percent in 205027. More precisely, the following yield decreases are expected by 2050, for the main crops in 
Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin: -17% for cassava, -18% for cowpeas, -30% for maize, -3% for yam, -30% for


---
*Page 18*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 15 
 
 
28 Jalloh, Abdulai; Nelson, Gerald C.; Thomas, Timothy S.; Zougmoré, Robert and Roy -Macauley, Harold. 2013. West 
African agriculture and climate change: A comprehensive analysis. IFPRI Research Monograph. Washington, D.C. 
International Food Policy Research I nstitute http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896292048  
29 Srivastava, A.K., Gaiser, T., Paeth, H. and Ewert, F., 2012. The impact of climate change on Yam (Dioscorea alata) yield 
in the savanna zone of West Africa.  Agriculture, ecosystems & environment , 153, pp.5 7-64. 
30 Balogoun, I., Ahoton, E.L., Saïdou, A., Bello, O.D. and Ezin, V., 2016. Effect of climatic factors on cashew (Anacardium 
occidentale L.) productivity in Benin (West Africa).  Journal of Earth Science and Climatic Change , 7, p.329.  
31 http://ebrary.ifpri.org/utils/getfile/collection/p15738coll2/id/127444/filename/127655.pdf   
32 See INSAE, Evaluation de la Pauvrete: Rapport final. 2014  
33 INSAE, Juillet 2020: Note sur la pauvrete en 2019.  
34 Leichenko R. M. & Silva J. A. (2014). Climate change and poverty: Vulnerability, impacts and alleviation strategies. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews Climate Change  5(4). DOI:  10.1002/wcc.287  
35 Food insecurity is especially prevalent in Middle Oueme, affecting 10 to 20% households – and over 20% in Glazoue. See WFP, Analyse 
Globale de la Vulnerabilite et de la Securite Alimentaire (AGVSA), Republique du Benin, 2017.  chilies , green vegetables, okra and tomatoes28 29. Note that similar projections are not available for mango, shea 
and cashew. However it is noted that c ashew production, which is positively correlated with the number of rainy days30, 
will also likely be negatively affected by the predicted shorter rainfall seasons. Furthermore, in the municipality of 
Glazoué (Upper -Middle Ouémé), for example, rain during January and December, violent winds and drought periods, 
intensified by climate change, have  been found to affect cashew productivity negatively by causing flowers to dry and 
drop. Climate models also project the reduction of soil fertility and soil losses in the Ouémé Basin31. Overall, in all 
project sites, farmers are especially negatively  beeing impacted by droughts and dry spells , which lead to production 
losses in food crops and key value chains  (in particular in Upper Ouémé) . Floods are also noted across all project sites, 
with a higher negative impact in Zogbodomey  and  in Zagnanado  (Middle Oueme). Please refer to table 3 in Section 
B3 for further information.  
 
5. Vulnerability and adaptive capacity of small -holders in Upper and Middle Ouémé  
The population of Upper and Middle Ouémé does not have the capacity to adapt to climate change impacts and threats 
on livelihoods, agricultural productivity and water availability (see  Annex 2, FS, Section  4 and 5 ). The municipalities of  
Copargo, Djougou (Upper Ouémé) ; Glazoué , Zogbodomey and Zagnanado (Middle Ouémé)  are characteri sed by a 
high concentration of population and agricultural land . About 61% of th e population in the Ouémé Basin rely on 
agriculture as main (and only) economic activity, which is essentially rain-fed subsistence farming in small farms.  
Poverty is significant in  the project area  (especially Bourgou, Donga, and Zou )32  affecting respectively 53, 43 and 39% 
of households compared to 38% at national level33.It is also an important driver of climate change vulnerability, which 
increases the propensity of individuals or households to be harmed by climate stresses and extre mes. In return, climate 
change exacerbates poverty, particularly in less developed countries, forming poverty traps and annihilating poverty 
alleviation efforts34. Moreover, many rural households especially in the  Middle Ouémé Basin do not produce enough 
food and income to meet their nutritional and income needs35. Field visits on the project sites have indicated limited 
capacity to adapt agricultural and production systems to current and future climate change impacts. While several 
adaptation projects have  been conducted in Benin as described in Section 6, some in rural areas with positive results 
such as NAPA -1, the target municipalities have been neglected until now and have not yet been the subject of large -
scale adaptation interventions .  
 
Climate chang e challenges existing agricultural practices and calendars, through shifting seasonal patterns, increased 
temperatures, and more frequent extremes events, among others. Vulnerability in the agricultural sector is underpinned 
by existing practices. Like the  rest of Benin, traditional family type of agriculture is the main economic activity, applied 
on small farms (often < 2 ha), oriented towards food crops. It is mainly rain -fed, semi -itinerant agriculture on burnt land, 
characterised by low productivity and  low yields. Farmers use basic agricultural equipment, such as hoe, and the use 
of harnessed cultivation on some farms. The production system is a shifting cultivation system  (crops are detailed 
above)  involving large areas of uncultivated fallow land and high crop rotation. In addition to crops and vegetable, 
mango, cashew trees and / or of shea tree (Vitellaria paradoxa) of the agroecosystems constitute important sources of 
income for the producers. These trees are planted on the fields, in orchards or fo und in the wild (shea). Access to 
irrigation is limited : it is estimated that 14% or 360,000 hectares of arable land in the Ouémé basin can be irrigated. 
Despite this potential, only 1% of annually cultivated land is irrigated (SDAGE, 2013).  Irrigation in the target area 
remains traditional and little modernised. As a result of low productivity, crops that are produced by rural communities 
in the Ouémé Basin are essentially used for direct consumption. If there is a surplus, it is sold wholesale to traders or 
on local markets, shortly after harvesting (due to limited storage capacity), at a very low price.  It should also be noted 
that production costs have practically doubled  in the project target area  in comparison to ten years ago. This is because 
of climate change  impacts which require the use of more fertiliser, adapted seeds, etc., compounded by inflation and 
overal increase of living costs in Benin – including increase cost of field labour  (see An nex 19) .


---
*Page 19*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 16 
 
 
36 Akponikpè PBI (2022) Climate change and Environmental Impact study in the Oueme -basin (Benin): Update of literature 
and Analysis of the perceptions of climate change and farmers adaptive strategies. FAO Consultancy report, Fev -March 
2022.  In a nutshell , low yields, food insecurity and high poverty in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin, as well as a lack of 
capacity, and economic and financial opportunities to support small -scale, climate -resilient agriculture, drive the local 
commun ities towards unsustainable practices . The impacts of climate change on ecosystems combined with the 
population growth and related needs will lead to serious impact of forest resources in the Ouémé Basin. Non -climatic 
factors such as agricultural land expa nsion through slash and burn, inappropriate and unsustainable forest exploitation 
mainly through fuel wood usage and charcoal fabrication, hunting, interacting with climate stress, are likely to amplify 
the decline of the forest. These non climatic factors  are, nontheless, being exarcerbated by climate change  (Figure 10) : 
as yields decline because of changing climate patterns, communities increasingly turn to over extraction of wood for 
charcoal production, illegal logging, and clearing of forest lands and natural habitats for agriculture. This further 
accentuates the ongoing depletion of the natural resources and land degradation, which is in turn exacerbated by lack 
of appropriate agriculture practices. In general and according to farmers, the non -climatic  causes of vulnerability 
(deforestation, wildfire, soil erosion and degradation, as a result of intense agricultural activities and/or natural 
phenomenon), have significantly increased over the Ou émé basin during the past few years, compared to the histori cal 
observations in the five communes. Examples of these phenomenon as observed during the field visits are presented 
in Annex 2 (Section 4. 3.4). Farmers confirmed the impacts of human activities and non -climatic factors as further 
exacerbating climate change effects36.   In the context of climate change, a  decline in ecosystem goods and services, 
which underpin agriculture production sustainability and livelihoods in the Upper and Middle Ouémé areas, leads to 
increased vulnerability to floods an d flash floods especially in Middle Ouémé, water scarcity especially in Upper Ouémé, 
and reduced agricultural productivity in the whole Basin. This situation further drives the p opulations towards 
unsustainable practices to meet their food and agricultural  needs, locking them into a vicious cycle.   
In order to  directly address these  climate change  impacts, OCRI will put in place  climate -resilient agriculture (CRA)  
techniques , including the use of diversified drought -tolerant crop varieties, conservation farming, rainwater 
conservation, micro -dams, agroforestry, improved water management, as well as ecosystem restoration, water -source 
and riverbank protection.  These technologies aim at improving yields in light of losses and damags caused by c limate 
change impacts by improving soil fertility, improve the resilience of the varieties used, improve water availability and 
protecting from increasing heat, floods  and strong winds .  
 
 
Figure 10: Vicious cycle  
 
 
Climate change 
related threats
Changes in seasonality, 
inducing shifts/ 
disappearance  of rainfall 
seasons
Heat stresses on fauna and 
flora, with loss of crops
Increased soil erosion, incl. 
river banks, because of 
increased runoffs, with floods 
on fields (esp. Middle Oueme
and downstream)
Reduction of water availability and quality in 
Ouemeriver for agriculture and domestic 
consumption
Reduced agricultural productivity and yields, increased 
poverty and food insecurity  Anthropogenic threats 
Unsustainable agricultural practices as 
farmers try to increase productivity 
through slash n burn, deforestation to set 
up fields, incl. near river banks seen as 
fertile soils
Deforestation to set up new fields, 
produce charcoal or construction wood 
for sale
Lack of adequate water management 
with no sustainable irrigation techniques 
to support agriculture 
Overexploitation  of natural resources as an 
income-generating strategy  Smallholders’ 
vulnerability 
increases Lead to Lead toLead to


---
*Page 20*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 17 
 
Figure 11: Linkages of climate change, human activities and non -climate factors on ecosystem services and livelihood in the Ouémé river 
basin in Bénin  
 
 
Impacts of COVID -19 
 
Field missions indicated that the main COVID -19 impact took place during the beginning of the pandemic (March -June 
2020) due to hard lock down measures implemented by the government. During that time, there was  a scarcity or lack 
of agricultural labor due to restrictive measures preventing outside labor from coming to the production areas . With 
regard to th e price of production inputs, the actors interviewed indicated that they had noted an increase in the price of 
inputs because of the restrictive measures through the closure of borders and the cordon sanitaire preventing the 
supply of inputs. Finally, seve ral processing units had temporarily closed due to the volatility of raw nut prices and the 
lack of adequate financing. However, strong competition has been noted (in 2020 and 2021) between different buyers 
in local cashew markets , indicating the recovery in global demand, particularly in Europe and the United States.  Please 
refer to Annex 19, Section 2.8 for more details on Covid -19 impacts.  
6. Private sector engagement  
Although valuable crops  that can be grown as part of the agro -forestry and CSA practices  like mango, cashew, shea 
and maize, are produced in the target areas and could increase climate change adaptation and uplift farmers out of 
poverty, the development of these value chains is currently hindered by several factors, affecting the demand and 
production side. On the buyer side the following companies and particulars are present on the project sites:


---
*Page 21*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 18 
 
 
 Table 1: Private sector engagement in the targeted value chains  
Value chain  Zagnanado & Zogbodomey  Glazoué  Djougou & Copargo  
Maize  Centre GBEMONTIN des sœurs, SOCIA -
Bénin (Bohicon), Véto -Service, SODECO, 
transformation unit, local retailers, 
SOBEBRA  SOCIA -Bénin (Bohicon), Véto -
Service,  transformation unit, local 
retailers,  ,  GAPA, SOCIA -Bénin (Bohicon), Véto -
Service  
Cashew  - Benin -Cajou, CC Services et Kaid -
deï-deï, Afokantan Benin Cashew, 
FLUDOR -Bénin, Tolaro Global 
S.A.S., Africa Negoce Industries, 
ZANCLAN  GAPA, Benin -Cajou, CC Services et 
Kaid -deï-deï, Afokantan Benin 
Cashew, FLUDOR -Bénin, Tolaro 
Global S.A.S., Africa Negoc e 
Industries  
Shea   FLUDOR -Bénin, Knar -Bénin, 
Afokantan -Bénin, Henhood, GAPA  FLUDOR -Bénin, Knar -Bénin, 
Afokantan -Bénin, Henhood, GAPA  
Mango  Processing units, private wholesalers, Blues 
Skies  Processing units, private 
wholesalers  Processing units, private  wholesalers  
 
It should be noted that the  mango market is not well organised and at the moment mango es are sold on local markets.  
FAO notes on the demand (buyer) side, a lack of communication between producers and buyers of agro -products, to 
discuss market needs and demands that could be met by the producers. The productivity of some products like 
mangoes can vary a lot in quantity and quality (because of climate change, limited water management capacity, and 
non-adapted agricultural technique s), which impairs buyers from planning ahead their buy. On the producer side, 
farmers are often not aware of the various potential buyers operating in their area, therefore relying on the same buyers 
without being able to negotiate prices. This is also bec ause of a lack of organisation among smallholders, mostly 
working individually rather than in cooperatives. Finally, on the technical side, farmers are facing difficulties accessing 
quality seeds and tree seedlings; they lack the equipment for crop process ing and storage  (e.g. 97% of cashews are 
sold raw), collection and transport (mangoes are most often directly collected by the buyers on the field), packaging, 
marketing skills to prepare and label agro -products (see Table 2).  In order to facilitate access  to market,  OCRI  will  
ensure adquate  production and quality levels in consideration of climate change impacts through CRA and 
waterworks/restoration activities , will provide  support for cooperatives organisation, strenghten knowledge on market, 
negotiation and financial skills and work throu gh existing networks with pre -identified buyers while also improving 
connection between producers and buyers. Letters of engagement from buyers interested in purchasing OCRI crops 
have been received from  Africa Green Corporation . More information related a ccess to market is available in Annex 19 
Section 2. Smallholder farmers also face many difficulties accessing credits for agricultural investments, particularly for 
the more vulnerable groups of society, such as women and youth. The financing schemes tend to focus on Alternative 
Income Generating Activities, such as sale of transformation products, honey, etc, while the risk of investing in 
agricultural production is still perceived as high. As a result, micro -finance institutions have high requirements wit h 
regards to collateral, which smallholders can  hardly  meet. Furthermore, finance institutions are more reluctant to lend 
to individual farmers than to organised groups.  An investigation conducted by MAEP37 on the reason why many 
smallholder farmers in Up per and Middle Ouémé  do not contract credits indicates, as main reasons: i) smallholders are 
scared and uncomfortable to be in debt  without any guarantee ; ii) high interest rates of credits; iii) lack of stable income, 
or income too low; iv) lack of knowledge of how to get a credit; and v) they have not thought about it (not aware of credit 
potential).  
 
Limited access to credit impairs the full development potential of key value chains in Benin  that could contribute to 
climate change adaptation and its sustainability . This is because  at the start of the season producers often lack the 
money to buy inputs (improved seeds, fertilizers, pesticides) and to pay labour , especially for ploughing  and maintaining 
crops. In the absence of financial means, produ cers resort to poor quality seeds (often taken from the previous harvest), 
use a limited quantity of inputs in production or poorly maintain their farms. Under these conditions, the products 
obtained are of poor quality  which jeaopardize access to market a nd negotiation of prices . In some cases, products like 
mango rot on farms for lack of takers.  Furthermore, with regards to transformation , limited funding impairs  the 
acquisition of raw materials, the purchase of processing inputs, and access to improved t echnologies.  
 
Despite these barriers, i n terms of access to microcredit, the country benefits from a favourable institutional framework 
as the credit actors are structured around a consortium of 43 micro -credit institutions called “Alafia” .  In addition, the 
Fonds National de Développement Agricole FNDA, a public entity, under the guardianship of the MAEP, facilitates 
access to loans from banks and MFIs (microfinance institutions) for producers through technical support (capacity


---
*Page 22*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 19 
 
 
38 Crinot et al.  (2015)  
39 Analysis of the Benin Cashew Sector Value Chain. African Cashew Initiative, 2010.  Available at: 
http://www.africancashewinitiative.org/files/files/downloads/aci_benin_gb_150.pdf  
40 Balogoun, I., Ahoton, E.L., Saïdou, A., Bello, O.D. and Ezin, V., 2016. Effect of climatic factors on cashew (Anacardium occidentale L.) 
productivity in Benin (West Africa).  Journal of Earth Science and Climatic Change , 7, p.329.  building via   the Territorial Agricultural Development Agencies (ADTA), based at the communal level and quality review 
of loan application) for the preparation of financial plans to submit for credit acquisition. Through that support, farmers 
can access FNDA -supported  loans  from MFIs : FNDA will cover a guarantee of 50% of the loan value, which FNDA will 
repay to the MFI in case farmers are unable to; FNDA also ensures loan interest rate at 12% (while ‘regular interest 
rate is at 18 -24%). Please refer to Annex 19, Secti on 3 for details regarding FNDA support to OCRI farmers. The 
support FNDA has committed to provide to OCRI farmers will increase MFIs’ confidency to provide loans to OCRI 
farmers, as indicated in Annex 19.  The MFIs ONG SIA N’SON Microfinance and  Bethesda partnering with FNDA and 
present in the Upper and Middle Ouémé have also signed letters of engagements confirming their support to project 
beneficiaries by facilitating access to credit . 
 
Farmers and cooperatives could acquire the necessary production input, processing equipment and other input through 
micro -credits or loans, once they have increased access to these financial tools. The loan will then be reimbursed under 
preferential rate ( through FNDA commitment) once they sell their high -quality product. The forms of credits that can 
contribute to the development of value chains are in particular credits for the maintenance of plantations (case of 
cashew nuts), credits intended for the acq uisition of quality inputs (improved seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, seeds of 
maize varieties resilient to climate change), credits for ploughing and maintenance of crops, credits for storage, credits 
for coaching (coach for the benefit of producer coopera tives). At the level of the transformation link, the credits will not 
only be directed towards the acquisition of raw materials and inputs but also towards the improvement of the 
transformation process and support for the standardization of the quality of products (mango, shea in particular ), 
capacity building of processing units, acquisition of modern processing equipment. Table  2: SWOT assessment of selected 
key value chains . 
Strengths  Weaknesses  Opportunities  Threats  (including CC -
threats)  
Cashew nuts  
• - Favourable conditions 
especially in Upper Oueme 
and the transition area 
(Glazoue)  
• - Prioritised for export by the 
Government of Benin.  
• - Can be produced in 
orchards or within 
agricultural fields 
(agroforestry) to contribute 
to restoring soil fertility.  
• - Combines well with locally -
appreciated crops like maize, 
yam, cassava and sorghum.  
• -  Increasing global demand 
for cashew nuts.  
• - There are regional 
cooperatives in Upper 
Oueme, which collect and  sell 
cashews from municipal and 
village -based cooperatives  
• - Improved plants are 
available (limited quantity)  • - Limited organisation of 
farmers at local level  
• - Limited price negotiation 
capacity  
• - Limited productivity of 
cashew trees  
• - Lack of processing  
equipment and technical 
capacity amongst most 
communities , particulartly 
women,  to add value to 
cashew nuts.  
• - Lack of skills amongst local 
communities for developing 
businesses based on 
cashews.  
• - Lack of storage facilities for 
nuts.  
• - Widespread illiteracy 
among women and lack of 
decision -making power  
• - Lack of relationships with 
trading c omp anies, currently 
raw cashews are sold to 
Indian traders).  
 • - Capacity amongst local 
communities for establishing cashew 
nut cooperatives.  
• - Opportu nity to cultivate in forested 
areas  along Oueme River (to 
reforest)  or on private land 
(agroforestry; intercropping; 
private/community plantations).  
• -  Potential to increase yield  
• - Potential to improve local value 
through processing and storage.  
• - Potenti al for international export 
through national c ompan ies.  
• - Inter -cropping with cashew trees, 
maize, yam and sorghum has high 
market value, up to CFA 
395,370/ha38. 
• - - Recurring fires in orchards  
- Influx of foreign capital for 
trading in raw nuts to the 
detriment of local processors39 
- Discriminatory socio -cultural 
norms that marginalize 
women;  
-Gender -based violence;  
- Women’s time poverty  
 
CC-related:  
-  Increased rainfall variability 
and droughts  will lead to  
reduce d cashew productivity40 
-  rain during January and 
December, violent winds and 
drought will lead cashew 
flowers to dry and drop  
- Women’s limited access to 
climate resilient technologies 
and practices  
- Post-harvest activities carried 
out by women affected by 
climate change with regards to 
quality of produce and access 
to clean water, fuel wood and 
drying and storing of produce  
 
Shea


---
*Page 23*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 20 
 
 
41 Glèlè Kakaï, R., Akpona, T., Assogbadjo, A.E., Gaoué, O.G., Chakeredza, S., Gnanglè, P.C., Mensah, G.A. and Sinsin, B., 2011. 
Ecological adaptation of the shea butter tree ( Vitellaria paradoxa  CF Gaertn.) along climatic gradient in Bénin, West Africa.  African Journal 
of Ecology , 49(4), pp.440 -449. • - Prioritized for export by the 
Government of Benin.  
• - Shea trees occur throughout 
the central and northern 
parts of the country, either 
within the forests or in 
cultivated fields.  
• - Nuts can be processed as oil 
or butter; used in direct 
consumption or sold on local, 
regional and international 
markets.  
• - Adapted to arid, less fertile 
soils  
• - Natural regeneration  
• - Tree last s for 200 yrs  
• - Local know -how for 
valorizing shea products 
among women  
• - Important source of income 
as well as coping mechanism 
for women.  • - Low price negotiating 
capacity among producers  
• - Limited knowledge of 
production techniques (shea 
is often collect ed from wild 
trees)  
• - Lack of processing 
equipment and technical 
capacity , particularly of 
women,  amongst most 
communities to add value to 
shea.  
• - Lack of skills amongst local 
communities for developing 
businesses based on shea 
nuts.  
• - Widespread illiteracy 
among women and lack of 
decision -making power  
• - Poor access of women to 
extension services.  
• - Lack of storage facilities , 
especially for women,  for 
nuts and processed products.  
• - Lack of relationships with 
relevant traders (shea butter 
can be lo st through spoilage 
if not sold on time).  • - Resilient to climate change  
• - Potential for strengthening capacity 
of local cooperatives.  
• - Opportunity to produce shea nuts 
in forested areas or on agricultural 
land (intercropping).  
• - Potential to improve add v alue 
locally through processing.  
• - Potential for international export 
through national c ompan ies (to be 
identified by CCIB).  
• -  
• - High potential for women’s 
involvement in shea cooperatives as 
the processing of shea nuts into oil 
and butter is typically a women’s 
task.  - Shea trees are often cut 
down as part of land clearing 
process for agriculture 
(because its use if 
agroforestry system is not 
well known)  
- Sensitive to bush fire - 
 
- Discriminatory socio -cultural 
norms that marginalize 
women ; 
-Gender -based violence;  
- Women’s time poverty.  
 
CC-related:  
- Increasing aridity in the 
north of Benin as a result of 
climate change is predicted to 
decrease the recruitment of 
seedlings, which w ill affect 
the natural regeneration of 
shea tree populations41. 
Planting shea trees to maintain 
the production of shea nuts 
will thus become increasingly 
important  
- Women’s limited access to 
climate resilient technologies 
and practices;  
-Post-harvest acti vities carried 
out by women affected by 
climate change with regards to 
quality of produce and access 
to clean water, fuel wood and 
drying and storing of produce   
Mango   
• - Market demand steadily 
increases especially for 
international market  
• - It can be produced in 
orchards or in agroforestry 
system, associated with 
current crops like maize, 
sorghum or cassava.  
- Embedding mango 
plantations in the cultural 
habits of the population (as 
savings for retirement, and as a 
tool for securing land ho ldings)  
- Existence of well trained and 
supervised nurserymen  
- Suitability of the soil for 
mango production  
•  • - Farmers are not well -
organised  and sale is mostly 
done along the road where 
prices are subjected to 
buyers/ poor negotiating 
capacity  
• - Production techniques are 
not well -controlled by the 
producers, therefore 
productivity is low, and the 
quality of the fruit is lacking  
- Poor acces sibility to good 
quality plants  
- Lack of the practice of 
irrigation in the plantations  
- Insufficient or lack of advice 
and training on good practices 
in setting up and managing 
orchards, and on monitoring 
and maintaining mango 
orchards  
- Lack of skills at t he level of 
actors (producers, supervisory 
staff) in harvesting techniques  • - Mango collection and sale is a 
women -oriented activity  
• - Given the increasing demand for 
mangoes on local to international 
markets, profits could be improved if 
production and processing 
techniques are better control led 
- Availability of cultivable land and 
existence of possibility of extension of 
plantations  
- Agro -climatic conditions favorable to 
mango production  
- Socio -economic importance of mango 
as a source of income and food security  
- Existence of proven metho ds of 
controlling fruit flies  
- Current government policy favorable 
to the promotion of sectors  
- Enthusiasm of the State and certain 
TFPs to support the development of the 
mango sector  
• - Existence of a National 
Development Strategy for Fruit Tree 
Cultivat ion in Benin  - Difficulties in accessing land 
and land tenure insecurity  
- Destruction of plantations by 
oxen;  
- Destruction of plantations for 
other crops  (cotton, cashew 
nut) or for the manufacture of 
fuelwood;  
- Lack of adequate funding for 
the acquisition of packaging, 
storage and processing 
equipment;  
- Discriminatory socio -cultural 
norms that marginalize 
women ; 
-Gender -based violence;  
- Women’s time poverty.  
 
CC-related:  
- Mangoes are sensitive to pest 
attacks which tend to increase 
with climate change  
- Negative impacts  of climatic 
extremes


---
*Page 24*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 21 
 
 
42 Elbehri, A., J. Kaminski, S. Koroma, M. Iafrate, and M. Benali (2013), West Africa food systems: An overview of trends 
and indicators of demand, supply, and competitiveness of staple food value chains, In: Rebuilding West Africa’s Food 
Potential, A. Elbeh ri (ed.), FAO/IFAD.  
45 Jalloh, Abdulai; Nelson, Gerald C.; Thomas, Timothy S.; Zougmoré, Robert and Roy -Macauley, Harold. 2013. West 
African agriculture and climate change: A comprehensive analysis. IFPRI Research Monograph. Washington, D.C. 
International Food Policy Research Institute http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896292048  
46 FAO, 2017. Brief ing Note on FAO Actions on Fall Armyworm in Africa. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a -bs183e.pdf  - Almost non -existence of 
phytosanitary products 
approved in Benin on mango,  
- Lack of control of pests or 
diseases (fruit flies, termites, 
anthracnose and physiological 
accidents) and emergence of 
Bacteria Black Spot (BBS) 
which can lead to large losses 
in orchards;  and women’s lack 
of access to inputs and 
extension service that can 
advise on use of fertilizers and 
pesticides  
• - Widespread illiteracy 
among women and lack of 
decision -making power  
- Low knowledge and low 
compliance with quality 
standards;  
- No mastery of the different 
pruning techniques for the 
rehabilitation of old orchards;  
- Lack of windbreaks around 
the mango plantations;  
- Poor knowledge of 
alternatives to chemical control 
for organic mango production;  
- Lack of adequate packaging, 
transport and marketing 
infrastructure and equipment 
(absence of packaging stations 
and quality control service);  
• - High concentration of 
produ ction over a short 
period of the year  - Women’s limited access to 
climate resilient technologies 
and practices;  
- Post-harvest activities carried 
out by women affected by 
climate change with regards to 
quality of produce and access 
to clea n water, fuel wood and 
drying and storing of produce.  
 
 
Maize  
• - Most widely planted crop in 
Benin.  
• - Many suitable soil  
• - Production techniques well -
known  
• - Strong local , regional 
(Nigeria),  and international 
demand  for food crop and 
livestock . 
• - Beneficiate from 
governmental support for 
production techniques and 
access to relevant seeds 
(from INRAB, DDAEP and 
ATDA/FNDA).  
• - Staple food and used 
extensively as animal feed42. 
• - Various improved varieties 
have been rele ased in • - Basic production 
techniques using hoe for soil 
preparation  
• - Women’s limited access to 
tools and animal traction  
• - Productivity is low at 
700kg/ ha  
• - Rural communities , 
particularly women,  often  
lack proper facilities to store 
harvested maize and can 
therefore not wait until 
prices improve to sell maize.  
• - Despite some local 
cooperatives, limited 
organisation of the value 
chains: individual producers 
sell directly to wholesalers, 
who are then se lling on local 
and regional markets  • - Maize yield can be increased 
further in Benin despite climate 
change45. 
• - Maize production is already part of 
rotation culture, which is climate -
resilient  
• - Short -cycle seed varieties are 
available in Benin (from INRAB) and 
in the neighbour countries, where 
farmers are already buying these 
seeds (Burkina -Faso).  
• - Dome stic, regional and 
international demands is increasing  
•  - Access to markets limited 
because of degradation of 
roads from extreme rainfalls  
 
CC-related:  
- New pests such as the fall 
army worm46. 
- Production affected by shift 
in rainfall patterns  
- Women’s limited access to 
climate resilient technologies 
and practices  
- Post-harvest activities carried 
out by women affected by 
climate change with regards to 
quality of produce and access 
to clean water, fuel wood and 
drying and storing of produce


---
*Page 25*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 22 
 
 
43 From 1970 to 2010, 36 maize varieties were released in Benin. Walker, T.S. and Alwang, J. eds., 2015.  Crop 
improvement, adoption and impact of improved varieties in food crops in sub -Saharan Africa . CABI.  
44 Mahoussi, F.E., Adegbola, P .Y., Zannou, A., Hounnou, E.F. and Biaou, G., 2017. Adoption assessment of improved 
maize seed by farmers in Benin Republic.  Journal of Agricultural and Crop Research , 5: 32-41. 
47 Davis, K., Nkonya, E., Kato, E., Mekonnen, D. A., Odendo, M., Miiro,  R., & Nkuba, J. (2012). Impact of farmer field 
schools on agricultural productivity and poverty in East Africa.  World Development, 40(2), 402 –413. 
Waarts, Y., Ge, L., Ton, G., & Jansen, D. M. (2012).  Sustainable tea production in Kenya; impact assessment of Rainforest 
Alliance and farmer field school training. LEI report 2012 -043. The Hague: LEI, part of Wageningen UR.  
48 Waarts, Y., Ge, L., Ton, G., & Jansen, D. M. (2012).  Sustainable tea production in Kenya; impact assessment of 
Rainforest Alliance and farmer field school training. LEI report 2012 -043. The Hague: LEI, part of  Wageningen UR.  
49 Cavatassi, R., González -Flores, M., Winters, P., Andrade -Piedra, J., Espinosa, P., & Thiele, G. (2011).  Linking 
smallholders to the new agricultural economy: The case of the plataformas de  
concertación in Ecuador.  Journal of Development S tudies, 47(10), 1545 –1573. Benin43 and these are 
adopted readily by farmers44. • - No negotiating power for 
price among the producers  
• - Widespred illiteracy among 
women and lack of decision -
making power  
• - Lack of processing 
equipment  
 
In addition to providing training on financial management and ensuring support from FNDA for loan repayment  and 
preferential credit rates, the  project will address the above -mentioned issue s, together with the need for technical 
capacity strengthening for CR A, through the “Caisse de Resilience” approach. This approach includes three pillars: i) 
technical capacity, which is supported through training in farmer field schools; ii) financial support with the establishment 
of Village Savings and Loan Association ( VSLA) ; and iii) social pillar as a methodology inspired from the Dimitra Clubs, 
where group members are trained and accompanied to discuss and address social or environmental issues that they 
consider as a priority for the community  (see below 7. on gender  inclusion). In particular, the VSLA   approach, adopted 
by farming communities in many countries of the world, will be used to cope with these difficulties and facilitate the 
accompaniment of smallholder farmers in accessing microcredit.  
 
Through the inte gration of the VSLA into the farmer groups already organized in FFS groups, this approach has proved 
extremely effective. The VSLA model creates self -managed and self -capitalized savings groups that use members' 
savings to lend small amount of money to eac h other. VSLAs are composed of between 15 and 30 members, groups 
of farmers large enough to create a pool of useful capital, and small enough to keep meetings manageable. Groups 
voluntarily come together to save and periodically grant small loans from thos e savings. Based on the experience in 
other countries, around 90% of groups continue to operate longer than five years after receiving  training. On average 
they double their capitalization and average loan sizes. Around 80 % of the members are female.  In addition, Please 
see Section 7.3.2 of the FS for further details on the VSLA approach.   
 
Finally, t he  Farmer Field School (FFS) and  Farmer Business School (FBS) approaches  introduc ed by OCRI  will also 
support  income increase for the target farmers.  FFS  is a FAO well -known  and tested  approach based on long -term 
participatory training for experiential learning to improve farmer capacity to solve production problems in a sustainable 
way.  FBS, follows the same methodology as FFS, with a particular focus on building the capacity of farmers to develop 
businesses, access to credit, cooperatives and increase market linkages.  
 
With regards to the FBS approach, based on the experience of FAO and other organizations, a  positive impact has 
been found worldwide in terms of improving economic conditions and income generation, by carrying out actions based 
on theFFS and  FBS approaches.  The FFS/FBS demonstrated its potential to enhance human, social, natural and 
financial capital of rural communities. Financial capital was enhanced through increased income and profits, savings 
and loans schemes, with a potential to reduce pove rty.  
 
A multi -country study in East Africa showed that participation in the FFS was associated with increased productivity 
and, on average, a 61% increase in household income47. A study in Kenya suggested that the FFS on tea increased 
family income and th e number of income sources48. Increased income was also reported in studies from Ecuador49,


---
*Page 26*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 23 
 
 
50 Todo, Y., & Takahashi, R. (2013). Impact of farmer field schools on agricultural income and skills: Evidence from an aid -funded 
project in rural Ethiopia.  Journal of International Development, 25 (3), 362 –381. 
51 Regmi, P. P., Bahadur, G., & Bhattarari, H. P. (2014).  Impact assessment of National Integrated Pest Management (NIPM) programin 
Nepal. Final report . Lalitpur: Nepal Development Research Institute.  
52 Sanglestsawai, S., Rejesus, R. M., & Yorobe Jr., J.M. (2015). Economic  impacts of integrated pest management (IPM) farmer field 
schools (FFS): Evidence from onion farmers in the Philippines.  Agricultural Economics, 46 (2), 149 –162. 
53 Adetarami, O., Alfred, S. D. Y., Fasina, O. O., Soetan, O. J. and Johnson, S.B. (2020).  PERCE IVED IMPACT OF FARMER BUSINESS SCHOOL 
(FBS) APPROACH ON SMALLHOLDER COCOA FARMERS IN ONDO AND OSUN STATES, NIGERIA. International Journal of Agriculture and 
Rural Development, 23(2): 5143 -5153. Ethiopia50, Nepal51, and the Philippines52. Another study investigated on the perceived impact of FB) approach on 
smallholder cocoa farmers in Ondo and Osun States,  Nigeria. The results of the study indicated that the majority 
(87.5%) of the respondents confirmed that they benefited in marketing skills to a large extent after participated in FBS. 
Many FBS cocoa farmers experienced increment in their income after gett ing involved in FBS approach in the year 
2011 to 2013. There was a significant difference between respondents’ income before the year 2010 and income after 
intervention of FBS in year 2011 (t = -2.613, p =0.028), year 2012 (t = -3.012, p =0.016) and year 2 013 (t = -3.012, p 
=0.022), respectively53. 
 
Referring specifically to Benin, the Section 2 of the Market Study carried out in March 2022 (Sodjinou, 2022) for OCRI 
project shows that for different products, 18% -54% of households is engaged in processing and trade. The study also 
shows the strengths and weaknesses of different value chains  as well as barriers to acess to credit  which imply that 
FBS also in the Bénin context have the potential to address frictions in the value chains and increase  households’ 
income. The OCRI project will carry out an impact study to compare economic/financial impact with the mentioned 
studies reported in the literature, which highlighted changes in cost, income or profit as a consequence of participation 
in the FF S/FBS.  The FFS  and FBS  implementation will be strengthened by the promotion of the Dimitra Clubs approach 
and methodology detailed below.  
 
7. Gender issues and inclusion  
 
Women and men experience the impacts of climate change and extreme weather events differ ently, with women being 
particularly affected and disadvantaged by it due to their weaker access to and control over land, water, services and 
technology, and the heavy workload they shoulder inside and outside the household.  
 
In the project area, women are involved in the production of crops, however, yields in women’s fields are lower mainly 
because they operate with smaller plots and less access to small tools and animal traction, and have little access to 
extension services that can support them with advice on use of fertilizers, pesticides and irrigation technology.  Women 
are also involved in forestry, mainly in collection of non -timber forest products (NTFP) and, in the project intervention 
area, in the collection and proc essing of shea nuts, locust bean fruits and vegetables, which are a source of income 
and a coping mechanism when other crops fail, particularly for female -headed households (FHH). They play a key role 
in processing, distribution and sales activities. Howev er, on, the post -harvest activities carried out by women are often 
affected by the impacts of climate change with regards to the quality of the product and/or difficulties in access to clean 
water, fuel wood, and the drying and storing of produce. In addit ion, floods or droughts affect the availability of water 
for the household (HH) and exacerbate women’s time burden as fetching water is considered women’s responsibility.  
Overall, women in particular have limited access to climate -resilient technologies a nd practices to cope with extreme 
rainfall and floods and pressure on water sources during droughts. They are also affected by social and cultural norms 
and gender inequalities that affect their economic and decision -making capacities. At local level, ther e is also limited 
institutional, regulatory and governance capacities to address climate change impacts in the Ouémé  watershed and to 
plan and implement climate -change measures that effectively address and respond to women’s needs. These 
challenges have  informed the design of corrective actions reflected in the Gender Action Plan, including for example 
in relation to developing institutional capacity for gender -budgeting and gender -responsive planning.  
 
The success of climate change adaptation initiatives largely depends on the meaningful engagement of rural 
communities and how these initiatives address the root causes of gender -based discriminations and social exclusion. 
The Dimitra Clubs are a flagship community -driven and gender transformative approach pioneered by FAO to facilitate 
gender equality, people’s empowerment and collective action in rural poverty reduction strategies and programs. The 
approach has achieved results in a variety of areas, incl uding better nutrition, wider adoption of climate -resilient 
adaptation practices, enhanced gender equality and women’s empowerment and improved inter and intra -ethnic 
dialogue for social cohesion and peace at community -level. Furthermore, the approach has stimulated changes in 
behaviors and discriminatory social norms that have led to an improvement in well -being outcomes such as better 
households’ diets and sanitation practices as well as concrete advancements towards more gender equal relations and


---
*Page 27*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 24 
 
 
54 https://www.ebafosa.org/index.php/about -us/102 -ebafosa/1144 -ebafosa -report -2019 -2 roles between women and men. Through a gender transformative lens, the Dimitra Clubs’ approach challenges gender 
discriminatory social norms and behaviors and tackles several forms of gender -based violence such as domestic 
violence and early marriage.   In a nut shell, the Dimitra Clubs are informal community -led groups of rural women and 
men (young and less young) who come together on a voluntary basis to discuss and seek solutions for community 
problems, making use of their local capacities and resources. To imp rove access to information and communication 
exchange, the clubs are equipped with wind -up and solar -powered radios. In some countries the radios are also paired 
with cell phones. The clubs also partner with community rural radio stations to share their ex periences with other 
villages. In a Dimitra Club, everyone’s voice and capacities count and are valued regardless of age, ethnicity, socio -
economic status, and disability/ability. It is a community engagement and inclusive approach, in the sense that the 
approach facilitates a process whereby rural communities participate as agents of change and decision -makers in 
relation to all aspects that affect their lives; this can be health, access to resources, girls’ education and also climate 
change adaptation. Co mmunity engagement represents an important enabler in any development and humanitarian 
strategy to boost social inclusion, ensure community ownership and achieve impact at scale. The Dimitra Clubs also 
constitute a gender transformative approach as this ap proach seeks to bring about social change by challenging 
entrenched discriminatory social norms, attitudes and behaviours that are the root causes of gender inequalities and 
gender -based discriminations. These root causes represent structural impediments t hat hinder women (but also other 
marginalized groups), to become key actors in building the resilience against climate change.  
 
8. Baseline projects and complementarities with OCRI  
Several past and ongoing projects, programmes and initiatives focus on promot ing climate -resilient, sustainable 
practices for land management (see FS, section 6.4). However, existing strategies and initiatives do not implement an 
integrated, climate -resilient approach to basin management in Benin, which considers the links between the upper, 
middle and lower basin areas, and significantly reduces the climate vulnerability of the population upstream to 
downstream. Moreover, they have not set up an enabling financial and institutional environment in Benin to ensure 
coordinated efforts  and scaling up of investments in climate -resilient management . The proposed project will build on, 
scale up, and complement past and ongoing regional and national initiatives and projects as described below.  
Table 2 : Baseline projects and complementaritie s with OCRI  
 
Baseline 
projects, budget 
and dates  Synergies and/or complementarities with OCRI  
Enhanced climate 
resilience of rural 
communities in 
central and north 
Benin through 
the 
implementation 
of ecosystem -
based adaptation 
(EbA) in forest 
and agricultural 
landscapes  
UNEP -SAP 
2019 -2024  
USD 10 million  
[ongoing]  Targeted area close to OCRI project: Dassa -Zome (site nearby Glazoue) and Djougou 
(same site)  
Coordination between the SAP project manager and OCRI project manager – the former 
was contacted during the project development phase – will ensure there will be no 
overlapping or duplication of project activities in Djougou. During preliminary discussions  
with SAP project manager, m ultiple synergies and complementarities were  identified 
between OCRI and this project. These are detailed in the Annex.  
The SAP project promotes CRA and sustainable water management  under its Outcome 2 . 
Field visits will be org anised for OCRI beneficiaries (under activity 3.2.1 of OCRI) to 
showcase successful experience from the SAP project and promote the uptake of project 
interventions (e.g. in Dassa -Zoume and Djougou, which are SAP sites located in the Ouémé 
Basin). OCRI will  also target different farmers than those receiving support from SAP. 
Successful SAP farmers in the Ouémé Basin will also be invited to annual municipal forums 
and OCRI symposium  (organised under activity 2.2.2 and 3.2.2) , which serve to connect 
farmers wi th traders, and promote innovation for adaptation.  
SAP aims to develop climate -resilient forest management plans  under its Outcome 1 , 2 of 
which will be for forests nearby the Ouémé River. OCRI will ensure the including these plans 
into the Ouémé Master P lan (SDAGE) , which will be strengthened under activity 3.1.2 . SAP 
reforestation will only take place within the existing protected forests, while OCRI targets 
buffer areas; therefore it will complement SAF, especially in Djougou.  
SAP project manager will a lso be invited as guest on OCRI platform , set up under 
Component 3,  and at the project steering committee, to ensure synergies and avoid 
duplications.  
Finally, under the SAP project, knowledge products on EbA will be shared through 
EBAFOSA54 under Outcome  3; opportunities to link EBAFOSA to OCRI platform will be 
explored (e.g. using EBAFOSA as the communication facility for OCRI).


---
*Page 28*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 25 
 
 
55 http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/500471486593559453/pdf/PIDISDS -APR-Print-P160029 -02-08-2017 -
1486593555416.pdf  It should also be noted that SAP will provide benefits to OCRI farmers, through reforestation 
and river banks restoration inter ventions in Upper/ Upper -Middle Ouémé (Djougou and 
Dassa -Zoume), which will benefit in particular communities located in the Middle and Lower 
Ouémé; while OCRI interventions in Upper Ouémé will also benefit downstream SAP 
beneficiaries of Dassa -Zoume.   
Programme for 
Integrated 
Development and 
Adaptation to 
Climate Change 
in the Niger Basin  
(PIDACC/NB - 
FP092)  
GCF -AfDB  
2018 -2025  
USD 209 million   
[ongoing]  Targeted area overlapping OCRI project: n/a  
This large -scale, regional project targets 9 countries located along the Niger Basin, including 
Benin (Malanville). Its objective is to improve the resilience of populations and ecosystems 
in the Niger Basin by managing natural resources sustainably. Improved natural resource 
management and land use,  as well as reforestation are promoted to better manage the Niger 
Basin.  
OCRI will replicate the successful approach to rehabilitation / construction of small hydraulic 
infrastructure under PIDACC, comprising a number of small multi -purpose dams. These 
include the following: i) extension of dyke protecting the irrigated perimeters of Malanville, 
including the installation of flood protection structures through the construction of protective 
embankments, in particular along the river to protect the rice fie lds against inundation; and 
ii) building of community adaptation infrastructures (product storage facility, product 
processing units and market sheds). Moreover, exchange of experiences with the 
communities that are preparing their community -based climate change adaptation plans for 
sub-areas of the Niger Basin will inform the strengthening of the Ouémé Master plan 
(SDAGE) and municipal plans under OCRI, to ensure a comparable approach throughout 
the country. To facilitate synergies and exchange of experien ce, the PIDACC project 
manager will be invited as guest on OCRI platform and to the PSC.  
Agricultural 
productivity and 
diversification 
project (APDP)  
World Bank – 
Phase 255 
2017 -2023  
Additional funding 
provided in 2017: 
USD 45 million  
[ongoing]  Targeted area overlapping OCRI project: n/a  
APDP  will restore and improve productivity and value addition for selected value chains in 
Benin. The following interventions are implemented in the 12 Departments of Benin: (i) 
promotion of large -scale adoption of improved technologies (production, post -harvest, 
processing and storage), including climate -smart production systems, to reduce 
vulnerability of farming activities to climate change and weather vagaries of farming 
activities; (ii) development of product ion and market infrastructure to enhance productivity 
through efficient water management, reduction of post -harvest losses and better access to 
market through warehouses and other facilities; and (iii) support to value chain 
coordination and access to fina nce through sustainable use of the financial management 
instruments. OCRI will use the lessons learned and best practices on land irrigation and 
climate -smart agriculture to design its interventions. Moreover, synergies will be sought on 
phase 2 of APDP, t o support relevant value chains and access to finance for agricultural 
cooperatives. To ensure this, APDP project manager will be invited as guest on OCRI 
platform.  
Transforming 
Financial 
Systems for 
Climate (The 
“TFSC 
programme”)  
AFD 
2019 -2026  
USD 767 million  
[ongoing]  Targeted area overlapping OCRI project: national level  
This regional project aims to create a market for investments in climate technologies, 
especially sustainable energy, in 17 countries including Benin, by removing the financial and 
technical barriers faced by local finance institutions to enable borrowing by, mainly, the 
private sector . To this effect, TFSC will provide loans, via local finance institutions, to 
borrowers who want to invest in climate -resilient technologies. OCRI will seek ways to 
access TFSC support and increase the financial resources of FNEC . To facilitate knowledge 
exchange and synergies with TFSC, the project manager will be invited as guest on OCRI 
platform.


---
*Page 29*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 26 
 
Support Project 
for the 
Development of 
Market Gardening  
(PADMAR)   
2018 – 2025  
IFAD  
Cofinancing 
project USD 500 
000 Targeted overlapping  OCRI project: Oueme and Zou  ( Zogbodomey et Zagnanada)  
The overall objective of PADMAR, a USD 49.2 million project, is to contribute to the 
sustainable improvement of food production and security, to poverty reduction, and to 
increase the income of vegeta ble farms sustainably, while improving their resilience to the 
effects of climate change. PADMAR is circumscribed in the southern regions of Benin and 
intervenes in 7 departments out of 12 in the country, namely the Atlantic, Couffo, Littoral, 
Mono, Ouémé,  Plateau and Zou. The following OCRI activities will be implemented in 
coordination and though financial support of IFAD:  
- activity 1.2.3 to promote CRA will be coordinated with PADMAR sub -component 1.1 
improving access to improved agricultural input in Z ogbodomey and Zagnanada  
Agricultural 
Development and 
Market Access 
Support Project  
PADAAM  
IFAD  
2020 -2024  
USD 1,971,797  
Cofinancing 
project USD 1  750 
000 Targeted area overlapping OCRI project: Middle Oueme (Glazoue area)  
Project PADAAM is directly contributing to several interventions identified in OCRI, 
pertaining to engaging the private sector and strengthening value chains with intervention 
sites located in Middle Oueme. Under Component 2 of PADAAM, support to maize and  
cashew value chain will be provided through training for cooperatives, facilitating contacts 
between producers and buyers, improving market access, and providing processing 
equipment and storage/ post -harvest units to the cooperatives. All training materi al and 
knowledge products developed by PADAAM on value chains will be useful to contribute to 
OCRI’s Output 2.2; it will constitute incentive for the private sector and finance institutions 
to invest in climate -resilient value chains in the Oueme Basin.  
Moreover PADAAM will support interventions to protect watersheds and improve water 
management, including in the Middle Oueme Basin, through planting trees like cashew 
trees and promoting irrigated horticulture, an activity also promoted by OCRI under its fi rst 
component. Finally, PADAAM will facilitate access to seeds and agricultural inputs for 
maize in the Middle Oueme, and support climate change awareness in the area.  
The following OCRI activities will be implemented in coordination and though financial 
support of IFAD:  
- activity 1.1.1 to  improve  water mobilisation and management will be supported by 
PADAAM sub -component 2.2 to provide irrigation schemes for  off -season agriculture in 
Glazoue  
- activity 1.1.2 to strengthen the Oueme  banks will be co -financed by PADAAM’s  sub -
component 2.3 and 4 through planting of nuts and fruits trees on the riverbanks  
- activity 1.2.3 to implement CRA will be coordinated with PADAAM’s sub -component 2.1, 
which will organise training in FFS  
- activit y 1.2.4 to improve access to quality inputs will be supported by PADAAM’s sub -
component 2.1 that will enhance access to quality inputs  
- activity 2.1.1 to train cooperatives on processing, packaging and sale of key agriproducts 
will be supported through PA DAAM’s sub -component 2.2  
- activity 2.2.2 to connect and develop partnerhsips between producers and farmers will be 
cofinanced by PADAAM’s sub -component 1.1 that will focus on maize producers and 
buyers.  
Regional 
Programme for 
the Integration of 
Agricultural 
Markets  – PRIMA  
IFAD  
2021 -2026  
US$ 108.6 million  
Cofinancing 
project  USD 
10 384 280 
 PRIMA aims to stimulate the regional markets in Benin (Djougou and Glazoue) and Togo, 
by supporting key agricultural products, through enhance productivity, access to 
processing and storage equipment, training for cooperatives and improved access to 
financial services. Although support to specific agriproducts will  be determined based on 
market demands, PRIMA will likely include OCRI’s supported crops  with regional market 
potential, including cassava and vegetables.  
The following OCRI activities will be implemented in coordination and though financial 
support of IFAD:  
- activity 1.1.1  to  improve  water mobilisation and management will be supported by 
PRIMA’s sub -components 2.1.3 and 2.2. which will set up anti -erosion infrastructure and 
promote sustainable water use for off -season agriculture in Djougou and Glazoue.  
- activity 1.1.2 to strengthen the Oueme banks will be complemented by PRIMA’s sub -
component 2.1.2, which will set up tree nurseries in the  2 municipalities  
- activity 1.2.3 to implement CRA will be cofinanced with PRIMA through its sub -
component 2.1.2 prov iding training in agroforestry  
- activity 1.2.4 to improve access to quality seeds will also be supported by PRIMA sub -
component 1.2.1


---
*Page 30*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 27 
 
- activity 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 to provide marketing and finance training to cooperatives will be 
done in cooperation with PRI MA’s sub -component 1.3.3 and 1.3.4 ; as well as 1.3.5 which 
aims to increase access to financial services  
- activity 3.2.1 to increase awareness on climate change will be cofinanced by PRIMA 
through awareness raising campaigns organised under its sub -comp onent 2.1.1  
 
Renforcement 
des capacites 
dans les secteurs 
de l’energie , de 
l’agriculture, de la 
sylviculture et 
d’autres secteurs 
d’utilisation des 
terres pour une 
transparence 
accrue de la mise 
en oeuvre et le 
suivi de la CND   
CBIT  (GEF)  
2021 -2024,  
USD 1,779,863  Targeted area overlapping OCRI project: n/a  
The CBIT  (GEF)  is a national -scope project aims to set up strong basis to enable Benin to 
implement a rigorous, transparent monitoring and evaluation (M&E) process of the 
implementation of its INDC. Hence, the project has three key targets: i) stronger, more 
efficient and transparent institutions; ii) improved capacity for GHG emission inventory; 
and iii) a robust M&E tool to monitor progress linked to implementation of the INDC 
(mitigation and adaptation). Reflection INDC’s priorities, the focus of the project is  on the 
Agriculture, Land Use and Forestry (ALUF) sector; capacity building interventions will 
target staff members of MCVDD and MAEP. Besides improved monitoring of GHG 
emission, CBIT will also enhance the capacity of the GoB to monitor and evaluate 
progr ess in the field of climate change adaptation. To achieve this, nationally relevant 
indicators will be developed, and a national adaptation M&E tool designed; trained staff 
members from MCVDD and MAEP will then be able to monitor the country’s progress in 
achieving its climate change adaptation targets as defined in the INDC.  
FAO will consider the CBIT GEF project as parallel co -financing giving the 
complementarity of the intervention related to capacity building of national institutions.  
Strengthening 
human and 
natural systems 
resilience to 
climate change 
through 
mangrove 
ecosystems 
conservation and 
sustainable use 
in southern Benin  
FAO – GEF This is it a project to restore and sustainably management mangrove ecosystems in the 
coastal area of Benin (so not overlapping in terms of location with OCRI project). OCRI 
activities which are implemented upstream this GEF -project sites are expected to have 
positive impacts downstream (where the GEF 7 is located) – in terms of reduced flood 
risks in particular.   FAO is exploring possibility of considering national activities related to 
capacity building as  parallel co -financing .


---
*Page 31*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 28 
 
 
Figure 12: Location of the target communities of the OCRI project  
 
Intervention areas  
The project will be implemented in 5 municipalities on Benin Republic: Copargo, Djougou in the Upper Ouémé ; Glazoué 
in the Upper -Middle Ouémé ; and Zogbodomey and Zagnanado in the Middle Ouémé. The Upper and Middle basins 
of the Ouémé river are situated b etween 7°00' and 10°30' N and 1°30’ an 3°05' E. The selection of the targeted 
communes has been carried out via a vulnerability matrix evaluation based on the combined scoring of the (1) 
vulnerability (climate change, poverty level, population density), (2 ) the priority level set by the National Strategies (CDN 
– PANA PAG/PSDSA/PNIASAN), and the recent and current attentions of climate resilience building interventions and 
projects (current and previous).  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram  (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages  plus diagram ) 
Through an innovative partnership with the Direct Access Entity FNEC, the FNDA, IFAD, MAEP and MCVDD , the 
establishment of a multi -stakeholder platform (for coordination of land restoration activities in the Oueme) and the 
development of a robust financial strategy (to provide funding for CRA and ecosystem restoration), the proposed project


---
*Page 32*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 29 
 
will address c urrent barriers (see Section B.1 and table below) to enhance the resilience of the population in the Ouémé 
Basin, reduce emissions and ensure activities persists over time. The OCRI project will break the vicious cycle in which 
vulnerable communities are  locked (see Section B.1) that is causing increasing emissions and catalyze a shift towards 
low emissions integrated climate resilient management (ICRM) in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin; this will enhance 
the climate resilience, reduce emission, and impro ve livelihoods in the whole Ouémé Basin, with benefits in the 
upstream areas spreading to downstream areas. To initiate this transformative change, the OCRI project is comprised 
of three complementary Components, which will support the implementation, inst itutionalization and long -term funding 
of ICRM in the Ouémé Basin, reduce climate change vulnerability from Upper to Lower Ouémé Basin, reduce 
emissions, and facilitate the replication of ICRM beyond the project’s sites . 
 
The project includes the following  3 Components, which Outputs and Activities are presented in the Theory of Change 
(Figure 7 ) and described in Section B.3:  
- COMPONENT 1.  Low carbon  climate Resilient  Crop production enhanced and Ecosystem services restored 
in the Upper and Middle Ouéme  (with government cofinancing). An integrated climate -resilient management 
(ICRM) implemented over 95.000 ha of land in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin provides benefits not only 
on project sites but in downstream areas as well. Floods are reduced es pecially in Middle and Lower Ouémé, 
soil erosion is limited, agricultural productivity is enhanced, water access secured especially in Upper Ouémé, 
and climate change vulnerability reduced in the whole Basin.  This component will support reducing emissions  
by 1,783,633  tCO2 -eq over 20 years.  
 
COMPONENT 2.  Value chains supported that provide climate -resilient livelihoods and income to farmers in 
the Upper and Middle Ouémé  (with government cofinancing) . Combining the use and planting of diversified 
high-value adapted crops and trees and enhanced productivity under Component 1 to training in climate -
resilient farm planning, marketing techniques, access to private sector and finance through support from the 
FNDA will secure farmers’ livelihoods and diversify income streams despite climate change impacts. This 
income can be re -invested in CRA and waterworks for scaling up and expansion of the interventions. The 
demonstration of the significant environmental and economic benefits of project interventio ns will also unlock 
additional private investments to sustain CRA in the long -term, materialized under Component 3.  
 
- COMPONENT 3. An enabling institutional and financial environment established to promote and upscale low 
carbon climate -resilient land and w ater management in Benin’s Basins (with government cofinancing) . The 
establishment of a multi -stakeholder coordination mechanism, to support on -the -ground tree planting and 
ecosystem restoration, CRA, supporting regulatory frameworks, and institutional ca pacity building will ensure 
the long -term implementation of ICRM in the Ouémé Basin. Moreover, FNEC’s financial strategy will be revised 
and strengthened to specifically support climate -resilient projects in the long -term. During project’s 
implementation, FNEC will provide fund  as co -financing  to cooperatives and organisations willing to implement 
CRA and ecosystem restoration in the Oueme. Finally, a strong communication and knowledge management 
strategy to compile, disseminate OCRI results and knowledge p roducts beyond the 5 target municipalities will 
also support the replication of this approach in other areas, and basins of Benin. The upscale of OCRI 
interventions is also promoted through various awareness raising events, as well as a rigorous M&E system  to 
demonstrate the environmental, social and economic benefits of the project.


---
*Page 33*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
 
The following diagram illustrates the relationship and complementarity between OCRI’ s three Components (Figure 1 3). 
 
Figure 13: OCRI’s 3 Components  
    
 
 
Causal pathway of proposed interventions  
The proposed  OCRI project  will effect a paradigm shift that results in enhanced climate resilience , low carbon emission  
and improved livelihoods for smallholders in the Ouémé Basin. This will be achieved through institutionalizing the 
implementation of ICRM in the Upper and Middle Oueme Basin , capacity building  and unlock ing access to finance for 
local farmers and cooperat ives, operating in key value chains (namely shea, cashew, mango and maize) to sustainably 
continue the low carbon ICRM activities. Achieving this goal will reduce the climate vulnerability of the communities 
and assure the reduction of emissions from upper  to lower Oueme in the long -term: vegetation cover will be restored 
to reduce flood and erosion risks, water access will be improved, productivity will be enhanced despite climate change 
impacts, and income will increase (see Business model in Annex 3). Th e project fully integrates gender equality 
principles to make sure that women and men benefit equally from the proposed interventions.  
 OCRI project is comprised of 3 components which will support the main goal.  
The first intervention (Component 1) aims a t restoring degraded land and riverbanks along the Oueme, using 
infrastructure, tree plantations and CRA, as well as improved soil and water management practices, with impacts over 
95,000 ha. This component will not only promote climate change adaptation i n the Oueme Basin, but also mitigation of 
CO2 emissions. Component 1 will restore soil and secure water access in the context of climate change, while 
increased ecosystem services will improve agricultural productivity  currently jeopardized by climate chan ge and buffer 
communities against climate change impacts. Currently, interventions under this component are undermined by the 
limited knowledge, among local communities, of the goods and services provided by restored ecosystems, and their


---
*Page 34*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 31 
 
 
56 GIZ, 2017. Adaptation de l’agriculture au changement climatique (PACC). Available at: 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/31841.html  limited technical  capacity to implement CRA. These barriers will be addressed by the proposed activities under Outputs 
1.1 and 1.2.  
Under Output 1.1, grey infrastructure will be built to capture run -off and rainfalls and enable irrigated agriculture; while 
degraded river banks and fields will be restored using tree planting to reduce soil erosion, provide shade, increase 
moisture and soil nutriment. Tree planting on field will favor value chain species, namely shea, cashew and mango.  
Note that all water and land managemen t interventions were carefully selected, considering the watershed context of 
Upper and Middle Oueme. Although the impacts of climate change have many similarities in Upper and Middle Oueme 
Basin, there are specific impacts related to respectively, the pre dominance of strong erosion and degradation of the 
uppermost sub -catchment, and more frequent flooding in the middle valley. Hence, protecting the uppermost sub -basin 
through the promotion of soil and water conservation practices will contribute to increas ed water infiltration over a large 
area of the basin upstream with an expected substantial effect on the reduction of downstream flows and floods in the 
lower valley. Infrastructures to store water ( such as micro -dams, weirs) (90%) or rehabilitation (96%),  and in -field water 
harvesting/infiltration management (69%) will be especially implemented in the upper Oueme, which suffers from drier 
conditions because of climate change impacts. Development of irrigation perimeters will also be more targeted to the 
upper than middle Oueme to valorise the mobilized water and combat the drier climate effect. Protection of artesian 
boreholes will essentially be developed (97%) in the middle Oueme to better make use of the water resource and 
control flooding, which happen more and more often in this area. In -land valley management will be developed equally 
(50%) in both the upper and the middle Oueme.  
Overall Output 1.1 will secure water access on field, rehabilitate degraded soil and protect plots against flood risks 
(Outp ut 1.1). However, there is a risk that local communities cut down newly planted trees to use as fuel wood or timber. 
To reduce this risk, reforestation will essentially target individual plots (owned by farmers – promotion of agroforestry) 
as well as some very degraded riverbanks, which are located near the plots and can therefore be controlled  by 
beneficiary farmers (against illegal logging, which can be reported to the local forest department). Reforestation will be 
implemented with local communities, thr ough the FFS approach (Output 1.2), which will increase project ownership, 
while sensitization on the benefits of ICRM will be conducted through the FFS and more widely, under Output 3.3. The 
construction of water harvesting and retention infrastructure  will induce a change of 1 ha from vegetated to non -
vegetated land leading to an additional carbon emission of 115 tCO2 -e over 20 years . 
Output 1.1 will be complemented by, and support the implementation of CRA in Upper and Middle Oueme  under output 
1.2. This will be promoted using the FFS approach. CRA techniques have been selected based on best practices in 
Benin, to address existing and foreseen climate change impacts  as well having mitigation results . The training will 
encompass  climate resilient  sustain able land and water techniques to ensure the rational  and effective  use of natural 
resources  against climate change . Sustainable management of degraded agricultural landscape and basin areas is 
also key to reduce climate change vulnerability , improve agric ultural productivity56 and reduce emissions .  
 
Such interventions contribute to CO2 reduction in a sustainable way as farmers are incentivised to manage their land 
sustainably (as it increases productivity), and contribut e to Benin’s mitigation efforts. In fact, as productivity increases 
thanks to the project intervention farmers will be less incentivised to carry out high emission practice and clear additional  
forest land to expand their agriculture production (see also the description of the vicious cycle  in  Figure 8 ).  Currently, 
farmers in the project area practice full tillage, burn their crop residues and use low input. This production system results  
in low yield and high emission. Under this output,  the beneficiaries with be trained to adopt the technic of non -tillage on 
2 000 ha and the residue will no longer be burned. In addition, to significantly increase the yield, there will be an increase 
in input use. As a result, the improved agronomic pract ices will avoid the emission of 52 587 tCO2 -e over the 20 years 
while the irrigation system will emit 115 tCO2 -e over 30 years ; the discontinuation of mineral fertilization will 
reduce  29,383 tCO2eq  over the 20 years .  When best practices are followed, the  interventions are not expected to 
increase nitrous oxide or methane emissions in targeted areas. Green manure and species composition will create in -
situ fertility through sustained and positive nutrient and carbon cycles, reducing the need for mineral fe rtilization. Uptake 
of project interventions by non -targeted farmers will lead to positive externalities and a reduction in GHG emissions 
when compared with current practices. GHG emissions associated with dam construction have already been accounted 
for in Ex-Act, and leakages are not expected . 
 
The irrigation system will emit 623 tCO2 -e over 20 years. The constructed dam  will emit 115 tCO2 -e over 20 years . In 
addition, currently, the project areas are highly degraded and fire is used on 20 percent of the  land (16 800ha). With 
the project, 15 percent of the total land (12 600ha) will be planted with perennial crops (cashew) with improved residue


---
*Page 35*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 32 
 
management. The project will also increase tree covers on 85 percent of total parkland (71 400 ha) (agroforestry 
combined with fruit trees). The improvement of tree density will increase carbon sequestration potential on this land. 
No residue will be burnt under the p roject. In addition, 9 000 ha of forest that is highly degraded will be restore to 
become a low degraded area. Thus, the agroforestry system on 84 000 ha will contribute to sequester 1 469 260 tCO2 -
e over 20 years while the improved forest management on 9 000 ha will sequester 232 518 tCO2 -e during the same 
period.  
Field missions during the project development phase have indicated farmers’ interest to receiving technical support for 
agricultural production, thereby ensuring buy -in of the proposed interventi ons, which will support the implementation of 
CRA, agro -forestry and sustainable resource management in the Oueme Basin (Output 1.2). However, as indicated in 
Annex 8 (GAP), there is a risk that women do not fully participate to, and benefit from, the proj ect’s interventions, 
especially with regards to technical agricultural support. To ensure women are not left aside from the project’s expected 
benefits, Dimitra club approach will be promoted through Output 1.2. By stimulating social dialogue and social 
mobilization, the implementation of the Dimitra Clubs methodology will allow the targeted communities to engage in a 
process to transform discriminatory gender and social norms that are at the root of gender inequality. Equal participation 
in FFS will also b e promoted, all trainers will be sensitized and trained on gender awareness, community engagement 
and the Dimitra Clubs approach, and schools dedicated to women set up, to benefit them with labor -saving tools among 
others (see Annex 8).        
All together , Output 1.1 & 1.2 will enhance crop production in the Upper and Middle Oueme. Farmers will benefit from  
increased agricultural productivity and reduced exposure to climate -related risks  while contributing to reducing 
emissions  (Outcome 1) , which will ince ntivize the long -term implementation of CRA and sustainable land management 
in the Oueme Basin; the demonstration of OCRI’s benefits (through sensitization under Component 2 & 3) will also 
facilitate project replication (including its adaptation and mitiga tion benefits) in other areas. In return, farmers will 
contribute to CO2 emission reduction beyond the project’s lifespan.  The training on CRA will particularly target key 
agro-products namely maize, mango, cashew and shea. The quality of these products wi ll improve by using appropriate, 
and resilient production techniques. Component 2 will further support the development of robust value chains for these 
key products – that is Component 2 will add value to these agro -products by improving capacity for harve sting, 
processing, marketing and sale – so that they can be sold by local farmers and cooperatives to make profit. Shea, 
maize, cashew and mangoes were selected for this target support because: i) these crops, fruits and nuts are already 
produced in the ta rget area; ii)  the FS indicates their adaptation potential , providing the use of adapted techniques 
(CRA) ; iii) shea, cashew and mangoes in particular contribute to CO2 emission reduction, through reforestation; iv)  
they are among prioritized agricultural  products by the GoB; v) there is a demand from domestic and international 
markets; and v i) there is currently few initiatives promoting these value chains. The total emission reduced from 
component 1 is 1,783,633 tCO2 -eq over 20 years .        
At the moment, the full development of maize, shea, cashew and mango value chains is impaired by a lack of technical 
and financial capacity (for production, harvest, processing, storage, and sale) as well as business skills amongst 
farmers and cooperatives  in the Oueme Basin. While Component 1 will enable farmers to produce high -quality crops 
under climate change conditions, interventions under Component 2 will address the lack of capacity for marketing and 
sale, to boost profits. First, under Output 2.1, f armers will be organized into cooperatives around key value chains – 
namely shea, cashew and maize – using the FBS approach. This will enhance their capacity to work together (as 
cooperatives and unions) to negotiate sale prices, prepare high -quality agro -products which respond to market 
demands and expectations.  
Second, access to finance will be unlocked  in the Oueme Basin. Currently, a lack of access to finance impairs value 
chain development in Upper and Middle Oueme. In particular, access to loans and micro -credits for agriculture is limited 
in Benin (see Annex 19 Section 3 and barriers table). Such access would enable farmers’ investments in agricultural 
inputs and quality seeds, labor support for harvesting, storage, processing and packaging equipment , among others. 
To address this issue, training on financial management will be organized through FBS to ensure farmers and 
cooperatives can meet MFIs’ requirements for accessing micro -credits.  FNDA will  faciliate  access to credit for OCRI 
farmers  through  the payment of  50% of the farmers’ loans  in case farmers or cooperatives cannot reimburse  (which 
will reassure MFIs); and through ensuring lower interest rates on the loans (facilitating farmers’ repayment) . Technical 
assistance to develop bankable loan applicatin will also be supported by FNDA’s partners, the ADTA, while FNDA will 
provide quality review of the loan application. Access to loans will finally be enhanced as VSLA will be established 
among the ben eficiary communities. With a better access to loans, cooperatives can invest in CRA and relevant 
equipment to create added value to their agriproducts – beyond the project’s lifespan. To further ensure a more efficient 
and profitable agriculture , the proje ct will promote use of the innovative FarmTree App (see Annex FarmTree App). 
This App offers cost -benefits simulation of combining crops and trees on the fields, taking into account climate change 
and agro -ecological conditions. It is therefore a key tool to help agri -business planning and will be used, through OCRI


---
*Page 36*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 33 
 
project, to identify best combination of trees, crops and vegetables that ensure high productivity, while responding to 
market demands.  
Third, Output 2.2 will create a favorable environment for  private sector investments in low carbon climate -resilient value 
chains. This will be done by demonstrating the socio -economic (e.g. returns on investment) and environmental benefits 
of the project (see business model in Annex 3). Information products und erlying the economic benefits of CRA and 
land restoration – as demonstrated through the FarmTree App –  will be specially packaged for the private sector 
organizations, including MFIs, agri -businesses, private donors and investors. Finally, match -making mu nicipal forums 
that connect sellers and local, national and international buyers/ exporters will be organized to facilitate sale of shea, 
mango, cashew and maize in the five target municipalities. There is no risk of limited buyers for these key value chai ns 
as the chains were selected based on field mission, Benin’s agricultural priorities, current production in the target areas, 
and a list of potential buyers for each value chains was prepared (see Section B.1 of the FP).  
Outputs 2.1 & 2.2 together allow  for the development of robust, climate -resilient value chains and income streams in 
the Upper and Middle Oueme Basin. In particular, Output 2.2 will reduce the risk that private sector does not support 
resilient value chains, through targeted sensitizatio n messages and products, which highlight the added -value 
(especially return on investment) from CRA. Furthermore, the promotion of gender equity and women empowerment 
within Component 2 is key as there is a significant risk that women cannot fully particip ate to, and benefit from the 
development of robust value chains – especially due to cultural reason in the Middle Oueme (see Annex 8). Women in 
the Oueme Basin are currently engaged in different links of these value chains – for example processing maize in to 
flour or shea into butter, or sale home, along the roads and in local small markets. However, women are often poorly 
organized, have less decision -making power than men, and are more burden to access micro -loan and credits to buy 
efficient agricultural and processing equipment (please see Annex 8 for additional information). To increase women’s 
participation in climate -resilient value chain, women and women -led agribusinesses and cooperatives will be purposely 
targeted by capacity development initiatives  and as recipients of equipment and storage facilities.  Moreover, 
interventions to improve loan access will have a special focus on women’s access to credit, who face issues due to 
their limited ownership of assets as collateral to access formal credit. Mi cro-credit opportunities will therefore prioritize 
women in the targeted area. In addition, in order to support their entrepreneurial potential, women farmers will be trained 
on financial management and business plan development. While the Dimitra Club sit s under Component 1 to maximize 
the impact of FFS, its social dialogue and social mobilization effects are meant to be cross -cutting to all components. 
In particular, community discussion has proven effective in changing discriminatory social norms resulti ng in women’s 
increased access to opportunities, voice and decision -making and better distribution of gender roles. Together and in 
dialogue with PSEA procedure and mechanisms, the Dimitra Club approach will also be used to discuss and address 
issues aroun d gender -based violence, as indicated above.  
The third intervention (Component 3) will ensure a long -term, enabling institutional and financial environment to support 
and sustain Outcomes 1 & 2 – including their adaptation and mitigation benefits – in the  long-run. At the moment, there 
are limited technical and institutional capacities in Benin, and more particularly, the Oueme Basin to plan and implement 
gender -responsive  low carbon  ICRM in the Oueme Basin. Moreover, there is a lack of coordination among national, 
regional and local government entities to implement ICRM in the Oueme Basin and to foster climate -resilient value 
chain development. Such support and coordination need engagement and collaborative work from various sectoral 
institutions represent ed at the national, regional and local level. To enable this and address both barriers, the OCRI 
platform will be establish with a view to coordinate project interventions and land management efforts in the Oueme 
Basin, in the long -term (beyond the project ’s lifespan). Establishing a robust, long -lasting platform will tackle  the existing 
risk that authorities in the target municipalities of the Oueme Basin cannot implement ICRM beyond the project’s 
lifespan, because they lack the capacity or resources. This  risk is also reduced as the project will develop tools to guide 
ICRM implementation: more precisely, the SDAGE and LDPs will be revised, using a participatory approach, to 
mainstream ICRM as well as gender concerns. These plans are key to guide future pub lic investment and development 
initiatives in the Oueme Basin (beyond OCRi project) .


---
*Page 37*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
Figure 14: Farmers benefiting from OCRI interventions  
 
Capacity building of local authorities and extension service ( making sure to train and involve women’s extension 
workers) for adaptation planning will also be implemented to further create an enabling institutional and technical 
environment for adaptation in the Oueme Basin. Field missions have also confirmed the wil lingness and interest of 
local authorities in the Oueme Basin, including field agents and the OBA, to increase their capacity for implementing 
sustainable and resilient land and water management.  
Beyond an adequate technical and institutional framework, t he GoB also lacks financial resources to implement  low 
carbon  ICRM in the Oueme Bas in. To address this gap and ensure long -term investments in ICRM and adaptation in 
Benin, the project will develop a strong partnership with FNEC, Benin’s GCF accredited ent ity. FNEC is already 
supporting Benin’s climate change related efforts through financing micro -projects or implementing larger projects 
funded by international funds; there are opportunities to leverage FNEC’s resources to upscale ICRM in Benin. The 
projec t will collaborate with FNEC to identify additional financial streams, that could increase the fund’s resources for 
supporting adaptation in Benin. Moreover, FNEC’s capacity to develop, implement, monitor and report on, climate 
change related projects will  be increased and 3 micro -projects on ICRM in the Oueme Basin will be selected and 
financed by FNEC (using its own resources), as well as monitored with support from FAO. This will strategically 
contribute to build FNEC’s capacity for the design and implem entation of climate change initiatives, and to tap into 
existing resources from public or private fund (e.g. Adaptation Fund). It will strengthen the role of FNEC as Benin’s 
accredited entity for the AF and GCF, and as a key player supporting adaptation ef forts in the country (Output 3.2). To 
foster large -scale awareness and knowledge of ICRM in the Oueme Basin and its benefits, all knowledge and best 
practices generated through the project and captured under various activities (2.1.3, 3.1.3) will be used t o develop 
sensitization campaigns. This will contribute to address the existing lack of awareness of the benefits of ICRM in Benin; 
in particular, authorities for Benin’s other basin areas – namely Volta, Niger and Couffo – will be invited for field visits  
on project sites to support project’s replication and upscale. Finally, the OCRI symposium will be organized to showcase 
climate -resilient agricultural practices in the selected key value chains to local farmers, cooperatives, entrepreneurs, 
and private s ector stakeholders and incentivize upscale of successful project interventions across Benin. These 
activities will ensure large -scale awareness of OCRI, as well as a robust institutional and financial environment for


---
*Page 38*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 35 
 
upscaling ICRM  – including its adaptati on and mitigation benefits – across the country (Outcome 3), and supporting its 
continuity beyond the project.


---
*Page 39*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 36 
 
 
  
Figure 10: Project's theory of change


---
*Page 40*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 37 
 
Barriers to adaptation and pathways to overcome them  
Without grant financing, the GoB and impoverished rural communities in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin will not 
have the technical or financial capacity and knowledge to make the investments required to reduce the impacts of 
climate change.  There are currently five  main barriers to implementing ICRM in the Ouémé Basin , and significantly 
reduce the vulnerability to climate change . These barriers will be addressed in the project strategy, as indicated below . 
Barriers  How to be addressed by proj ect 
Technical capacities  
The communities of Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin have 
limited technical and material capacity  and awareness on how  
to implement, climate -resilient agricultural and water 
management practices that improve productivity in the 
agricultural landscapes while, at the same time reducing the 
negative effects of climate change, including erosion, floods 
and flash floods, espec ially in downstream areas.  
The Base line Study (included in Annex 2 )  conducted  in the 
project sites of Upper and Middle Ouémé indicates a lack of 
hydro -agricultural technologies implemented to cope with the 
impacts of climate change. As a result, farming communities 
face a chronic deficit of mobilization of water resources, which 
impairs the promotion of promising adaptive economic 
activities such as irrigated agriculture and off -season 
horticulture. Effective irrigation systems are almost non -
existent and there is no control of water, for example through 
water retention infrastructu res or micro -dams; when such 
structures exist, they are obsolete because of the absence of 
capacity, at the local level, for sustainable water management 
and maintenance of waterworks. (see Waterworks Feasibility: 
Annex 17 for an assessment of existing irr igations schemes 
and water infrastructure in the target areas).    
 
With regards to  agricultural practices in the Ouémé Basin, they 
are characterized by the use of basic tools and low 
mechanization. Extensive, rainfed agriculture dominates, 
which is very s ensitive to climate variability and extremes like 
droughts and late onset of rainfalls. The use of climate -resilient 
production technologies is very limited on project sites, with a 
low adoption rate of improved seeds and a low use of on -farm 
rainwater har vesting techniques. This is because, on the 
project sites, there are no integrated water management and 
climate -resilient agriculture – including agroforestry  projects – 
projects therefore farmers, who have not received adequate 
training and are not aware  of the climate benefits of CRA, 
present low levels of adaptation capacity.  
 Under Component 1 of the project, communities will be trained  
(through FFS)  to implement CRA, agro -forestry and water 
management; waterworks will also protect their land and home 
against floods (especially in Middle Ouémé ) and facilitate 
water access and retention in the desiccated soils (especially 
in Upper Ouémé ). Likewise, a detailed resilience and adaptive 
capacity assessment will be carried out to improve targeting 
and identif ication of context -specific solutions to enhance 
communities’ resilience. Moreover, under Component 3, 
awareness raising events, and radio broadcasts will contribute 
to disseminate knowledge of climate change and resilient 
practices; training modules will also be available on the OCRI 
platform.  
Financial capacities  
The communities have restricted / no access to micro -credit or 
other financial support (from the government or the private 
sector) to invest in climate -resilient practices, improve their 
produc tivity, access market, and boost their profits  (see Annex 
19 Section  3).  
 
Although there are financial institutions and schemes to 
provide micro -finance for smallholders, the agricultural sector 
remains under -financed. Smallholder farmers also face many 
difficulties accessing credits for agricultural investments, 
particularly fo r the more vulnerable groups of society, such as 
women and youth. The financing schemes tend to focus on 
Alternative Income Generating Activities, such as sale of 
transformation products, honey, etc, while the risk of investing 
in agricultural production i s still perceived as high. As a result, 
micro -finance institutions have high requirements with regards 
to collateral, high interest rates and short payback periods, on 
top of their administrative fee – which smallholders cannot Unde r Component 2, in partnership with MAEP/IFAD, the 
project will facilitate access to finance via trainings for 
cooperatives. F armers and cooperatives will learn how to plan 
their field (TreeFarm App), and to grow resilient, high -value 
products; they will al so be trained on marketing techniques to 
boost their sale, and financial management to access credits 
and re -invest in their activities. The project will support access 
to credit from MFIs through the facilitation provided by FNDA. 
Communication products o n the economic benefits to invest in 
CRA and ecosystem restoration will be disseminated to private 
sector institutions to encourage investment in the project. A 
roadmap to increase FNEC’s resources will be developed 
under Component 3, to further enhance ac cess to fund in the 
long-term, as a replenishment strategy will be developed . 
Moreover, farmers and buyers will be linked through biannual 
municipal forums, and through the OCRI platform, to facilitate 
sale of climate -resilient agriproducts responding to m arket 
demands.


---
*Page 41*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 38 
 
meet. Furthermore, finance i nstitutions are more reluctant to 
lend to individual farmers than to organised groups. An 
investigation conducted by MAEP on the reason why many 
smallholder farmers in Upper and Middle Ouémé do not 
contract credits indicates, as five main reasons: i) small holders 
are scared and uncomfortable to be in debt; ii) high interest 
rates of credits; iii) lack of stable income, or income too low; iv) 
lack of knowledge of how to get a credit; and v) they have not 
thought about it (not aware of credit potential).  
Institutional coordination  
Land or water management in the Ouémé Basin is not 
implemented according to an integrated climate -resilient 
approach . Therefore degradation of the natural capital is 
observed. There is lack of capacity and reso urces invested in 
restoration and pr otection of critical ecosystems (especially 
along the Ouémé  River) and in CRA , with a view to improve 
livelihoods and resilience on the whole Ouémé  Basin; there is 
no coordinated efforts among relevant stakeholders in  
environmental management,  agriculture  and water to support 
such an approach.   
 
Climate change and ICRM is not yet integrated into local 
development plans (LDPs) and regional strategies in the 
Ouémé Basin; in addition, the Ouémé Master Plan (SDAGE), 
which pr omotes integrated water management, is 
underfinanced and few interventions are currently 
implemented. Mainstreaming adaptation into development 
plans would inform and guide public interventions and 
investments towards climate -resilient development.  
 
Another weakness is the lack of coordination mechanism or 
platform to facilitate the coordination of public and private 
stakeholders in climate resilient water management, 
agriculture, and agri -markets. For example, a platform 
including the Ministry of the  Livelihood and Sustainable 
Development (MCVDD), the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock 
and Fisheries ( MAEP ), the National Fund for the Environment 
and Climate (FNEC), FNDA, the Ouémé Authority, farmers’ 
cooperatives and finance organisations would support  
coordinated efforts towards ICRM in the Ouémé Basin, that 
generate benefits for all parties. On the contrary, a siloed 
approach to development prevails in the target areas of the 
Ouémé Basin, where projects and development initiatives tend 
to focus on a s ingle sector like agriculture or water access, 
without integrating climate change concerns or basin -specific 
considerations – as interventions implemented upstream have 
impacts on downstream communities and landscapes. As a 
result of these limitations, agr icultural landscapes in the 
Ouémé Basin are not resilient to climate change and the 
communities are increasingly vulnerable to water scarcity, 
droughts, shifts in seasonality and floods.   Under component 3, the OCRI platform will be established to 
provide  a space where national and local governmental 
agencies  join their efforts to improve management in the 
Ouémé Basin. The ICRM will also be institutionalized through 
the Ouémé Master Plan  (SDAGE) , and implemented through 
the LDP of  the 5 project municipalit ies. Developing/ integrating 
ICRM in the municipal plans will also ensure public funding are 
invested in climate -resilient interventions in the future.  Local 
extension officers will be trained to implement ICRM.  
 
Under component 1 such strategies of prote ction and 
restoration, sustainable adapted production will be 
implemented and farmers will be trained to do so.


---
*Page 42*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 39 
 
The government of Benin and its local extension services do 
not have the knowledge and technical capacity to implement 
an integrated basin -level management approach, and 
therefore cannot provide the necessary technical support to 
the local population. The  institutional, regulatory and 
governance capacity to plan and implement this approach in a 
coordinated, complementary or synergetic w ay is missing.  
 
As underlined in Section 6 of the FS (Annex 6), there is a 
limited mainstreaming of climate change concerns, especially 
into local and regional development plans. While, at the 
national level in Benin, there is an ongoing process to integrate 
climate change adaptation into relevant policies and 
strategies, at the local level, there is limited integration of 
integration of climate change into local development plans 
prepared by the municipalities. This is because of limited 
technical a nd financial capacity among local -level government 
staff (described above) and limited availability of climate 
change -related information, including on the benefits of 
adaptation (further described below). Consequently, 
municipalities and communities do no t receive support for the 
design and implementation of locally appropriate climate 
change adaptation interventions.  Under Component 3, local extension, forest and water officers 
will be trained to implement ICRM in the basin, including the 
resilient plans developed in the 5 target municipalities, which 
they will contribute to develop. They will also be trained under 
the To F programme under Component 1 to disseminate their 
knowledge on CRA, agro -forestry and waterworks to other 
local officers/ farmers, there by multiplying the expected project 
beneficiaries after project completion.  
Awareness   
The government of Benin and the private sector are not aware 
of the socio -economic benefits to implement an integrated 
sustainable climate -resilient approach for the  management of 
basin. In other words, there is no incentive for the private 
sector and agri -businesses to invest in climate -resilient value 
chains as their benefits are not demonstrated yet.  
 
Benin’s economy is mainly based on agriculture, trade, and 
trans port to and from neighboring countries. Despites 
improvements on the economic front, the average economic 
growth rate is 4.2% over the period 2006 -2015 . This growth 
rate is insufficient to combat poverty in a sustainable manner. 
Moreover, the population d oes not have the financial capacity 
to overcome poverty, provide sufficient food for the household, 
and invest in climate -resilient technologies, infrastructure, or 
equipment. This is particularly the case in the project 
intervention areas, where the econo mic and socially 
vulnerable targeted populations is further threatened by 
climate change impacts.  
  
The public sector, within its very limited capacity, is the main 
actor responsible for promoting agriculture, irrigation, and 
drainage in Benin, while inves tments from the private sector in 
the field of irrigation, for example, are almost non -existent as 
there are few incentives at present. Indeed, there is yet no 
clear demonstration of the socio -economic and environmental 
benefits to implement ICRM in basin areas in Benin. While 
climate change is partly integrated into agricultural research 
(for instance at the National University of Agronomy in Porto 
Novo), programmes are focused on improving agricultural 
productivity under existing climatic conditions rathe r than 
focusing on future changing climatic conditions. Finally, there 
is no platform where information about climate change impacts 
in Benin and best adaptation practices are stored and shared 
with policy - and decision -makers. As a result, there is a lack  of 
user-friendly information to inform policies, plans, and 
appropriate CRA interventions in the agriculture; and 
demonstrating strengthening the socio -economic benefits of 
this approach. Such demonstration could incentivise public 
and private investments  in project interventions. The potential 
of the project to maintain agricultural productivity despite 
climate change, and to increase the acreage of production of Under component 2 & 3, the economic and environmental 
benefits of project interventions will be carefully monitored 
(using an innovative App), compiled , packaged into ta rgeted 
knowledge products,  and shared, in particular towards 
governmental institutions and the private sector. This will 
incentivize future investments in resilient farming activities. In 
addition , all knowledge products  and project’s data, training 
module s, lessons learned and best practices for ICRM in 
watershed will be shared on OCRI’s online portal.  Field visits 
and awareness -raising events will also be organised for the 
communities surrounding the project’s sites, in order to 
showcase the benefits of r estored and protected ecosystems 
along the Oueme River. Finally, field visits and training 
sessions will be organised for other basin authorities in order 
to promote replication of OCRI approach across Benin’s 
watersheds.


---
*Page 43*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 40 
 
high value crops and trees (see Economic Analysis, Annex 3) 
would also secure future investme nts from farmers and 
cooperatives that would maintain the project beyond its 
lifespan.  
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co -benefit categorization  
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributi ng 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results  areas provided in the guidance note.   
Outcome 
number  GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1 -4) GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1 -4) 
MRA 1  
Energy 
generation 
and access  
 MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport  
 MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries , 
appliances  MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use  ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities  ARA 2 
Health, well -
being, food 
and water 
security  ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment  ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services  
Outcome 1 : 
Low carbon, 
Climate 
Resilient Crop 
production 
enhanced and 
Ecosystem 
services 
restored in 
the Upper and 
Middle 
Ouéme  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 2 : 
Climate -
resilient and 
gender -
sensitive 
value chains 
supporting 
farmers’ 
livelihoods in 
the Upper and 
Middle 
Oueme  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Outcome 3 : 
An enabling 
institutional 
and financial 
environment 
established to 
promote and 
upscale low 
carbon, 
climate -
resilient 
management 
in Benin’s 
Basins  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
 
Co-benefit 
number  Co-benefit  
Environmental  Social  Economic  Gender  Adaptation  Mitigation  
Co-benefit 1: 
livelihood of 
165,000 women 
improves  ☐ ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Co-benefit 2: 
farmers’ income 
increases  ☐ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐


---
*Page 44*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 41 
 
B.3. Projec t/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages ) 
The proposed interventions will contribute to achieve the GCF Fund -Level impacts: A1.0 Inc reased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions , A2.0 Increased resilience of health and 
well-being, and food and water security , and A4.0 Improved resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services . For 
example, the communities of Upper and Middle Ouémé, which were identified as highly vulnerable to climate change 
(see FS, Section 5), will benefit from OCRI interventions that will restore agricultural landscape and river banks and 
reduce soil erosio n, leading to less floods and flash floods in Middle and Lower Ouémé ; agroforestry and CRA, along 
with waterworks will contribute to restore soil moistures and fertility, which are reduced by higher temperatures, 
evapotranspiration (especially in Upper Ou émé) and water staggering on field (especially in Middle Ouémé); finally the 
integrated climate resilient management approach will restore and increase the production of ecosystem goods and 
services, to benefit the whole population of the Ouémé Basin.  
Several GCF outcomes for adaptation will also be achieved through the proposed project, namely:  
- A5.0 Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate -responsive planning and development  
- A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks  
- A8.0 Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk -reduction processes  
In addition, the proposed project will achieve one GCF outcome for mitigation:  
- M9.0 Improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emission s reduction.  
Project description  
The project objective is to enhance the climate resilience of the communities living in the Ouémé Basin of Benin, while 
contributing to the GHG emission reduction objectives of the country. This will be achieved through th e implementation 
of three complementary Components in the Upper and Middle Ouémé areas. Overall, project interventions were 
designed based on the results of extensive field missions conducted in 2019, 2020 and 2022. The results of the 
missions have been us ed to prepared the project’s annexes, in p articular Annex 2, 17 and 19.  The project’s 
Component s will directly address climate change impacts on key value chains . Table 3 proposes a range of CRA 
practices that have been identified as successful in the diff erent communes and that can be implemented and improved 
to support agriculture and productivity in particular for the selected VCs  as part of OCRI . These examples were drawn 
from the field mission, and the final selection of CRA strategies most adapted acc ording to site specific context will be 
conducted during the FFS activities  (please refer to Annex 2 Section 7.2 and 7.3 for more information) .  
 
 
 
Table  3:  Climatic hazards, climate change impact on crops and effective adaptation measures by municipality  
 Climate change events in Upper and Middle Ouémé  
 Upper Oueme  Middle -Oueme  
Copargo  Djougou  Glazoué  Zogbodomey  Zagnanado  
Climati e change  
events  
-Irregular rainfall  
-Shift in the 
agricultural calendar  
- Heavy wind  
- Early drying of rivers   
 Climati e change  
events  
- Drought  
- Late arrival of rain  
- Early drying of rivers   
 Climatic change 
eventse  
-Rain delay  
-Drought  
-Early arrival and end of 
rain 
-Heat  
-Heavy wind  
-Excessive rainfall 
causing flooding of the 
lowlands   Climati e change 
events  
-Late/short rainfall  
-Imbalanced 
distribution of rainfall  
-Heavy wind  
-Flooding  
-Early drainage of 
lowlands   Climati echange events  
-Drought  
-Late arrival of rai n  
-Irregular rainfall  
- Long harmattan 
duration  
-Early drainage of 
lowlands  
-Flooding  
Climate change impacts of the above mentioned events on OCRI VCs  and adaptation measures


---
*Page 45*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 42 
 
Maize  CC impact on crops  
-Low germination 
rate 
-Seedling wilt  
-Dwarf development 
of plants  
-Poor cob 
development  CC impact on crops  
-Low germination rate  
-Seedling wilt  
- Dwarf development 
of plants  
-Poor cob 
development  CC impact on crops  
-Worm development  
- Dwarf development 
of corn plants  
 CC impact on crops  
-Low emergence 
after germination  
-Plant wilt  
-Yellowing of leaves  
-Development of 
parasitic attacks 
from inside the plants   CC impact on crops  
-Low emergence after 
germination  
-Plant wilt  
-Yellowing of the leaves  
-Development of 
parasitic attacks from 
inside the plants   
Adaptation measures  
-Crop rotation and 
association  
-Adoption of short 
cycle and resistant 
varieties  
- Zai 
- No tillage  
  Adaptation measures  
-Crop rotation and 
association  
- Adoption of short 
cycle and resistant 
varieties  
- Zai 
- No tillage  
 Adaptation measures  
- Crop rotation and 
association  
- Adoption of short 
cycle and resistant 
varieties  
- Zai 
- No tillage  
 
 Adaptation measures  
-Drainage  
-Adoption of high -
yielding and CC -
resistant seeds  
-Lowland maize 
production  
- No till age  
 Adaptation measures  
-Drainage  
-Crop diversification  
-Adoption of high -
yielding and CC -
resistant seeds  
-Lowland maize 
production  
- No tillage  
 
Mango  CC impact on crops  
Low fruit development (+ fruit acidity / Glazoue)   
Adaptation measures  
- Pruning  
- Mechanical control  
- Adoption of grafted 
plants  
-Windbreak 
installation  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
-Pruning  
-Mechanical control  
-Adoption of grafted 
plants (Kent and 
Amelie)  
Windbreak installation  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
- Pruning  
- Mechanical control  
- Adoption of grafted 
plants (Kent and 
Amelie)  
-Windbreak nstallations  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
-Artificial watering / 
Irrigation under half -
moon  
-Mulching around 
the plants to 
conserve moisture  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
-Artificial watering / 
Irrigation under half -
moon  
-Mulching around the 
plants to conserve 
moisture  
-Agroforestry: 
association with crops   
- Zai 
Cashew  
nut 
 CC impact on crops --
-Low nut 
development  
-Early blooming of 
flowers  CC impact on crops  
-Low nut development  
 CC impact on crops  
- Low nut development  Impact CC on crop 
Development of 
pests causing low nut 
size  CC impact on crops  
Development of 
parasites causing low 
nut size  
Adaptation measures  
-Pruning, Thinning, Foliage  
-Adoption of grafted plants  
-Windbreak installations  
- Zai 
 
Shea  
nut CC impact on crops  
Low nut development (except in Zogbodomey and Zagnanado)  
Adaptation measures  
- Orchard 
maintenance  
- Biological control  
-Weeding  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
- Orchard 
maintenance  
- Creation of shea parks  
- Biological control  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
- Orchard 
maintenance  
- Creation of shea parks  
-Biological control  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
Orchard 
maintenance  
- Creation of shea 
parks  
- Biological control  
- Zai Adaptation measures  
- Orchard 
maintenance  
- Creation of shea parks  
- Biological control  
- Zai 
Vegetable 
crops  Impact on crops  
 - Plant wilt  
-Weak growth of 
vegetables  
-Poor fruit 
development  Impact on crops  
-Plant wilt  
-Weak growth of 
vegetables  
-Poor fruit development  Impact on crops  
-Development of 
worms especially in 
cabbage  
-Weak growth of 
vegetables (carrots, 
leafy vegetables)  
-Attack on chilli  and 
tomato leaves  Impact on crops  
-Plant wilt  
-Low emergence 
after germination for 
carrot and cabbage  
-Low emergence 
after transplanting  
-Yellowing of the 
leaves  Impact on crops  
-Plant wilt  
-Low emergence after 
germination for carrot 
and cabbage  
-Low emergence after 
transplanting  
-Yellowing of the leaves


---
*Page 46*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 43 
 
Adaptation measures  
-Short cycle seeds  
-Targeted watering  
-Mulching  
-Crop rotation   
-Targeted irrigation  
-Off-season 
production  
- No tillage  Adaptation measures  
- Short cycle seeds  
- Targeted watering  
- Mulching  
- Crop rotation  
- Targeted 
Irrigation/Targeted 
Hand Irrigation  
- Off-season production  Adaptation measures  
- Short cycle seeds  
- Targeted watering  
- Mulching  
- Crop rotation  
- Targeted 
Irrigation/Targeted 
hand Irrigatio n  
- Off-season production  
- No tillage  Adaptation measures  
- Adoption of seed of 
improved varieties 
resistant to the 
effects of CC  
- Gravity drainage  
- Targeted irrigation  
-Installation of dikes   
- No tillage  Adaptation measures  
-Adoption of seed of 
improved varieties 
resistant to the effects 
of CC   
-Raised boards  
-Construction of dikes 
for water control  
-Gravity drainage  
-Targeted irrigation  
- No tillage  
 
 
 
Table  4 Climate change impacts on value chains: Processing, conservation, and salesError! Bookmark not define d.: 
   Climate Threats  Climate change impacts and Adaptation strategies  
 
Crops  
 1-Drought, heat  
2-Late/shorter 
rainy season  
3-Excessive 
rainfall/flooding  
4-Heavy wind  Climate change impacts  ( Threats #)  Adaptation measures  
(promoted under OCRI 
Component 2)  Measures expected 
impact  Upper and 
Middle 
Oueme (All 
communes)  
Maize (staple 
crops)  
 1, 2, 3, 4 Grains humid at harvest and 
deteriorate/spoil fast (1,3),  
Lower quality of processed products 
(1,2,3), Heavy rain hampers access 
to fields and markets compromised  
(3), Price hikes (3)  Drying  
stocking practices  
organized processing, & 
sale  Stable qua lity 
capture of higher prices 
make up for reduced 
production  Upper 
and 
Middle 
Oueme 
(All 
commu
nes)  Vegetab
les 
 1,3 Poor quality fruit products (1, 2 & 3)  
heat affects products conservation 
(1) 
Price hikes (3)  Organized packaging, & 
sale Stable quality  
capture of higher prices 
make up for reduced 
production  Upper and 
Middle 
Oueme 
(Glazoue -
Djougou -
Copargo)  Cashew (nuts)  
 1, 2, 3, 4  Damaged fruit harvest (1,2,3,4)  
small, broken nuts (1,2,3,4)  
humid nuts fast deteriorate (3), 
heat affects fruits conservation (1)  
Price hikes (3)  
Low quality fruits (1,2,3,4)  Ventilated storage, 
organized packaging, & 
sale 
Marketing and finance 
capacity building  Stable quality  
capture of higher prices 
make up for reduced 
production  Upper Oueme 
(Djougou -
Copargo)  
Mango  
 1, 2, 3, 4  Heat affects fruits conservation, 
rapid deterioration of fruits (1)  
Reduced shelf life (1,2)  
Price hikes (3)  
Shea nut acidity (3)  
Harvest delayed (3)  
Low quality fruits (1,2,3,4)  Ventilated  storage  
organized processing, & 
sale 
Marketing and finance 
capacity building  Stable quality  
capture of higher prices 
make up for reduced 
production  Upper 
Oueme 
(Djougou -
Copargo)  
Shea  
 1, 2, 3, 4  Nuts humid at harvest  
Low quality fruits (1,2,3,4)  Drying  
organized processing, & 
sale 
Marketing and finance 
capacity building  Stable quality  
capture of higher prices 
make up for reduced 
production  
 
Please note that a detailed market study was conducted to support the project, it includes a detailed review of mode 
and business cycles for the target crops. Section 3 of the market study  (Annex 19) focuses on access to credit for 
farmers, including barri ers/ problems faced by farmers. The barriers analysis also integrates the point of view of MFIs, 
which have been interviewed. Both farmers’ and MFIs’ interviews demonstrate an interest to provide/ access agricultural 
credits, providing training and support  to farmers, and improvements to the production side as failure is a key cause for 
the none -repayment of the credit . 
 
Based on the field missions and market analysis, the following interventions were designed within OCRI to  specifically 
address the barrier s to agricultural credit access :  
 
Barriers to credit access  Solution proposed by OCRI  
MFIs are more reluctant to provide loans to individual 
farmers than to farmers organised in efficient 
cooperatives  Support and training to organise and register farmers into 
local, municipal and regional cooperatives to organise 
the production and sale, and to develop business,


---
*Page 47*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 44 
 
finance/ access to credit, and marketing skills (Output 
2.1) 
MFIs have indicated that farme rs often l ack financial 
education, have limited capacity to put together bankable 
business plans, and  to provide regular repayment  Busines and financial management training to ensure 
farmers develop bankable business plans; close follow 
up of OCRI farmers  (through FNDA) to ensure they 
implement their financial and business plans (developed 
through FBS) and that they are following their  schedule d 
loan repayment  (Output 2.1)  
MFIs and farmers indicate the difficulties for farmers to 
provide the required coll aterals for a loan  FNDA will provide a guarantee covering 50% of the loan 
amount  for OCRI farmers , quality control of loan 
application, and reduced interest rate  (Output 1.2)  
MFIs and farmers are aware of th e negative effects of 
climate change on crop yields; changes in rainfall 
patterns and other climatic parameters have already 
caused lack of credit repayment  Technical training on increasing productivity and 
producing quality products – especially for maize , 
mangoes, cashews and shea nuts (Output 1.2)  
MFIs and farmers are aware of th e negative effects of 
climate change on crop yields; changes in rainfall 
patterns and other climatic parameters have already 
caused lack of credit repayment  Provide high -quality , climate -resilient seeds from 
national institutes (Output 1.2)  
MFIs and farmers are aware of th e negative effects of 
climate change on crop yields; changes in rainfall 
patterns and other climatic parameters have already 
caused lack of credit repayment  Training on climate -resilient production techniques 
ensuring pest control, irrigation, protection against strong 
winds and extreme rainfalls, among others ( Output 1.2 ) 
Farmers and MFIs are worried of a lack of credit 
repayment  Create bi -annual forums to connect producers/ 
cooperatives with wholesalers/ retailers to develop 
market opportunities, facilitate crop sale, and negotiate 
price and contracts ( Output 2.2 ). This will not only 
enhance revenue but also  ensure stable and increased 
income to repay cred it 
Farmers in the target communes have access to limited 
financial services for agriculture  Provide FNEC grants  to finance the implementation of  
climate -resilient agricultural and ecosystem restoration 
micro -projects (Output 3.2)


---
*Page 48*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 45 
 
 
57 Lowlands are defined as "inland valleys, flat or concave with temporary or perennial flow axes, which are flooded for 
periods of at least several days of the year, and in which soils with hydromorphic characteristics and a relatively small 
catchment area are  found" (APRM / Direction Génie Rural, 2010).  Component  1 Low carbon climate Resilient Crop production enhanced and Ecosystem services restored in 
the Upper and Middle Ouéme  
To enhance climate -resilience and reduce emissions on the Ouémé Basin, an ICRM approach – including waterworks, 
agroforestry and CRA – will be implemented in selected municipalities of the  Ouémé Basin to provide benefits not only 
on project sites but in downstream area as well. Floods will be  reduced, soil erosion limited, access to water improved, 
agricultural productivity enhanced, and as such climate change vulnerability and impacts reduced .  There are 95,000 
ha of degraded lowland57 and riverbanks area in the Upper and Middle Ouémé which can be restored and made climate -
resilient through overall improved soil and water management, includin g waterworks and agroforestry on the riverbanks 
(Output 1.1) and CRA (Output 1.2); including the 5,320 ha under the MAEP projects  funded by IFAD . The target area 
for OCRI (95,000 ha) was selected because it can be subjected to surface water mobilization th rough micro -dams, 
water retention of variable size, and water management (soft and hard) infrastructures to enable climate -resilient 
agriculture, agroforestry, and counter -season horticulture, in the context of climate change, while at the same time 
improv ing water filtration in soils and vegetation cover to buffer communities against floods, heat and water scarcity. 
This estimation (95,000 ha) takes into account soil erosion problems and risks in the area.  
Within this target 95,000 ha, the project will se t up the following:  
- 30 new surface water collection structures are built: 8 in Copargo, 11 in Djougou; 8 in Glazoue; 2 in Zangnanado; 1 
in Zogbodome  
- 23 surface water collection structures are rehabilitated: 5 in Copargo, 7 in Djougou; 10 in Glazoue; 1 in Zangnanado  
- 680ha of irrigated plots are established: 200 ha in Copargo, 170 ha in Djougou; 160 ha in Glazoue; 25 ha in 
Zangnanado; 125 ha in Zogbodome  
- 14 water sources are protecter: 2 in Copargo; 14 in Zangnanado; 42 in Zogbodome  
- 44 artesian boreholes are built  
- A total of 9,000 ha of degraded land are reforested including: 1,500ha in Copargo; 1,750ha in Djougou; 300ha (OCRI) 
and 680ha ( MAEP) in Glazoue; 600ha (OCRI) and 1,360 ( MAEP ) in Zagnanado; and 850ha (OCRI) and 1,960ha 
(MAEP ) in Zogbodome  
This is based on the results from the various field missions conducted during the project development phase, related 
to area available within each  commune, need for water access or water protection infrastructure, and degraded riverine 
forests to be restored.  
Please note that all project interventions for waterworks, reforestation and CRA will take place on land that either belong 
to the Government  of Benin and is managed by the target municipalities (letters from municipalities have been received 
in this regads) ) or that belong to the beneficiary farmers. Please refer to Section 1.8 of Annex 2 for details on land 
tenure systems in Benin.   
A vulner ability assessment was conducted on each project site during the FP development phase (see Annex 2  
Sections 4 and 5 ). Its results will be refined with a site specific assessment of resilience in the project sites to be 
undertaken at the start of the projec t using the SHARP tool. This will aim to increase the understanding of the prevailing 
livelihood conditions of smallholders, as well as their resilience and adaptive capacity levels. The tool will serve to 
identify the main areas of vulnerability in the se lected municipalities. The results will support the targeting and decision -
making on which of and where the proposed waterworks and CRA are most needed and identify who need them the 
most. The results will also support the refinement of the M&E strategy an d set a project baseline for key M&E indicators 
with primary up -to-date data.  
CRA and agroforestry  
CRA and agroforestry techniques will be implemented to increase productivity of  maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, 
okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam, shea,  mango and cashew. As indicated in the table 3, most suited CR A practices 
have been identified for each commun based on c limatic ha zards and climate change impact on crops  as well as their 
strengths and weaknesess . Although  in general farmers tend to use similar adaptation measures  in Upper and Middle 
Oueme , some of them are context -specific based on different climate hazards. For instance, for vegetal crops 
Zagnanado farmers included adaptation measures such as r aised board s and c onstruction of dikes for water control , 
as it is more affected by flodding ; while Diougou, among other  adaptation measures  farmers  included short cycle seeds 
and targeted watering /irrigation , which are CRA practices more adapted to dry spell, drough t and heat.  CRA practices


---
*Page 49*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 46 
 
 
58 https://www.fao.org/3/CA1323EN/ca1323en.pdf   
59 FAO, ICRISAT, CIAT. 2018. Climate -Smart Agriculture in Benin. CSA Country profiles for Africa series. International 
Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT); International Crop Research Institute for the Semi -Arid Tropics; Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Rome. Italy. 22 p.  
60 Ratnadass A, Fernandes P, Avelino J & Habib R. 2012. Plant species diversity for sustainable management of crop pests 
and diseases in agroecosystems: a review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development. 32: 273 –303. indicated in the Table 3 will be further fine tuned at the inception phase of the FFS sessions, through a community 
vulnerability assessment, which is the first FFS activity to update the adaptation measures based on the specific current 
farmer needs.  FAO has vast experience in working on CSA practices all over the world and in Benin and, particularly 
for Benin, has developed the CSA guidebook58 which identifies the key CSA practices that have proven to be successful 
in Benin, as per figure below. The results of this guidebook has been considered, toghether with field missions carried 
out in the target areas, to prioritize the CSA best practices in OCRI.  
. These options were identified and assessed for their degree of acceptance by  small scale farmers in Benin59. 
Agroforestry and the diversification of crop varieties will be implemented to ensure a broader source of crop resilience 
to the uncertain occurrence and effects of extreme weather events60. The development of agroforestry s ystems will be 
considered through the design of dynamic vegetation models that integrate both net primary production and forest yield 
approaches. This would allow on the one hand to calibrate and adjust the biogeochemical processes (regulation of 
greenhous e gases) and biophysical processes (regulation of water and energy) to be implemented for sustainable 
management of agricultural ecosystems, forests, and on the other hand to simulate forest biomass, primary and food 
production, the water and nutrient cycl e, the effects of fires, insect infestations and extreme events, the evolution of 
biodiversity as well as climate feedbacks. Water -holding capacity of soil will improve, and soi l erosion  will be  reduce d. 
The agroforestry systems to be promoted by OCRI proj ects are briefly presented in Table 5.  
Table  5: Agroforestry models to  be promote d by OCRI  
 
These techniques result  in reduced surface runoff and enhances soil moisture, which in turn improve productivity  of  
maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam, shea, mango and cashew  (see details 
of practices in the FS, Section 7). 130 FFS will be im plemented  per target municipality (spread between selected 
villages), each lasting 4 -to-5 months (following length of the growing season) .


---
*Page 50*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
Agroforestry and CRA systems also directly contribute to reducing emissions through no tillage practices  and 
discontinuation of biomass burning ; better residue management practices ; reduce deforestation caused by agriculture 
expansion caused by low productivity;  and increase carbon sequestration through  enhancing existing tropical moist 
deciduous forest area, improving vegetation coverage and soil quality by planting trees  
The acti vities under component 1 will support reduce emissions as follows: (a) improved CRA practices to enhance 
agricultural productivity, including the development of small irrigation system, corresponding to emission reduction by 
52 587 tCO2eq over 20 years; (b ) Strengthening degraded river banks and restoring perennial parkland land with 
additional trees and SLM/SFM practices, resulting in a direct reduction in emissions of approximately 1  469 260 tCO2 
equivalent (tCO2eq) over 20 years (per year which correspon ds to 73  463 tCO2eq per year) .  Additional reduction in 
emissions of approximately 29,383 tCO2eq over 20 years is expected from phasing out mineral fertilization ; and (c) 
improving the management of degraded forest over an area of 9  000 ha, which is subjec t to severe anthropic pressure, 
contributing to a reduction emission by 232  518 tCO2 eq over 20 years.  
Overall, Component 1 of the project is expected to create a carbon sequestration result of 1 ,783,633 tCO 2eq over 20 
years compared to baseline.  Consent to intervene in project targeted areas have been provided by the 5 municipalities.  
 
OUTPUT 1. 1 Waterworks and tree plantation  to protect river banks and secure water access  
Please refer to Annex 2, FS, Section 7, as well as Annex 17 for specificities of the waterworks and their location. An 
O&M plan is also presented in Annex 2, section 8.  
Under this Output, ecosystem goods and services in the Ouémé Basin will be restored and enhanced: floods and water 
scarcity risks will be reduced,  and small scale irrigation facilitated, soil fertility and moisture will be improved, tree cover 
increased, hence enabling climate -resilient agriculture (CRA) and ecosystems restoration. The following activities have 
been identified  as best solution to the adaptation problems in the Upper and Middle Ouémé :  
1.1.1 Build water harvesting and retention infrastructures : (target of 680 ha irrigated land plus 1,320  ha with MAEP co -
financing) .(Executing entities: FAO & MAEP)   The project wi ll subcontract relevant local companies to build hard and 
soft infrastructures such as micro -dams (length of 100 to 150m, to capture  30,000 m3 to 80,000 m3 of water, in line with 
FAO safeguards for risk category B), dykes, wells and surface boreholes, as w ell as ‘soft’ contour ploughing, and stone 
lines that can easily be reproduced and maintained by the communities  (see training under Activity 1.2.3).  These


---
*Page 51*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 48 
 
infrastructures will  enable CRA (see Output 1.2), in a context where water scarcity is increasing an d seasonal shifts 
affect the agricultural calendar, especially with the late onset of the main rainy season, and the disappearance of the 
short rainy season in Middle Ouémé . Water retention will also enable counter -season horticulture, a women -oriented 
activity, as well as  facilitate recharge of underground water. The waterworks and their localisation have been pre -
identified in Annex 17 - Feasibility waterworks ; this preliminary study will be refined, reviewed and adjusted, during the 
project inc eption pha se (year 1), to confirm the specific location and type of the waterworks ( selection criteria are 
provided in the Annex 17). Simple adaptation techniques, like contour and mulching, that also contribute to improve 
water retention especially in drought - and flood -prone areas, like Upper and Middle, as demonstrated in previous 
projects , will be promoted on all project sites (also to be determined during the project inception phase) . This activity 
will support reducing emission as a result of reduc ed tillage, better residue management practices and no burned 
residue on improved annual cropland with irrigation . 
1.1.2 Strengthen degraded river banks and restore land with trees . (target of 5,000 ha plus  4,000 ha with MAEP co -
financing)( Executing entit ies: FAO, MAEP, MCVDD).  Well functional riparian forest provides essential goods and 
ecosystem services of multiple benefits ( such as shelter for pollinators, wild animals, medicinal plants, Non Wood 
Forest Products) to local communities. This will reduce  risks of erosion during heavy rainfall events, which become 
more frequent especially during the middle and end of the rainy seasons; and improve water recharge for boreholes. 
This activity will especially focus on Upper Ouémé and contribute to reduce floo d risks in Middle and Lower areas, and 
as such will also support protect the FAO GEF project currently under development.  The exact locations of the sites 
will be selected during the inception phase through selection criteria already identified (see feasi bility study section 
8.1.2) . In areas where the FFS are not close to the river, trees will be planted by workers hired by the project on river 
banks and fields to restore vegetation coverage, reduce flood risks due to heavy rainfalls falling on bare land, restore 
fertility, provide shade and keep moisture in a context where heat stresses and evapotranspiration increase. The 
restoration of river banks using climate -resilient and high value tree species was identified as a best practice on the 
UNEP SAP and PA DAAM projects; the OCRI project will replicate good practices from these projects to upscale 
reforestation along the Oueme  River (please refer to sections 7 and 8 of the feasibility study for a list of best practices 
and lessons learnt). Reforestation site s will be determined at project onset and related land and tree tenure practices 
assessed and enhanced. In line with Benin national forest resources (including riparian forest) management policies 
and regulations, river banks restoration and protection wil l be enhanced. This activity will specifically target degraded 
river banks. Moreover, trees will be planted on farmers’ field to restore vegetation coverage and diversify income stream 
(Component 2).  
Tree planting activities will directly contribute to re duce Benin’s GHG emission, thereby supporting the achievement of 
INDC’s goal. The restoration of degraded riverbanks and fields with agroforestry systems (Activity 1.1.2) will contribute 
to deepening the existing carbon sinks through the plantation of frui t trees and the increase in the density of parkland. 
This activity contributes to sequester 1  469 260 tCO2 -eq over 20 years (which corresponds to 73,463 tCO2eq per 
year).  In addition, the overall improved management on 9 000  ha of degraded forest supported  by the project 
sequesters 232 518  tCO2 -eq. 
This activity will be coordinated by the MCVDD and its local branches, through the OCRI platform (see component 3). 
Planting sites will be selected based on their level of degradation (where tree density is less  than 25 trees/ha), interest 
for the restoration and of tree cover is acknowledge by the local communities and tree the related goods and services 
have proven socio -economic value for the local communities and the Ouéme basin ecosystems. Tree nurseries wil l be 
set up through activity 1.2.4 (see below).  
OUTPUT 1.2 25,250 farmers capacitated to implement climate resilient agriculture , agro -forestry and sustainable land 
management  over 95,000 ha   
Under climate change conditions, agricultural productivity in the Ouémé Basin is projected to decline by 25%. Under 
this Output, 25,250 selected farmers will be trained through the FFS approach, and implement (on their own field) CRA 
and agroforestry, to r estore soil fertility, retain moisture, provide shade; CRA will focus on  maize, cassava, cowpea, 
chillies, okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam, shea, mango and cashew, which are the main cultures in the target 
area; irrigated agriculture and counter -seas on horticulture will be implemented, supported by the water schemes set 
up under output 1.1.  
Agroforestry, using cashew, mango and shea trees, will not only stabilise soil, especially along the riverbanks, and 
improve water retention – thereby reducing ri sks of flood in the Middle and Lower Ouémé – but it will also support new 
income streams for the beneficiary communities. Indeed, high -value tree species grown using climate -resilient 
techniques (CRA and agroforestry) will be planted along the Ouémé River and on fields, as well as other indigenous 
species, to improve crop productivity and support sustained income – to be valued under Component 2 of the project. 
Agroforestry will also support increase carbon sequestration and reducing emissions  from addition al tree planting and  
no tillage .


---
*Page 52*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 49 
 
The proposed project will use the FFS approach as key methodology for field activities , in conjunction with the Dimitra 
Clubs approach . The FFS approach ensures a continuous p rocess for updating the information base needed to cope 
with climate impacts . It is considered the most appropriate approach to implement ground -based activities with farmers 
on climate change adaptation and mitigation as it is flexible, focused on learnin g by doing, it responds to farmer needs, 
it is context -specific, it helps farmers to organize collective action (i.e. for natural resource management), it focuses on 
farmers' decision -making and helps the community to develop adaptation plans.  Due to its flexibility, innovation, 
adaptive capacity to different contexts, the FFS approach fits very well to cope with climate change. Based on identified 
local community priorities and farmer needs related to climate stresses and climate threats  on production and  natural 
resources , the approach aims at find out context -specific solutions. Starting from a community needs assessment, 
which is the basis of the FFS curriculum development, FFS farmer experiment different options in the field and adopt 
those which are m ore promising to face climate unpredictability and impact . 
The methodological alliance between FFS and the Dimitra Clubs has been tested in DR Congo, Mali, Niger and 
Senegal, mainly in the framework of climate -smart and resilience projects. This alliance h as led to promising results in 
terms of improved access to information and knowledge about climate -smart agricultural practices and innovations as 
well as enhancing the leadership an d empowerment of rural women.  The FFS enable Dimitra Clubs’ members to 
access technical knowledge by adopting more sustainable agricultural practices and better seeds varieties, improve 
their management of natural resources and develop better marketing skills. This valuable knowledge and experience 
that arises within the FFS is  discussed within Dimitra Clubs that facilitate the scaling -up and broader application of 
these practices at community -level, particularly among the most marginalized groups such as rural women and youth.  
The combination between FFS and Dimitra Clubs enha nces community participation, inclusion, gender equality and 
the adoption of more sustainable agricultural practices, thus making it more possible to effectively contribute to improve 
livelihoods and reduce rural poverty.   The Dimitra Clubs improve rural w omen and men’s capacities to organize, express 
their needs, exchange information, and influence decision -making processes. Thanks to this approach, rural women 
have improved their access to services, information and resources and enhanced their leadership,  voice and 
participation in decision -making processes at different levels (households, organizations and communities). As the 
gender dimension is inherent within the Dimitra Clubs’ approach, this methodological alliance enables rural women 
farmers to enhan ce their capacities and knowledge on improved agricultural techniques so that they can become better 
farmers and enhance their yields while also enhancing their leadership and organizational capacities, crucial to 
influence decision -making processes.  
The D imitra Clubs allow women to get together and discuss issues that are important to them. The results of these 
discussions are also showcased at village meetings with the presence of the whole community, including men and 
village chiefs. This mechanism enabl es women’s voice to be heard and recognized at community level.  
Integrating climate change adaptation and mitigation into a  FFS curriculum begins when FFS Master Trainers and 
Facilitators introduce the FFS programme to the community and the subsequent ground working activities which take 
place. During the preparatory stage, the Baseline Climate Change Community Vulnerability A ssessment is carried out, 
through a Community Resource Mapping exercise with the community. The assessment includes  site specific  
consideration on the community exposure and sensitivity to weather stresses , based on the analysis already carried 
out at form ulation stage . Baseline assessment exercises are used to identify site specific adaptation strategies and 
options to be included  in Field Studies (through comparison among plots) and Special Topics (specific topics to be 
deepen) and to be integrated in the  curriculum. Regardless of the field studies that are chosen, it is important to include 
the collection of weather information as part of the FFS activities, including the use of thermometers and rain gauges, 
which are critical, simple and cheap, and tools  to be used by farmer to monitor key variable of weather patterns. At the 
end of the FFS learning process, the community develops its adaptation plan based on its own experience and taking 
lessons learned from experimentations in the field.  
Low carbon c limate resili ent management of the targeted c rops and trees identified in the formulation phase in the 
intervention areas, will be adapted to the different sites  and improved through the FFS trainings in order to increase 
communities’ resilience and to devel op specific value chains (see component 2).  
Some examples of field studies and special topics on climate change adaptation and mitigation to be integrated into 
the FFS curriculum are: Seed germination; Mulching and mulches; Moisture stress during the growi ng season; 
Responding to an increasingly uncertain start to the growing season with seed priming and dry seed; Site specific 
Adaptive Varieties – temperature and moisture stress tolerant and early maturing varieties; Impacts of extreme weather 
threats; Tra ditional knowledge on predictors of climate events ; income and carbon sequestration; Improving nitrogen 
fertilizer management and production; Reducing emissions from enteric fermentation; Sequestering carbon in 
agricultural and forestry systems.


---
*Page 53*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 50 
 
 
61 CRA technologies have been identified by FAO -Benin, and compiled in the following manual, which will be 
used to guide the trainings: FAO (2017). Pratiques et technologies pour une Agriculture Intelligente face au 
Climate au Benin.   
1.2.1.  Train  15 FFS Master Trainers  and facilitators (women and men ) .  
Selection (see feasibility study section 8.1.2 for selection criteria) and training of 15 existing FFS Master T rainers (mix 
of agronomy, forest, land  and water experts) (at least 30% women). Four training sessions (on e week x session) are 
organized to refresh and update the Master Trainers on the FFS methodology and on the key technical issues needed 
by the project. These Master Trainers will conduct t he trainings of facilitators (ToFs), which are described in the following 
activity.   
Training of Master Trainers will include also basic finance and business matters – particularly related to farm 
management. As Master Trainers have an agronomic backgroun d profile, during the training of facilitators (see activity 
1.2.2) they will be supported by external subject experts on financial/business matters, similarly this external support 
will be provided to facilitators during the implementation of FFS.  
Master Trainers and selected Facilitators  (see activity 1.2.2) , will create a network/association t o operate as technical 
business advisors to secure the future scale up and sustainability of the project. Specifically, the network/association 
will assure the supp ort of the future activities linked with the financial facility (see component 3), which will provide 
financial support to maintain the network . The mechanism will be formalized through agreements during the project 
implementation to assure the sustainabil ity of the support.   
1.2.2  Training of 250 Facilitators (at least 40% women) – that is 50 per selected municipality - will be trained. First, a 
training curriculum will be developed based on the key priorities of the  Ouémé Basin . This activity will include  a 
validation workshop, which involve t echnical experts and FFS Master Trainers.  Secondly, according with the curriculum, 
the training material will be compiled and adjusted, covering the following thematic : FFS methodology, low carbon  
climate -resilient ag riculture  (CRA) for maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam ; agro -
forestry  with shea, mango and cashew ; sustainable land management (with focus on river banks); and construction 
and maintenance of small waterworks  (as per ope ration and maintenance manual developed in Annex 2, Section 8).  
Key framework of FFS trainings will be the agroforestry approach which combines crops and trees producing a mutual 
benefit as the tree roots bring up water and nutrients from deep in the soil , their leaves add to the soil’s organic matter, 
pruning from trees and shrubs can be used as mulch or to make compost. In addition, pla nting trees decrease land 
degradation  and tree fruits are used for value chain purposes (see component 2) as well as providing  mitigation co -
benefits. CRA will focus on maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam, shea, mango and 
cashew. Different CRA technologies a nd agricultural practices will be locally adapted and adopted, such as construction 
of anti -erosion bunds along the contour lines; stabilization of anti -erosion bunds through the planting of agroforestry 
species including those that fix nitrogen ones; appl ication of mulch using crop residues, practices of fertilizer micro -
dosing; the zai techniques, cover crops ; protection of water sources through the planting of adapted low  water -
consuming species.  
FAO has already designed several training materials for F FS, including on Land and Water management and Climate 
Change, which will be easily adapted to the local context in Benin. The material will include 6 modules61, with gender -
sensitive chapters to ensure the full participation of women to agricultural activ ities (e.g. focusing on horticulture or 
processing of nuts and fruits); it will also comprise demonstration video. The training modules will be disseminated on 
the knowledge portal of OCRI platform (Activity 3.1. 1) and regularly updated during the project lifespan, based on 
lessons learned from the project sites, new site specific technologies for CRA , and peer -to-peer review as the material 
will be disseminated through the OCRI platform and subject to expert examination . Finally, the modules on CRA will 
explain the  various ‘starter kits’, with specific adaptation options and seed varieties, based on the needs and specificities 
of their farm  (that will be distributed under Activity 1.2.3 . Once the training modules are ready for use, 250 facilitators 
(50 per municipality) will  be trained: the project will organize 10 Training of Facilitators (ToF), for a duration of 5 months 
each (sequential training - 1 week per month) to follow the entire production season. Each ToF will be attended by 25 
facilitators. Based  on the country capacity, more ToFs can be organized simultaneously in the various municipalities. 
Once trained, the facilitators will disseminate their new knowledge on field schools set up under Activity 1.2. 3: each 
facilitator will implement 2 -to-3 Farm er Field Schools (FFS) per year, lasting 4 to 5 months each . These facilitators will 
come from local extension services in forestry and agriculture, local rural irrigation and waterworks department of  the 
Ministry of Agriculture,  Livestock and Fisheries  (MAEP), young educated community members  and leads , technicians 
or members of agri -businesses. They will be  chosen based on their willingness to become OCRI facilitators to continue 
the training beyond the project’s lifespan.


---
*Page 54*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 51 
 
The common selection criteria fo r facilitators are as follows: a) have agricultural training of some kind, formal or informal, 
or have some level of advanced skills, knowledge and experience in agriculture/forestry; b) be technically competent 
for the agroecosystem at hand; c) be availab le to facilitate the FFS process; d) be able to share experiences and 
connect well with other community members; e) have good people skills and an aptitude for informal and participatory 
ways of working; f) have at least some reading and writing skills; g)  speak the local language; h) live in the local 
community; i) have a dynamic and confident personality.  Priority in selection will be given to women to proactively 
ensure parity in representation among the facilitators.  
1.2.3 Implement climate resilient agriculture , including agroforestry, to enhance agricultural productivity under climate 
change  and reduce emissions (MAEP cofinance) . Farmers in the target sites will be trained and receive agricultural 
input. Training will take place in 650 farm er field schools (FFS)  plus 360 FFS set up by MAEP , including 100 schools 
dedicated to women. The 250 facilitators trained under Activity 1.2.2 will disseminate the practices through the 
established FFS to a total of 16,250 farmers (25 farmers per FFS) – including at least 50% women – spread over the 
5 target municipalities ; an additional 9,000 farmers will be trained in the FFS set up by MAEP . Beneficiaries of the 
training activities will be selected based on the following criteria: vulnerability to climat e change measured as a plot 
size < 2 ha, their  willingness to participate, their availability and their interest in developing climate -resilient farms;  the 
sharing of same needs /priorities related to the production; and the strong motivation to follow  the entire training cycle . 
These selection criteria will be further refine at project onset by FAO. 20 FFS per municipality will be dedicated to 
women, as they are more vulnerable to climate change; training will focus o n vegetable production and counter -season 
horticulture, production, processing and storage of nuts, fruits and crops like cassava.   
Training sessions will be tracked through  attendance register s. In addition, a tool called "logbook" is used in which the 
facilitator s summarize  each day of animation session . Finally, at the beginning and at the end of each training cycle a 
knowledge test is carried out through incom ing and outgoing questionnaires involving all participants, allowing to 
estimate the improvemen t of general knowledge and technical skills acquired by each participant.  Also, a final 
evaluation is carried out for each FFS at the end of the training cycle . 
The 16,250 training beneficiaries  trained under the OCRI FFS  will also receive farmer’s starter kits, including small 
tools like spade, water can, trowels, wheelbarrow, as well as climate -resilient  seeds. Selected based on demonstrated 
interest and capacity of the members, 150 FFS will receive an introduction to th e key elements of the business . Although 
a special focus on business will be dedicated during the second cycle of FFS (see activity 2.1.1), key elements of 
finance, marketing and business management concepts will be introduced into the curricula of the fir st cycle of FFS, 
based on Farmer  Business Schools modules. These modules include basic financial literacy, farm accounting, market 
plans and farm investment planning , with special focus on developing women’s entrepreneurial capacity. . In parallel, 
linked t o the FFS groups, the VSLA approach (Village Savings and Loan Associations) will be developed. The V SLA 
allows members to take out a loan and develop small income generating activities.  It retrieves tradition al ways of saving 
and manage  small amount of mon ey at group level and allows to consolidate and develop basic notions of business. 
When associated w ith Farmer Business Schools modules, it creates the initial conditions for improving farmers' 
capacities to develop small local development projects that th ey can later present to microcredit institutions (Component 
2 and 3).  
Key steps of setting up and operating VSLAs are: a) Preparatory phase (4 -6 weeks): facilitators assess community 
needs, select beneficiary communities, provide background information to  local leaders and select VSLA groups to be 
formed; b) intensive phase (14 weeks): VSLA groups receive training structured in six modules, during which members 
elect their leaders, draw up their internal rules and define procedures that will govern their a ctivities. They learn how to 
manage the solidarity fund and share buying / savings and loan meetings; c) supervision phase (up to 36 weeks): it 
consists of a development phase and a maturity phase, each lasting approximately 18 weeks. The facilitator conti nues 
to assist the group by attending some meetings. At the end of the cycle, if the group chooses to enter a second cycle, 
an assessment is carried out to determine how well the organization should support it.  
Introducing climate -resilient agriculture (CR A) through Activity 1.2.3 would contribute to shifting cropping practices on 
a variety of crops.  Emissions  will be  sequestered from area undergoing additional tree planting to enhance tree cover 
through agroforestry practices  and implementation of perenni al fallow agroforestry system   Emissions will be avoided 
from no tillage practices and discontinuation of biomass burning . The carbon balance of this activity corresponds to a 
reduction of emission by 52 587 tCO2 -eq over 20 years.   
1.2.4  Increase  access of adapted quality seeds and plant propagation material .  For tree seeds and propagation 
material (eg shea), the project will rely on MCVDD who has already established a national tree seed collection and 
supply unit. The project will strengthened t he existing system by improving the technician’s and farmers’ knowledge on 
seed sources identification, mother trees selections, seed harvesting – cleaning – storage, control and certification of 
seed genetic and physiologic quality.   Selected farmers wil l be organized into seed producer groups.  Given that shea 
seeds are characterised as recalcitrant, particular actions will be developed to ensure that the seedling producers 
receives viable seeds. Further to propagation through seeds, farmers will be trai ned to apply Farmer Managed Natural


---
*Page 55*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 52 
 
 
62 The project wil l work with existing cooperatives, or will help organizing farmers into cooperatives for maize, shea, cashew 
or mango.   Regeneration (FMNR). This will also include grafting operations on farm to shortened the production cycle and enable 
the production of desired fruit straits.  
For Mango, Cashew, annual crop and vegetable seeds and propag ation material, the project will collaborate with 
l’Institut National de Recherche Agricole du Benin (INRAB)  through the synergies that will be put in place by the OCRI 
with the MAEP projects financed by IFAD to prepare the technical descriptions of the va rieties that will be procured for 
the farmers. MAEP confirmed that INRAB is already supporting their projects with aspects related to seed supply. 
Technical description  
The project will also set up village nurseries for the production of quality seedlings ; then, to produce tree seedlings, the 
project will build one tree nursery of 10,000 tree/year capacity in each target commune; the existing nurseries attached 
to the local Forest Department services will also be mobilised to grow additional tree seedlings  as needed. This activity 
will benefit from the MAEP projects  financed by IFAD  experience on seed and seedlings supply. This will enable 
communities to continue climate -resilient farming beyond the project’s cycle.   
Component 2:  Climate -resilient and gend er-sensitive value chains, supporting farmers’ livelihoods in the 
Upper and Middle Ouémé  
Following the trainings in FFS (under Output 1.2), 100 best -productive farmers field schools, among the 150 which 
attended the training and set up the VSLAs (see activ ity 1.2.3 ) and the 100 FSS dedicated to women, with priority given 
to the ones (30) associated with the Dimitra Clubs , will be selected  to participate in a second cycle of training in Farmer’s 
Business Schools (FBS)  in order to reinforce their business cap acity, create or consolidate cooperatives and reinforce 
values chains . Each FBS will train 25 farmers, organised in cooperatives62. By investing in training on marketing 
techniques and access to finance  – which will also be supported by MAEP through an additional 100 FBS and by 
reaching out to MFI  through FNDA  to secure provision of micro -loans to trained cooperatives – , the project  will secure 
farmers’ livelihoods and income stream s, thereby reducing poverty, food insecurity and  climate change vulnerability. 
The strengthening of agri -businesses and climate -resilient farms, combined with the demonstration of the project’s 
economic benefits, through rigorous M&E, will also boost private sector’s willingn ess to invest in CRA and ICRM in the 
Ouémé Basin, by providing resources to the FNEC for climate -resilient projects, under Component 3. Finally, trade 
agreements between farmers, agri -businesses, and sellers of agri -products will be facilitated through org anizing match -
making municipal forums in the project sites.  
OUTPUT 2.1 Farmers and cooperatives’ income stream diversified, enhanced, and secured in the face of climate 
change  
As productivity improves under Component 1, and high -value products, including maize, shea, mango and cashew, 
become available for sale, fa rmers will be organised in cooperatives (or Farmer interest groups – FIGs), and capacitated 
through FBS to develop new income streams, and sell their processed, packaged products on the local and regional 
market, at best possible price. An innovative App – FarmTree App – will also be used to ensure climate -resilient farm 
plans that are cost -effective, profitable, while responding to the impacts of climate change; the App will also serve to 
demonstrate the economic benefits of sustainable land management and  CRA in order to incentivise private sector 
investments (under Output 2.2 and 3.2). As packaged, well -marketed products create an added -value, private income 
will increase, enabling re -investment in project activities. Support to smallholder farmers and co operatives,  particularly 
women and women’s cooperatives, will be provided though capacity building and technical assistance for accessing 
micro -credits that can be invested in CRA techniques, and equipment to increase the sale value of agriproducts.  
Wome n and women’s cooperatives will be supported with capacity development on financial management and 
business plan development.  
2.1.1 Increase income of 5,000 farmers through training  on business and marketing techniques and equipment using  
FAO farm busines s schools (FBS) methodology : 100 (2,500 farmers) FBS plus 100 (2,500 farmers) from MAEP  co-
financing . The activity will train 5,000 farmers. The training will take place on the 100 most -productive FFS ,  with  due 
consideration of gender considerations and ensuring that productivity criteria also take into account women’s multiple 
roles and time burden . FBS will be conducted by FFS facilitators, with the support of Master Trainers and external 
experts on busine ss and marketing management modules. FBS will be set up and farmers not yet organized in 
cooperative will be supported to set up cooperatives (approx. 100 cooperatives) around key value chains: mango, shea, 
cashew and maize. Cooperatives will be reinforced  and consolidated to be able to be autonomous and well equipped 
to face the market challenges. The learning programmes will be designed to boost the productivity and profitability of 
these high -value products, by developing business and marketing skills am ong cooperatives, supply and demand, 
income/expenditure book and operating account. Processing, packaging and storing equipment for shea, cashew, 
mango and maize will be provided to the cooperatives in need , with priority given to women’s cooperatives . Tra ining


---
*Page 56*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 53 
 
on processing, packaging, operational and financial feasibility, commercial negotiation, labeling and marketing of agri -
products will also be provided to increase product value on local, regional and international markets . Specific attention 
will be given on improving women’s capacity to add value to their products (e.g. shea butter by producing off -season 
or cassava flour ) to reduce their work burden through use of labour -saving techniques and technology and to develop 
their entrepreneurial capacity . Processing and storing interventions will not only help farmers boosting their costs and 
sales, but also protect agri -products against climate change impacts, like floods, heat, and pests.  
In addition to the establishment of cooperatives and the strengthe ning of the capacities of their members, the FIGs will 
be established to strengthen ties with the market and facilitate the marketing of products . Farmer Interest Groups 
(FIGs), i ndependent group of farmers with a shared goal and interest , will be selected  based on their demonstrated 
entrepreneurial capacity, and trained using the FAO/INRAE  (Institut National de Recherche pour l’Agriculture, 
l’Alimentation et l’E nvironnement ) Innovator Handbook which guides groups through the development of a business 
plan for their collective initiative. The handbook offers advice on consumer engagement, building markets, innovative 
finance, guarantees and certification, processing, packaging, logistics, formal registration of the group, advocacy and 
partnerships, input sup ply, and engagement with research. The idea behind this approach is that there is a diversity of 
market channels that can be pursued based on the identified products and markets (from own -consumption, to local 
markets, to national markets and to export). W illingness to buy OCRI products will be verified at the project start based 
on market analysis (see annex  19), summarized in  Table 2 ( SWOT assessme nt of selected key value chains). These 
FIGs will be trained to identify transparent intermediaries who can l ink them to export markets (e.g., organic juice 
producer in the south of Benin selling organic and fairtrade certified origin juice to the French Monoprix supermarket) 
as well as how to begin to develop these activities themselves. For those cooperatives t hat are most advanced, the 
project will support the hiring of a business coach‘ who can facilitate the cooperatives access to different markets and 
provide a marketing service to the farmers. This approach will effectively work like a business incubator as  this incubator 
could also offer seed financing for the most promising ideas that emerge from each round of training.  
FBS will be selected based on the following criteria: a)) FFS groups (or at least important number of members of the 
groups) which are al ready organized or connected with cooperatives or structured producer organizations; b) FFS 
groups which are producing the crop/tree included in the selected value chains and are willing and aware about the 
steps needed to sell products to the markets. Letters of interest to participate to the activities of the FFS have been 
received by cooperatives.  
2.1.2 Improve access to micro -credit and investments  for agriculture  (MAEP ) cofinance ). The 2,500 farmers trained 
under Activity 2.1.1 will also receive training on financial management for cooperatives, and developing business plans 
to boost their financial profits (through better financial management) and to address current barriers in acce ssing micro -
credits (see B.1 on barriers; as well as Annex 19 Section 3). This activity will improve farmers’ access to finance tools 
like micro -credit s or to access FNEC’s resources, under Component 3; these fund can  be invest ed in necessary 
equipment to boost their profitability, like processing equipment, storage, label for the products, a delivery truck, etc.  
The main microfinance institutions in Upper Oueme and Middle Oueme - Association for the Promotion of Community -
Based Savi ngs-Credit (P.E.B. Co -BETSHEDA) and NGO SIA N'SON Microfinance, Savings, Credits Advice – ensure d 
their availability to provide loans in supporting value chains of mango, cashew, shea and maize. In addition they will 
provide direct support to the project through the following se rvices:  a) provide expertise on credit products adapted to 
project beneficiaries;  b) facilitate the conditions for granting loans;  c) make credit managers available for awareness  
raising , orientation and training of beneficiaries.  
Access to Finance will be  facilitated by the FNDA and by Agence Territoriale du Developpement Agricole (ATDA). 
ATDA works with FNDA at the municipal level, to identify relevant projects that can receive agricultural micro -credits, 
and FNDA works closely with several MFI in Benin t o ensure credit access to relevant farmers and cooperatives  by ). 
A letter of commitment from FNDA  to cover 50% of OCRI’s farmers loans, ensure low interest rates on credit, and 
provide quality control over loan application  has been received in this regar ds. Please refer to Annex 2 Section 6 and 
8 for further details on FNDA and ATDA  as well as Annex 19 Section 3.  Specific attention will be given to the possibility 
of micro -credit targeted at women and women’s groups that provides innovative and alternati ve solutions to overcoming 
the lack of collaterals. financial training modules will be shared under the Finance Facility of OCRI platform, under 
Activity 3.1.2. A women -specific module will be developed to enable women’s access to credit and buy equipment to 
support their activities in the processing of high -value nuts and crops.  
In addition, among the 150 farmer groups which set up VSLA (see activity 1.2.3), the OCRI project will carry out an 
evaluation in order to retain the most efficient. Assessment criteria will be based on  operational (organizational 
aspects) and financial performance s. 
1) Operationa l performance s - analysis of the functioning of VSLAs: a) application of disciplinary measures 
(fines); b) mastery of roles and responsibilities  by the members of the VSLA office; c) regularity of holding 
weekly meetings; d) quality of recording of financial data in the  VSLA register by the secretary general; e)


---
*Page 57*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 54 
 
stability of the office (number of members having left the office); f) cash management  by the treasurer, g) 
management capacity; h) procedures for making decisions during meetings.  
Financial performances: a) total amount purchases by all members during the cycle; b) total amount of assistance 
provided to members during the cycle; c) balance in the solidarity fund during the cycle; d) total amount of credits 
granted to members during the cycle; e) credit repayment rate.  
 
2.1.3  Train facilitators (selected educated young) and national/local climate change experts (from relevant institut ions 
eg MCVDD, MAEP) on the use of assessment and/or monitoring Instruments for Resilience  ( TreeFarm App are the 
identified tools).  
The activity will train selected educated young facilitators  and national/local climate change experts (from relevant 
institutions eg MCVDD, MAEP) on the use of assessment and/or monitoring Instrum ents for Resilience ( TreeFarm App 
are the identified tools).  
The FarmTree App enables  climate -resilient agri -planning . It offers cost -benefits simulation of combining various crops 
and trees on the fields, based on climate change and agro -ecological conditions, and thereby  enable s a more efficient 
and profitable agriculture . The App will help farmers turn their field into a c limate -resilient, high -profit landscape. The 
facilitators will train entrepreneurs and cooperatives on resilient farm planning methods (Activity 2.1.1); they will also 
use the App to provide on -the-field advises to individual farmers, who search ways to im prove their profit . Moreover, 
through the App, the facilitators will collect evidence of the economic and environmental benefits of OCRI’s 
interventions. These data will inform the development of information products geared towards the private sector, to 
incentivize investments in ICRM in the Oueme Basin (activity 2.2.1) and private sector contributions to climate -resilient 
projects (Output 3.2).  
2 Facilitators per target municipality and 20 national and local experts from MCVDD and MAEP will be trained and 
equipped to use these assessment and M&E tools. Please refer to the feasibility study section 8.1.2 for selection criteria 
of the facilitators.  
OUTPUT 2.2 Private sector incentivized to invest in climate resilient agriculture  and resilient mana gement techniques 
in Ouémé Basin  
This Output aims to boost private and public sector investments in OCRI activity – to secure long -term climate -resilient 
management in the Upper and Middle Ouémé, thereby reducing climate change vulnerability – by demonstra ting the 
significant environmental and economic impacts of CRA, creating an exchange platform for farmers and sellers to 
discuss market opportunities and demands, and facilitate trade contracts.  
2.2.1 D isseminate information products packaged for private sector to demonstrate the socio -economic benefits of 
combined waterworks, climate resilient agriculture  and agroforestry ; this will target  private sector institutions such as 
investors  and credit organisations , processing compagnies or buyers of agri -produ cts, in the field of agriculture . 
Information generated by the project  – including  data collected through the FarmTree App (activity 2.1.3) and the 
project’s M&E under A ctivity 3.1. 1 – will be specially packaged (by a communication specialist) for the private sector 
organizations, including MFIs, agri -businesses, private donors and investors. Potential investors will be identified with 
the help of MAEP, under Activity 2.2.1. Information brochures, flyers, and book lets will then be developed and 
distributed via mail and email.  The data from the rigorous M&E on land restoration and the results from OCRI project 
will be carefully collected, compiled and shared via the OCRI platform, set up under 3.1. Knowledge produc ts will be 
packaged for specific target groups and shared to relevant stakeholders via email, brochures, OCRI platform, etc. The 
purpose of this activity is to incentive private sector investments in CRA in the Oueme Basin, by demonstrating the 
project’s b enefits especially on value chains (mango, cashew, shea and maize) for which private sector has an 
investment interest; it will also convince MFI that loans supporting ICRM and CRA are profitable.  
2.2.2 Organise municipal forums to connect female and male  farmers and small businesses to local and regional buyers  
(MAEP cofinance) . The municipal forum will be designed to include a match making function that helps  all stakeholders 
in the forum find the best business match . Relevant buyers will be identified u nder Activity 3.1.1  using existing sale 
networks and connected to farmers through the OCRI platform. The bi-annual municipal forums will be opportunities 
for producers to showcase their innovative climate -resilient production practices, and their resilien t products, as well as 
to conclude trade agreements  between farmers and buyers of agri -products , or receive new demands for alternative 
products from the buyers, based on market demands . Successful farmers from the UNEP SAP project in the 
municipalities of  Djougou (same project site than OCRI) and Dassa -Zoume (close to Glazoue), will be invited to 
participate to the forum and showcase their agricultural methods and products. These farmers will be invited to OCRI -
organized municipal forums to demonstrate the ir climate -resilient agricultural techniques. Selection criteria for SAP 
farmer field will be: implementation of at least 3 new climate -resilient agricultural practices; visible land improvement


---
*Page 58*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 55 
 
(e.g. reduced erosion); 1 sustainable irrigation scheme in pl ace; +20% agricultural productivity; and +10% income.  
Letters of engagement from buyers interested in purchasing OCRI crops have been received . 
 
Component 3: An enabling institutional and financial  environment established to promote and upscale climate -
resilient management in Benin’s  Basins  
To further  root the OCRI approach in the Ouémé Basin, and upscale it to other sites, Component 3 will support the 
establishment of a multi -stakeholder coordination mechanism and platform. The platform, managed  by MCVDD, will 
coordinate the ICRM works. A communication strategy including newsletters and events will be designed for the 
platform, which will also provide an online portal where knowledge products such as training material developed under 
Component 1 & 2, and data demonstrating the benefits of project’s interventions, will be uploaded.  Information 
generated by the project – including  data collected through the FarmTree App (activity 2.1.3) and the project’s M&E 
under Activity 3.1.1 – will be speciall y packaged (by a communication specialist) for the private sector organizations, 
including MFIs and agri -businesses. These partners will be selected respectively based on their belonging to the 
ALAFIA for MFIs and Benin Chamber of Commerce for agri -busines ses. A long -term strategy will be designed to ensure 
the platform’s continuation beyond the project, especially to continue ICRM efforts in the Oueme Basin.  Through the 
platform, regulatory frameworks will be developed, and capacity building implemented f or local extension officers.  This 
will root the OCRI approach within all development processes implemented in its target municipalities. To combine 
institutional strengthening with availability of finance, a roadmap to expand FNEC’s resources, which are c urrently 
made up of green -taxes, fees and government fund, among others, will be developed. The roadmap will also detail how 
FNEC can use its resources to implement projects (who can apply and what projects are eligible) to ensure FNEC 
specifically support s climate change interventions. The goal is to unlock finance to implement ecosystem restoration 
and CRA in the Oueme Basin in the long -term. Therefore, FNEC will be linked to OCRI platform, as its key financial 
mechanism to implement climate -resilient ini tiatives. Together with the other communication products and events, the 
platform will also be used to raise awareness on the importance of a gender -responsive institutional and financial 
environment and to promote women’s role and participation.  
 
To ensu re the long -term financial replenishment, FNEC’s capacity will be enhanced; as DAE, building FNEC’s capacity 
is key to unlock future climate finance in Benin. Finally, to ensure the continuation and upscale of the ICRM approach, 
awareness -raising events wi ll be conducted; the project will also reach out to other Basin Authorities in Benin to 
showcase OCRI project’s impacts. Indeed, Benin includes several basins: Oueme, Mono, Niger, and Volta. The Volta 
and Niger  basins are transboundary and there fore manage d by several countries through an inter -African agency.  
- The National Committee of Mono Basin is a recent  entity established in May 2021  
- The Niger Basin Authority is a multi -country institution, created in 1964. It is in charge of integrated development  
planning in the Niger Basin  
- The Volta Basin Authority is a multi -country institution.  
 
OUTPUT 3.1 OCRI project  institutionalise d through a multi -stakeholder platform, regulatory frameworks and capacity 
building  
There is currently no coordination mechanism that allows concerted efforts to sustainably manage Benin’s basins and 
to share knowledge and best practices for upscaling resilient land, water and agricultural management in watershed 
landscapes. The OCRI mult i-stakeholder platform will thus be established to connect all relevant stakeholders  engaged 
in land planning in the Ouémé Basin. This includes representatives from MCVDD FNDA and MAEP (committed to 
support OCRI through signed cofinance letters), especiall y their local extension services for agriculture, waterworks 
and forest management; the Oueme Basin Authority (OBA); and FNEC (for the on -granting facility – also committed to 
support OCRI through signed letter). These stakeholders play a key role in local  development planning; they will 
therefore be capacitated – through training and the development of local adaptation plans – for climate -resilient 
management in the Oueme Basin. This will support the replication of OCRI’s approach beyond the five target 
municipalities. To ensure the platform’s continuation beyond OCRI, the project will support obtention of a legal status 
for the platform as a decentralised governmental structure. A sustainability (financial) strategy will also be developed 
under  OCRI.  
The platform design will include  a communication strategy to ensure the  dissemin ation of  knowledge , including on 
gender aspects, to support long -term ICRM in the Ouémé Basin, and beyond ; and a sustainability strategy to support 
its continuation. The platform w ill be managed by MCVDD, with FAO support, in terms of capacity building for project 
coordination and on -the -ground implementation. FNEC will also be consulted to design the platform and define its 
specific role for financing, designing and implementing c limate change projects.  Women and women’s organizations 
engagement in the platform will also be proactively promoted.  
Another key step to ensure long -term governmental support to implement ICRM in the Ouémé Basin is to formally 
institutionalise the appro ach through local regulations and ensure their implementation; and to build local capacity for


---
*Page 59*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 56 
 
implementing ICRM. These efforts will be conducted through the OCRI platform: members will be trained on climate 
change adaptation planning and participate to th e revision of key development plans for mainstreaming ICRM. This is 
a pathway to ensure post -project’s support through future public funding that target development initiatives in the 
Ouémé Basin. This, complemented with the strengthening of private financ e investments in OCRI (see Output 3.2), will 
support the project’s exit strategy, as well as its replication in neighbouring areas and beyond.  
3.1.1 Establish and activate  the OCRI platform  ensuring adequate and meaningful participation of women and women’s 
organizations at local and national level . The platform has three key functions: i) coordinate the ICRM  interventions in 
the 5 target areas in coordination with the PMU ; ii) support the revision of key regulatory frameworks; and iii) build 
capaci ty for climate -resilient management in the Oueme. Moreover, the platform  will disseminate  new knowledge on 
the benefits from ICRM in basins , thereby contributing to the project’s awareness -raising interventions (under Output 
3.3) and include a sustainabili ty strategy for long -term implementation and financing of OCRI  (see Output 3.2 ). 
 
The platform will be managed by MCVDD as EE, and include municipal representatives of the five target communes, 
as well as extension services from forest department, agricult ure and waterworks; and the OBA. Their main 
responsibilities will be to coordinate the tree plantation, waterworks  as other hard and soft anti -erosion infrastructure,  
and land restoration interventions in the 5 project sites (during the project) and beyo nd these target areas afterwards 
(e.g. following the guidance of the revised Oueme Master Plan). For this, they will receive technical support from FAO 
and training on gender -responsive climate change adaptation, ICRM in basin context, and gender -responsiv e resilient 
local planning. The design of the role, responsibility, legal status and composition of the platform will be done with 
MCVDD. To ensure smooth implementation during and after the project, FAO will provide technical support. The 
technical suppor t will also enable local forest agents to implement the revised PDL (activity 3.1.3) and the OBA to 
implement the strengthened SDAGE (activity 3.1.2).  
 
A communication strategy for the platform will be developed to facilitate interactions between the platf orm members, 
disseminate project -related information, best practices for CRA, raise awareness of climate change, and the socio -
economic benefits of ICRM applied to basin areas, and organise  the Annual Symposium  (3.3.2) . Best communication 
channels and pack aging will be identified through a consultative process with communities and stakeholders. It will 
guide activities  under Output 3. 3 
 
The platform  will include a website (online portal) hosted by MCVDD, and newsletter will be sent on a regular basis  to 
share relevant communication and knowledge information about the OCRI project to stakeholders in the public and 
private sector. Finally, a sustainability strategy will be developed to confirm the ma nagement of the platform at project’s 
end. It is envisioned that MCVDD will fully take over, and that the government will cover the running/ operational cost 
of the platform. These costs could be covered through FNEC’s financial resources, as the project w ill contribute to 
increase FNEC’s fund under Output 3.2. A detailed financial plan for OCRI platform, along with role and responsibilities 
of key institutions including MCVDD, FNEC, FNDA and OBA, will be prepared under this activity.  
 
3.1.2 Implement  regional and local climate -resilient development plans in the Oueme Basin to ensure long-term 
investment in   low carbon integrated climate -resilient management  (ICRM)  . The Ouémé Master Plan (SDAGE) will be 
the legal tool that institutionalise s an ICRM approac h in the whole Ouémé area. It will be revised using a participatory 
approach. This will be done through the OCRI platform: OBA will work with FAO, MCVDD and municipality 
representatives to improve and mainstream ICRM into the SAGE. these improvements will address the gaps identified 
in the FS (see Section 6.3), and the strengthened SAGE will be implemented by OBA (which capacity are strengthened 
under 3.1.1) . Particular attention will be made to provide an integrated approach that considers and reduces climate 
change  impacts from upstream to downstream areas of the Basin. The strengthened SDAGE  will serve as the umbrella 
under which project activities linked to tree plantation and restoration of the riverbanks (Output 1.1) will take place  and 
continue beyond the project. The coordination of these interventions is supported under 3.1.1.  
 
Moreover, ICRM will be mainstreamed into the PDL of the 5 target municipa lities. Climate -change management is 
currently under -considered in these plans . The existing LDP will be revised to mainstream  the ICRM approach 
promoted under the  Ouémé Master plan  to guide future (post -project) local governmental investments in the Ouémé  
Basin , including reforestation and strengthening of the Oueme riverbanks . It will provide guidance for waterworks (and 
their maintenance) and other soft and hard adaptation technologies , including tree nurseries and tree  plantations  to 
protect river banks  –  needed to strengthen the Ouémé river banks at the municipality level, reduce flood risks and 
improve water access. The plans will be developed at project’s end, based on project’s results, lessons learned and 
best practices.  The will be done using a pa rticipatory approach inclusive of local communities’ interests. Again, this will 
be ensured using the platform as a coordination tool to bring together representatives of the municipalities, extension 
services and providing outreach to representatives of t he target communities in the five municipalities. For example, 
the revised plans will ensure no conflicts are created or exacerbated around access to resources between farmers and 
herders.


---
*Page 60*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 57 
 
 
The implementation of the plans – including reforestation along t he Oueme riverbanks by local forest services and 
communities – will also be coordinated under the OCRI platform, beyond the project. To support this, members of the 
platform – OBA and extension officers – will be trained; the training will be extended to m embers of other basins’ 
authorities (Volta, Mono and Niger) in order to support project upscale in other basins of Benin.  
 
3.1.3 Implement rigorous M&E on land restoration in the Ouémé Basin . Staff members of MCVDD and MAEP, as well 
as extension officers from the forest department in the target municipalities – all members of the OCRI platform – will 
receive technical support from FAO to conduct rigorous gender -responsive M&E of the impacts o f tree plantation among 
the Oueme riverbanks. Moreover, they will be capacitated to implement the SHARP tool (or similar resilience 
assessment approaches) during target training sessions. A field survey will take place afterwards to assess changes 
in the r esilience and adaptive capacity levels of smallholders in the selected municipalities, resulting from the project’s 
interventions.  Staff members of MCVDD and MAEP who will receive technical support to monitor the impact of tree 
planting and riverbank rest oration will be selected based on: (i) their effective involvement on forest and/or agriculture 
extension, (ii) familiarity with at least two of the five targeted communes, (iii) ability to communicated in the local 
language, (iv) participation of women wi ll be highly encouraged.  Finally, extension officers will be capacitated to provide 
advises on climate -resilient agriculture and adaptation to farmers living in their commune. To ensure this, training will 
be provided and ToRs of the extension workers wil l be adjusted to include financial/business/climate change continued 
support to the communities. Extension officers who will be capacitated to provided advises to farmers, will be selected 
based on: (i) their field experience on climate resilient agricultu re, (ii) their duty station, which must be in one of five 
beneficiary communes (Copargo, Djougou, Glazoué, Zanghanado, Zgbodome), (iii) priority will be given to female 
extension officers.  
 
OUTPUT 3.2 Strengthened FNEC’s capacity to ensure continuous suppo rt to climate -resilient farming in the Oueme 
Basin  
Under the OCRI platform, GCF fund will be used to strengthen FNEC’s capacity to capture climate finance and to 
design, finance and implement climate change -related projects will be strengthened. Moreover, FNEC’s fund 
(cofinance) will be used to finance climate -resilient micro -projects. These grants will be accessible to OCRI farmers 
and cooperatives through a call for micro -project proposal (based on current existing procedure within FNEC to call for 
micro -project proposals). FAO will work with FNEC to develop a project selection ‘check -list’, which ensure the selection 
of projects aligned with OCRI approach and gender -responsiveness; FAO will also strengthen FNEC’s capacity to 
monitor the implementation of these micro -projects on the ground, produce detailed progress reports, and ensure 
financial transparency; training will also include  gender -responsive budgeting.  Finally, a replenishment strategy for 
FNEC (to increase its current resources, some of which  will contribute to covering the operational costs of OCRI 
platform post -project) will also be developed to enable the continuation of climate -resilient agriculture and value chains 
beyond the project’s lifetime.  
 
3.2.1 Develop a robust financial strategy  for FNEC .    
A complete financial strategy  to boost FNEC’s resources and sharpen its focus on supporting climate change -related 
projects, will be developed with the FNEC and MCVDD. This strategy  will include:  
- a list of criteria (or checklist) that projects submitted to the FNEC must aligned with; criteria will ensure the prevalence 
of CC concerns in selected projects.  
- eligible proponents.  
- financial roadmap, with a view to increase FNEC’s available resour ces to implement climate change -related projects, 
including disbursement modalities (at the moment, FNEC only provides grants but the possibility to add loans will be 
explored).  
The financial roadmap will include pathways to increase the current green -taxes base that provides funding to FNEC, 
to leverage investments from the private sector (which will already be incentivized under Output 2.2), and to develop 
‘bankable’ projects that can attract resources from international climate funds, including the Adap tation Fund (AF) and 
GCF, for which FNEC is a national accredited entity. Access to these funds will also be enhanced under Activity 3.2.2.  
Other pathways to mobilise climate funds at national and international level to replenish the Facility and ensure t he 
facility remains operational to support ecosystem restoration and CRA initiatives will be explored.  
The Roadmap will also ensure that climate change resilience remains the main focus of FNEC (which currently 
focuses on waste management and recycling pro jects).  
 
The project is committed to verifying the institutional possibility of collaboration between the two funds FNEC and 
FNDA. Although each fund has its independence, a synergy between the two funds is envisaged to allow reciprocal 
advantages by shar ing the experience and capacities of each other. This could be an avenue to explore to increase 
the resources available to the FNEC, particularly in terms of private sector involvement, expansion of access to credit


---
*Page 61*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 58 
 
 
63 Please note that activity 3.2.2 and related indicator only targets the capacity building of FNEC, not the actual approval of a Funding 
Proposal submitted by FNEC.  
 
65 Note that the project will make use of existing community -based radio which are accessibl e to OCRI farmers (wide outreach int ernet  
target areas) and use appropriate local languages. This will be determined during the project implementation by the communica tion expert  in the environmental sector, opening up of the possibility of financing projects that use an integrated agricultural -
environmental approach.  
3.2.2 Build  FNEC’s capacity to design, select, implement and monitor climate change -related projects   
This capacity building will be supported by FAO.  
GCF fund will be used to provide technical assistance and build FNEC’s capacity to design bankable climate change 
projects, which can attract investments from private sector institutions (because of their demonstrated returns), or 
receive funding from nati onal/ international funds and donors. At the end of the project, FNEC will have designed at 
least one fully-fledged Funding Proposal, with high potential to receive funding from international donors . GCF fund  will 
support FNEC to develop such proposal (capacity building) and submit it to the most adequate fund by project’s end63. 
Finally, training on gender -responsive budgeting will be provided to FNEC’s members to ensure  the use of fund will 
take into account women -specific needs and priorities . 
 
3.2.3 Provide finance to 3 micro -projects that contribute to climate change adaptation and ecosystem restoration in the 
Oueme Basin  – to the benefits of small -scale farmers (FNEC co -financing)64 
This activity will be funded by FNEC. A call for proposal wil l be launched by FNEC (using its current procedures for 
appel a projets ) and farmers’ associations and cooperatives, trained in the FBS, will have the opportunity to submit 
proposals for micro -projects that focus on climate -resilient agriculture and ecosys tem restoration and/or protection in 
the Oueme Basin. The call for proposal will be launched based on current FNEC’s procedures  and successful micro -
projects will be selected by FNEC, based on the check -list that will be developed at project onset with FAO  
support (developed under 3.2.1) . The check -list will ensure the selection of projects aligned with OCRI approach, with 
a strong climate change adaptation and ecosystem restoration angle, and gender -responsiveness ; FAO will also 
strengthen FNEC’s capacity to monitor the implementation of these micro -projects on the ground, produce detailed 
progress reports, and ensure financial transparency.   
 
OUTPUT 3.3 Awareness of ICRM in basins’ benefits raised among farmers and public and private institutions  
There is limited knowledge in Benin of how to sustainably manage basin areas, while providing socio -economic benefits 
from upstream to downstream communities, and reducing climate change vulnerability. A lack of understanding of the 
environmental and socio -economic benefits of ICRM – which mixes waterworks with CRA and resilient land 
management adapted to upstream and middle basin areas – impairs investments opportunities from farmers, public 
and private institutions, in project interventions. Under this Ou tput, and based on the communication strategy of the 
OCRI platform, all training material, knowledge and best practices generated through the project and captured under 
various activities (2.1.3, 3.1.3) will be used to develop sensitization campaigns on th e environmental and socio -
economic benefits of ICRM. In addition, field visits to OCRI project sites will be organised for Volta, Niger and Couffo 
Basin Authorities in Benin. This will support the upscale of OCRI in new areas. Moreover, innovative adaptati on 
practices will be encouraged to further enhance the climate -resilience of farmers, and attract private sector investments 
in climate -resilient agriculture .  
 
3.3.1 Organise knowledge dissemination events and products on OCRI  including  gender mainstreaming . This will 
include:  
These events will include: - Farmers’ field visits for neighbouring communities , during project’s year 4 to 6,  to showcase 
OCRI’s  results ; 
- Visits of other basin’s authorities (Mono, Volta and Niger) in the Oueme Basin to showcase: i) on -the-ground project 
impacts; ii) operationalisation and functions of the OCRI platform; iii) revised regulatory framework for climate -resilient 
watershed manage ment,  
- Radio shows to broadcast information about climate change related risks in Upper to Lower Ouémé regions, including 
how mismanagement in the Upper and Middle Ouémé can increase risks of erosion and floods downstream65; 
information about SAP, OCRI pr ojects and other similar initiative in the Ouémé Basin will be shared, as well as the 
lessons learned and best practices from these projects. The information will be prepared and packaged based on the 
communication strategy developed under Activity 3.1. 1. Radio hosts will be trained and, if possible, the radio hosts 
trained under the SAP project will be used to broadcast information in the Ouémé Basin. Radio programs will be 
broadcast in local  languages of the targeted municipalities as follows: Copargo (Taneka, Dendi, Lopa and Solla 
languages); Djougou (Dandi language); Glazoue (Mahi, Idatcha languages); Zagnanado (Fon, Mahi languages); 
Zogbodomey (Mahi, Fon languages). The radios and languages will be selected based on the following criteria: a)  
coverage capacity in the municipalities of the project (radio coverage); b) accessibility capacity from the whole


---
*Page 62*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 59 
 
population involved in the project (radio access); c) understanding capacity, to include all communities and groups 
involved in the project ( languages).  
- Knowledge products to raise awareness of CCA in basins for governmental institutions  including other basin 
authorities , agro -businesses and cooperatives, and smallholders in the whole Ouémé Basin. The products will be 
packaged adequately for the various audience – policy -makers, businesses and farmers – following the communication 
strategy developed under Activity 3.1. 1.  and also include specific messaging, lessons learned, best practice and results 
related to gender equality and the implemen tation of the GAP  (Annex 8). The may include flyer, briefs for policy -makers, 
posters with simple design . 
 
The selection process  of the farmers that will participate in field visit will be based on the best performing FFS / FBS 
groups, in terms of field r esults (quantity and quality of best practices and technologies adopted) and demonstrated 
capacity in the management of VSLAs and cooperative activities. Lead farmers of these groups will be selected for 
these visits.  
 
3.3.2 Organise OCRI Annual Symposium.  The Symposium will be organised jointly by MCVDD and MAEP. The 
Symposium will be an opportunity for agribusinesses, entrepreneurs, and cooperatives (those trained under Output 
2.1) to showcase their innovative climate -resilient practices and their benefit s. During this participative symposium, 
participants will be invited to present project ideas to improve their productivity and the profitability of their business, in 
the context of climate change. Presenters will be selected based on the following criter ia: a) quality of the innovative 
climate -resilience practice; b) potential benefits of projects, in terms of productivity and the profitability; c) market 
potential of the value chain.   
Authorities of other basins in Benin will be invited to attend the sy mposium. Benin includes several basins: Oueme, 
Mono, Niger, and Volta. The Volta and Niger basins are transboundary and therefore managed by several countries 
through an inter -African agency.  
- The National Committee of Mono Basin is a recent entity establ ished in May 2021  
- The Niger Basin Authority is a multi -country institution, created in 1964. It is in charge of integrated development 
planning in the Niger Basin  
- The Volta Basin Authority is a multi -country institution.  
Representatives of these 3 Basi n Authorities will be invited to attend OCRI symposium  
 
Table 6: funding source and executing entities of OCRI . References in this table to MCVDD or MAEP are to the 
Government of Benin acting through MCVDD or MAEP, respectively . 
COMPONENT 1:   Low carbon climate Resilient Crop production enhanced and Ecosystem services restored in the 
Upper and Middle Ouéme  
Output  Activity  Sub-Activity  Funder  Executing 
Entity  
Output 1.1  Waterworks and 
tree plantation  to protect 
riverbanks and secure water 
access  1.1.1. Build water harvesting 
and retention infrastructures 
(target of 680 ha irrigated 
land plus 1,320 ha with 
MAEP cofinancing ) 1.1.1.1 Construction 
surface water storage 
structures or harvesting 
structures (Small earth 
dams, water rising 
structures, etc.)  GCF   FAO  
 
1.1.1. Build water harvesting 
and retention infrastructures 
(target of 680 ha irrigated 
land plus 1,320 ha with 
MAEP cofinancing ) 1.1.1.2 Rehabilitate 23 old 
surface water collection 
structures  GCF   FAO  
 
1.1.1. Build water harvesting 
and retention infrastructures 
(target of 680 ha irrigated 
land plus 1,320 ha with 
MAEP cofiancing ) 1.1.1.3 Development of 
small irrigated  perimeters 
with full water control  GCF   FAO  
 
1.1.1. Build water harvesting 
and retention infrastructures 
(target of 680 ha irrigated 
land plus 1,320 ha with 
MAEP cofinancing ) 1.1.1.4 Development for 
the protection of water 
sources (river, head of 
streams, artesian 
boreholes, etc.)  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 63*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 60 
 
 
1.1.1. Build water harvesting 
and retention infrastructures 
(target of 680 ha irrigated 
land plus 1,320 ha with 
MAEP cofinancing ) 1.1.1.5 Support for 
waterworks guidance  GCF   FAO  
 1.1.1. Build water harvesting 
and retention infrastructures 
(target of 680 ha irrigated 
land plus 1,320 ha with 
MAEP cofinancing)  1.1.1.6 Set up 1,320 ha of 
irrigated land in Glazoue 
and Djougou  MAEP  MAEP  
 1.1.1. Build water harvesting 
and retention infrastructures 
(target of 680 ha irrigated 
land plus 1,320 ha with 
MAEP cofinancing)  1.1.1.7 S ecure 
government support to 
coinvest in waterworks  MAEP  MAEP  
 
1.1.2  Strengthen degraded 
river banks and restore land 
with tree (target of 5,000 ha 
plus  4,000 ha with MAEP 
cofinancing ) 1.1.2.1 Conduct detailed 
biodiversity analysis in 
Upper and Middle Ouémé 
to identify site specific 
locally -relevant and 
resilient tree species - 
conduct technical and 
hydrological studies to 
identify best site for the 
micro -dams  GCF   MCVDD  
 
1.1.2  Strengthen degraded 
river banks and restore land 
with tree (target of 5,000 ha 
plus  4,000 ha with MAEP 
cofinancing ) 1.1.2.2  Set up 5 
community tree nurseries 
and provide technical 
support to produce high -
quality seedlings  GCF   MCVDD  
 
1.1.2  Strengthen degraded 
river banks and restore land 
with tree (target of 5,000 ha 
plus 4,000 ha with MAEP 
cofinancing ) 1.1.2.3. Plant 5,000 ha of 
trees along degraded river 
banks and fields  GCF   MCVDD  
 
1.1.2  Strengthen  degraded 
river banks and restore land 
with tree (target of 5,000 ha 
plus  4,000 ha with MAEP 
cofinancing ) 1.1.2.4 Plant additional 
4,000ha of trees in 
Glazoué, Zagnando and 
Zogbodomey  MAEP   MAEP  
 
1.1.2  Strengthen  degraded 
river banks and restore land 
with tree (target of 5,000 ha 
plus  4,000 ha with MAEP 
cofinancing ) 1.1.2.5 FAO provides 
Technical support to 
produce high -quality tree 
seedlings to enhance rural 
community resilience to 
climate change.  FAO  FAO  
OUTPUT 1.2: 2 5,250 farmers 
capacitated to implement 
climate resilient agriculture , 
agro-forestry and sustainable 
land management over 95,000 
ha  1.2.1 Train 15 Master 
Trainers and Facilitators 
(women and men)  1.2.1.1 Develop training 
courses  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 64*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 61 
 
 
1.2.1  Train 15 Master 
Trainers and Facilitators 
(women and men)  1.2.1.2 Select 15 Master 
trainers to train and 
capacity/ skills 
assessment  GCF   FAO  
 
1.2.1  Train 15 Master 
Trainers and Facilitators 
(women and men)  1.2.1.3. Implement 4 x 1 -
week training sessions  GCF   FAO  
 
1.2.2. Training of 250 
Facilitators (at least 40% 
women)  1.2.2.1 Develop  training 
curriculum and modules 
on CRA; agro -forestry; 
sustainable land 
management (with focus 
on river banks)  GCF   FAO  
 
1.2.2. Training of 250 
Facilitators (at least 40% 
women)  1.2.2.2 Organise 10 
training of facilitators 
sessions of a 5 -month 
duration, to accommodate 
25 facilitators per session 
(for a total of 250 
facilitators trained)  GCF   FAO  
 
1.2.3 Implement CRA, 
including agroforestry, to 
enhance agricultural 
productivity under climate 
change  and reduce 
emissions. .  1.2.3.1 Set up 650 FFS 
and select  training 
beneficiaries in areas not 
covered by MEAP; or 
beyond the MAEP project 
period. Each FFS will 
include 20 training 
sessions and involve 25 
farmers (at least 40% 
women)  GCF   FAO  
 
1.2.3 Implement CRA, 
including agroforestry, to 
enhance agricultural  
productivity under climate 
change  and reduce 
emissions. .  1.2.3.2 Technical support, 
coaching and supervision 
to the implementation of 
650 FFS  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 65*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 62 
 
 
1.2.3 Implement CRA, 
including agroforestry, to 
enhance agricultural 
productivity under climate 
change  and reduce 
emissions. .  1.2.3.3 Provide training to 
additional farmers in 
Glazoué, Djougou, 
Zagnando and 
Zogbodomey  MAEP   MAEP  
 
1.2.4 Increase access of 
adapted quality seeds and 
plant propagation material  1.2.4.1 Rehabilitate/build 
and operationalise 1 
nursery per target 
municipality  GCF   MCVDD   
 
1.2.4 Increase access of 
adapted quality seeds and 
plant propagation material  1.2.4.2 Organise and 
support 1 seed producer 
group per municipality  GCF   MCVDD  
 
1.2.4 Increase access of 
adapted quality seeds and 
plant propagation material  1.2.4.3 Train technicians 
and farmers to collect, 
handle and dispatch shea 
seeds and to produce 
seedlings.   GCF   MCVDD  
  COMPONENT 2: Climate -resilient and gender -sensitive value chains, supporting farmers’ livelihoods in the Upper 
and Middle Ouémé  
OUTPUT 2.1:  Farmers and 
cooperatives’ income stream 
diversified, enhanced, and 
secured in the face of climate 
change  2.1.1 Increase income of 
5,000 farmers thro ugh 
training on business and 
marketing techniques and 
equipment using FAO  farm 
business schools (FBS) 
methodology (100 FBS plus 
100 from MAEP cofinancing ) 2.1.1.1 Train 2,500 
farmers organized in 
agribusinesses and 
cooperatives – including 
33% women.  Eac h FBS 
will include 20 training 
sessions and involve 25 
farmers.  GCF   FAO  
 
2.1.1 Increase income of 
5,000 farmers through 
training on business and 
marketing techniques and 
equipment using FAO  farm 
business schools (FBS) 
methodology (100 FBS plus 
100 from MAEP cofinancing ) 2.1.1.2 FBS coached and 
supervised: coaching, 
reporting, monitoring & 
evaluation process, by a 
group of local focal points 
(FBS experts); 1 month 
per FFS, funded by the 
FBS funder  GCF   FAO  
 
2.1.1 Increase income of 
5,000 farmers through 
training on business and 
marketing techniques and 
equipment using FAO  farm 
business schools (FBS) 
methodology (100 FBS plus 
100 from MAEP cofinancing ) 2.1.1.3 Provide at least 15 
small processing/ 
packaging/ storing units to 
cooperatives  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 66*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 63 
 
 
2.1.1 Increase income of 
5,000 farmers through 
training on business and 
marketing techniques and 
equipment using FAO  farm 
business schools (FBS) 
methodology (100 FBS plus 
100 from MAEP cofinancing)  2.1.1.4 Train and equip 
additional cooperatives for 
post-harvest, processing, 
storing and sale of 
agriproducts in Glazoue, 
Zogbodomey, Djougou 
and Zagnanado  MAEP   MAEP  
 
2.1.2 Improve access to 
micro -credit and investments 
for agriculture  2.1.2.1 Develop training 
material addressing 
current barriers to credit 
access  GCF   FAO  
 
2.1.2 Improve access to 
micro -credit and investments 
for agriculture  2.1.2.2 Organise 5 training 
sessions for each FBS to 
train 2,500 farmers  GCF   FAO  
 
2.1.2 Improve access to 
micro -credit and investments 
for agriculture  2.1.2.3 Establish Village 
Savings and Loans 
Associations to foster low -
threshold small loan 
provision  GCF   FAO  
 
2.1.2 Improve access to 
micro -credit and investments 
for agriculture  2.1.2.4 Improve access to 
financial services for 
farmers in Glazoue and 
Djougou  MAEP  MAEP  
 
2.1.3 Train facilitators 
(selected educated young) 
and national/local climate 
change experts (from 
relevant institutions eg 
MCVDD, MAEP) on the use 
of  assessment and/or 
monitoring Instruments for 
Resilience (FarmTree App 
are the identified tools) .  2.1.3.1 Select 10 
facilitators (2 per target 
municipality) and 20 
experts from MCVDD and 
MAEP (national and 
municipal services) to be 
trained on the tools  GCF   FAO  
 
2.1.3 Train facilitators 
(selected educated young) 
and national/local climate 
change experts (from 
relevant institutions eg 
MCVDD, MAEP) on the use 
of  assessment and/or 
monitoring Instruments for 
Resilience (FarmTree App 
are the identified tools) .  2.1.3. 2 Equip them and 
train facilitators through 1 
x 5-day training session in 
Cotonou  GCF   FAO  
OUTPUT 2.2:   Private sector 
incentivized to invest in climate 
resilient agriculture  and 
resilient management 
techniques in Ouémé Basin  2.2.1 Disseminate 
information products 
packaged for private sector, 
and organise field visits to 
demonstrate the socio -
economic benefits of 
waterworks, CRA and 
agroforestry  2.2.1.1 Develop 
information products 
packaged for private 
stakeholders and finance 
institutions  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 67*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 64 
 
 
2.2.1 Disseminate 
information products 
packaged for private sector, 
and organise field visits to 
demonstrate the socio -
economic benefits of 
waterworks, CRA and 
agroforestry  2.2.1.2 Disseminate 
financial products via the 
OCRI platform, flyers and 
booklets distributed, etc.  GCF   FAO  
 2.2.1 Disseminate 
information products 
packaged for private sector, 
and organise field visits to 
demonstrate the socio -
economic benefits of 
waterworks, CRA and 
agroforestry  2.2.1.3 Field visit in each 
project municipality for 
private stakeholders 
(including MFI, wholesaler, 
export companies, etc.) to 
showcase the benefits of 
project activities  GCF  FAO 
 
2.2.2 Organise municipal 
forums to connect female  
and me le farmers and small 
businesses to local and 
regional buyers  2.2.2.1 Further Identify 
relevant buyers in each 
municipal to invite to the 
forums  MCVDD   MCVDD  
 
2.2.2 Organise municipal 
forums to connect female  
and m ale farmers and small 
businesses to local and 
regional buyers  2.2.2.2 Liaise with the GoB 
and municipal authorities 
to provide support to the 
forums and to facilitate 
trade agreements between 
men and w omen farmers 
and buyers   MCVDD   MCVDD  
 
2.2.2 Organise municipal 
forums to connect  female  
and m ale farmers and small 
businesses to local and 
regional buyers  2.2.2.3 Organize bi -annual 
forums (5 in total, from 
project Y3)  MCVDD   MCVDD  
 
2.2.2 Organise municipal 
forums to connect female 
and m ale farmers and small 
businesses to local and 
regional buyers  2.2.2.4 Ensure 
partnerships between 
farmers, processing 
companies and buyers in 
Glazoue, Zogbodomey 
and Zagnanado     MAEP   MAEP  
  COMPONENT 3:  An enabling institutional and financial environment established to promote and upscale low 
carbon climate -resilient management in Benin’s basins  
OUTPUT 3.1: OCRI project 
institutionalised through a 
multi -stakeholder platform, 
regulatory frameworks and 
capacity building  3.1.1  Establish  and activate 
the OCRI platform ensuring 
adequate and meaningful 
participation of women and 
women’s organizations at 
local and national level  3.1.1.1 f  Further Identify 
relevant stakeholders to 
participate on the platform, 
including their roles and 
respons ibilities  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.1  Establish  and activate 
the OCRI platform ensuring 
adequate and meaningful 
participation of women and 
women’s organizations at 
local and national level  3.1.1.2 Design the 
platform operational 
strategy and multi -
stakeholder coordination 
mechanism  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 68*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 65 
 
 
3.1.1  Establish and activate 
the OCRI platform ensuring 
adequate and meaningful 
participation of women and 
women’s organizations at 
local and national level  3.1.1.3 Design the 
platform’s financial and 
communication strategies 
– including an online portal 
to be hosted by MCVDD  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.1  Establish  and activate 
the OCRI platform ensuring 
adequate and meaningful 
participation of women and 
women’s organizations at 
local and national level  3.1.1.4 Disseminate all 
training modules, 
knowledge products, and 
project’s lessons learnt 
and best practices on t he 
platform’s online portal  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.1  Establish and activate 
the OCRI platform ensuring 
adequate and meaningful 
participation of women and 
women’s organizations at 
local and national level  3.1.1.5 Ensure 
government support to 
OCRI platform  MCVDD   MCVDD  
 
3.1.2 Implement regional and 
local climate -resilient 
development plans in the 
Oueme Basin to ensure 
long-term investment in 
ICRM  3.1.2.1 Organise 
participatory workshop to 
discuss options for 
strengthening the SDAGE  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.2 Implement regional and 
local climate -resilient 
development plans in the 
Oueme Basin to ensure 
long-term investment in 
ICRM  3.1.2.2 Revise the 
Operational Management 
Plan with all relevant 
stakeholders and validate 
through a workshop  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.2 Implement regional and 
local climate -resilient 
development plans in the 
Oueme Basin to ensure 
long-term investment in 
ICRM  3.1.2.3 Organise 1x5 -day 
training sessions on ICRM 
targeting extension officers  
and OBA staff members  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.2 Implem ent regional and 
local climate -resilient 
development plans in the 
Oueme Basin to ensure 
long-term investment in 
ICRM  3.1.2.4 Revise local 
development plans  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.3 Implement rigorous 
M&E on land restoration in 
the Ouémé Basin  3.1.3.1 Organize 1x 5 -
days training workshop to 
train 20 officers on M&E 
techniques with FAO 
support  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 69*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 66 
 
 
3.1.3 Implement rigorous 
M&E on land restoration in 
the Ouémé Basin  3.1.3.2 Train 10 extension 
officers to provide advises 
on climate -resilient 
agriculture  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.3 Implement rigorous 
M&E on land restoration in 
the Ouémé Basin  3.1.3.3 Conduct mid -term 
evaluation  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.3 Implement rigorous 
M&E on land restoration in 
the Ouémé Basin  3.1.3.4 Conduct end of 
project evaluation  GCF   FAO  
 
3.1.3 Implement rigorous 
M&E on land restoration in 
the Ouémé Basin   3.1.3.5 Carry out a project 
impact assessment study  GCF  FAO 
OUTPUT 3.2: Strengthen 
FNEC's capacity to ensure 
continuous support to climate -
resilient farming in the Oueme 
Basin  3.2.1 Develop a robust 
financial strategy for FNEC  3.2.1.1 Review FNEC’s 
existing financial strategy 
and identify gaps and 
opportunities to expand it  GCF   FAO  
 
3.2.1 Develop a robust 
financial strategy for FNEC  3.2.1.2 Organise 
consultations with FNEC 
and MCVDD to discuss 
best options for increasing 
FNEC’s resources  GCF   FAO  
 
3.2.1 Develop a robust 
financial strategy for FNEC  3.2.1.3 Organise validation 
workshop with GoB to 
validate the financial 
strategy  GCF   FAO  
 
3.2.1 Develop a robust 
financial strategy for FNEC  3.2.1.4 Through 
consultation with FNEC, 
identify relevant criteria to 
facilitate the selection of 
relevant climate change 
adaptation projects to be 
financed through FNEC’s 
resources  GCF   FAO  
 
3.2.2 Build FNEC’s capacity 
to design, select, implement 
and monitor climate change -
related projects  3.2.2.1 Conduct a detailed 
assessment of FNEC’s 
capacity to design, 
implement and monitor 
climate change -related 
projects  GCF   FAO  
 
3.2.2 Build FNEC’s capacity 
to design, select, implement 
and monitor climate change -
related projects  3.2.2.2 Design training 
modules and train 5 
members of FNEC (2x1 -
week training)  GCF   FAO


---
*Page 70*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 67 
 
 
3.2.2 Build FNEC’s capacity 
to design, select, implement 
and mo nitor climate change -
related projects  3.2.2.3 Provide regular 
support to FNEC to design 
a bankable climate change 
project to submit to the AF 
or GCF  GCF   FAO  
 
3.2.3 Provide finance to 3 
micro -projects that contribute 
to climate change adaptation 
and ecosystem restoration in 
the Oueme Basin  to the 
benefits of small -scale 
farmers  (FNEC financed)  3.2.3.1 Open call for 
proposal  FNEC  FNEC   
 
3.2.3 Provide finance to 3 
micro -projects that contribute 
to climate change adaptation 
and ecosystem restoration in 
the Oueme Basin  to the 
benefits of small -scale 
farmers  (FNEC financed)  3.2.3.2. Review received 
projects and select, 
contract and finance the 
successful ones  FNEC   FNEC   
OUTPUT 3.3:  Awareness of 
ICRM in basins’ benefits raised 
among farmers and public and 
private institutions  3.3.1 Organise knowledge 
dissemination events and 
products on OCRI including 
gender mainstreaming  3.3.1.1 Organize 5 field 
visits for 100 farmers per 
municipality (5), living in 
neighboring communities 
that did not directly 
beneficiated the project  GCF   FAO  
 
3.3.1 Organise knowledge 
dissemination events and 
products on OCRI  including 
gender mainstre aming  3.3.1.2 Organise 1 x 1 -
week visit for 
representatives of Benin’s 
other basins  GCF   FAO  
 
3.3.1 Organise knowledge 
dissemination events and 
products on OCRI  including 
gender mainstreaming  3.3.1.3 Synergise with 
SAP project to train 10 
radio broadcasters to 
disseminate climate 
change related information 
and organize radio 
broadcast with local radio 
in each municipality  GCF   FAO  
 
3.3.1 Organise knowledge 
dissemination events and 
products on OCRI  including 
gender mainstreaming  3.3.1.4 Develop and 
package knowledge 
products on the projects, 
according to the needs of 
each targeted group  GCF   FAO  
 
3.3.1 Organise knowledge 
dissemination events and 
products on OCRI  including 
gender mainstreaming  3.3.1.5 Organise 
sensitization campaings 
on CC in Glazoue and 
Djougou  MAEP   MAEP  
 
3.3.2 Organise OCRI Annual 
Symposium  3.3.2.1 Identify relevant 
participants from agri -
business (producers, 
sellers, manufacturer, etc.) 
and policy -makers to 
attend the symposium  GCF   MCVDD  
 
3.3.2 Organise OCRI Annual 
Symposium  3.3.2.2 Organise 1 
symposium per year from 
project Y2, with support 
from MCVDD and MAEP  GCF   MCVDD


---
*Page 71*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 68 
 
 
3.3.2 Organise OCRI Annual 
Symposium  3.3.2.3 FAO supports 
OCRI Annual Symposium  FAO  FAO  
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max.  1500 words, approximately  3 pages plus diagrams ) 
Project Governance Structure  
Accredited Entity (AE): FAO  
FAO will serve as the Accredited Entity (AE) for the Project.  FAO as the AE will be responsible for project 
implementation and administrative oversight and technical supervision, corporate management for GCF intervention, 
project reporting, and project completion and evaluation in accordance with the detailed provisi ons outlined in the GCF 
policies as well as Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA)  to be entered into 
between FAO and the GCF should this funding proposal be approved by the GCF Board . As such, FAO will be 
responsible for  overall management of the Project, including: i) All project evaluation aspects; ii) Administrative, financial 
and technical supervision throughout implementation of the Project; iii) Supervision of effective management of funds 
to achieve the results and  objectives; iv) Quality control of Project monitoring and reporting to the GCF; v) Project 
closure and evaluation. The FAO will assume these responsibilities in line with the detailed provisions listed in the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between F AO and the GCF.  
As Accredited Entity of the Project, the FAO’s supervising role will be attributed to the FAO Regional Office for Africa 
(RAF), located in Accra with support by the Office of Climate Change, Biodiversity and Environment (OCB) and other 
technical divisions located FAO headquarters in Rome (HQ), as required. To perform the AE functions, FAO will set up 
a dedicated FAO -GCF Project Task Force (PTF) comprising relevant staff from the FAO Country Office in Benin, the 
FAO Regional Office for Afric a, and FAO Headquarters. Members of the PTF will perform the necessary supervision 
and oversight functions, including supervision and backstopping missions during the entire implementation period, as 
required. The project supervision function will remain i ndependent of the Executing Entity functions performed by FAO 
Benin. The above -mentioned segregation of responsibilities within FAO will ensure that the Organization can 
independently and effectively perform the types of Accredited Entity functions.  FAO wi ll contract with MCVDD to act as 
co EE.  
 
Executing Entities (EE):  
FAO: FAO is one of the executing entities of GCF proceeds.  FAO and MCVDD will set up the Project Management 
Unit (PMU) and local Project Implementation Unit (LPIU) in the Upper and Middle Ouémé . FAO will establish a Farmer 
Field School (FFS)  Technical Unit technically and methodologically bac kstopped by FAO, based in MAEP, that will 
provide technical advise on the implementation of agriculture activities. This Technical Unit will be chaired by MAEP. 
FAO will ensure strong coordination of implementation of project activities with MAEP and MCVDD.    National partners 
will be contracted as procured parties  by FAO  in accordance with FAO’s procurement rules (Manual Section 507).  FAO 
has be en established its Office in Benin in 1977. Since then it has implemented projects in the country in all areas of 
relevance to FAO and funded by partners such as GEF.  
 
MCVDD : The Government of Benin, acting through  MCVDD , is one of the executing entities of GCF proceeds.   MCDDV 
will be an executing entity to whom FAO will transfer funds through the applicable modality, which foresee all necessary 
provisions  for monitoring and supervision , including  regular  supervision missions, third -party regular spot checks and 
audits to ensure financial management, procurement and other . MCVDD  will work with project -financed staffs, project -
recruited subject -matter specialists, to deliver support to targeted beneficiarie s in the field. On behalf of the client -
country, MCVDD  will receive project -financing and technical support, including capacity building and access to 
knowledge and information to implement the project. As agreed during the stakeholder consultation stage, MCVDD 
retains the leadership role in hosting the PMU  at central level and has the core mandate to implement land restoration 
(including protection of Ouémé water sources through tree planting on the banks, and waterworks) as well as the 
rigorous project M& E using the FarmTree App. A capacity assessment of MCVDD has been carried out in 2018.   
 
MCVDD houses the NDA; it  is in charge of developing and implementing national policies on environmental issues, 
climate change, reforestation, ecosystem restoration, urban development and coastal protection. It is the nodal ministry 
for all matters relating to climate change and coordinates implementation of the National Action Plan on Climate Change 
(2008). This Ministry has extensive experience in executing donor -funded projects on natural resources management, 
reforestation and forest and water management  including ‘Projet de Gestion des Ressources Naturelles’ (PGRN) and 
‘Projet Bois de Feu’ phase 1 & 2 .. More recently, MCVDD has been involved in the execution of the GCF UNEP SAP 
project. MCVDD will chair the PMU and the SC.


---
*Page 72*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 69 
 
FNEC : the FNEC will co -finance the OCRI project and be executing entity for the activities it cofinances. FNEC has 
been, since 2003, a financial instrument placed under the supervision of the MCVDD. FNEC is semi -autonomous legal 
entity from MCVDD.  Its creation responds to a need to support and finance initiatives related to environmental 
protection and climate cha nge.  Using different sources of funds, in particular green taxes, FNEC opens call for project 
proposal to a large array of proponents including NGOs, local associations, cooperatives and private sector 
organisation. The projects must be aligned with FNEC’ s strategy and list of project theme; these are only funding 
through grants. FNEC has been accredited with the Adaptation Fund since 2011; and with the GCF as Direct Access 
Entity since 2019. FNEC will also  receive technical support to strengthen its manda te. 
 
MAEP:  The Government of Benin, acting through MAEP , will be the executing entity for the activities it cofinance 
through IFAD resources.  MAEP capacity assessment s has  been performed in 2018 .  MAEP intervenes through the 
Directorate of Rural Engineeri ng (DGR)  which is egally controlled by MAEP and the Lowlands Unit under its supervision, 
the Directorate of Livestock, the Directorate of Fisheries  and the Directorate of Forestry and Natural Resources (DFRN)  
legally controlled by MCVDD . The MAEP, with the se local delegations - at the village level - is the institution responsible 
for agricultural and pastoral hydraulics, water and soil conservation, aquaculture, forest management and reforestation.  
 
 
 
Figure 15: Implementation arrangements OCRI.  References in this figure to MCVDD or MAEP are to the Government 
of Benin acting through MCVDD or MAEP, respectively . 
 
 
 
Project Management  Unit ( PMU ) 
A PMU will be set up by FAO and MCVDD. It  will be established with office space procured by the MCVDD . A National 
Project Coordinator (NPC), responsible for project implementation and coordination with all project stakeholders, and 
operational leadership of the PMU, will be recruited based on a c ompetitive process; his recruitment will be validated 
by FAO and MCVDD . The PMU  will be responsible for providing support to the implementation of day -to-day activities 
at the national/central level in close coordination with the EE. Under the leadership o f the NPC, the PMU  will also 
coordinate with the LPIUs and Focal Points  the implementation of activities at sub -regional level and ensure these are 
aligned with the implementation of activities in the five municipalities . The PMU  full-time staff will inclu de: (i) National


---
*Page 73*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 70 
 
project coordinator; ii) local office manager; iii) project assistant; and iv) Procurement and Finance Officer . In addition, 
the following expertise will be mobilsed to support project implementation: i) International Chief Technical Advis or; ii) 
Environmental and Social Safeguarding Expert;  iii) IT Communication  Specialist ; (iv) Gender Specialist; and (v) 
Monitoring Specialist.  The PMU will be advised by the FFS Technical Unit based in MAEP with regards to the agriculture 
activities.  PMU will report to FAO as AE and the Steering committee chaired by MCVDD.  
 
Local Project Implementation Unit  
MCVDD  and FAO -Benin will initially joi ntly form the Project Implementation Units at two levels: (i) the national -level 
Project Management Unit (PMU); and (ii) two Local Project Implementation Units (LPIUs) for the Upper Ouémé and for 
the Middle Ouémé, part of the OCRI platform. The LPIUs will comprise government staff members, whose capacity will 
be strengthened under Component 3, and project -recruited staff. FAO will also provide technical and administrative 
support to the government and the LPIUs. This arrangement will ensure that a) high and  quality technical standards 
are adhered to; b) project delivery can proceed securely and efficiently despite the complex governance framework; 
and c) government partners play a leading role in project delivery and capacity development.  
 
Two LPIUs will serve as operational arms of the PMU , located in the Upper and Middle Ouémé , each headed by a 
Project Technical Director (PTD), recruited based on a competitive process by MCVDD.  The two LPIUs will be under 
the supervision of MCVDD. Each LP IUs is headed by a Project Technical Director (PTD). They are recruited based on 
a competitive process by MCVDD. The PTD will supervise the d ay-to-day project operations in each LPIU , liaising with 
the Focal Point in each municipality.  The location of the LPIU offices will be jointly identified in coordination with the 
Agriculture and Environment departments and the communes to ensure synergies and liaison among all stakeholders. 
LPIU staff will include GoB staff  – which will be capacitated under Component 3 – and project subject -matter specialists 
(local), including: (i) Water Management Specialist; (ii) Environmental Specialist; (iii) Agronomist; (iv) FFS Specialist. 
The LPIUs will be ‘attached’ to the OCRI platform (set up under Component 3). LPIUs will b e in charge of stakeholder 
coordination  in their area , knowledge dissemination , field implementation  with the municipal Focal Points,  and M&E of 
results. The LPIUs may procure services of  NGOs/CBOs or specialized structures with the necessary expertise  to  
implement specific activities (e.g. construction of micro -dams) , in line with FAO procurement procedures. The Ouémé  
Basin Authority (OBA) will also be involved once operational, but thro ugh the OCRI platform and  the project steering 
committee ( PSC), and will be included in the project's capacity -building efforts.  
Project Steering Committee  
The steering committee will provide guidance and recommendation to the PMU.  The primary functions of the PSC will 
be: (i) aligning project activities with GoB policies and priorities; (ii) ensuring coordination of the project among 
departmental government partners and with partners in the communes; (iii) providing project implemen tation oversight; 
(iv) approving annual work plans and budget,  and reviewing project progress; and (vi) guiding the resolution of 
implementation challenges. The PSC will meet twice a year  or can be convened by  the Chairperson , at the request of 
the EEs and on an  ad-hoc basis,  to discuss key oversight and/or implementation issues . The Chair will have the 
authority to invite other experts as the need arises. Minutes of PSC meetings will be made publicly available and 
circulated to all Committee members and  project stakeholders. They will also be posted on the OCRI Platform site and 
the FAO website.  The PSC (chaired by the Director General of the MCVDD and co -chaired by FAO) will comprise 
representatives from: MCVDD  (NDA) ; MAEP; Ouémé Basin Agency (OBA); Min istry of Planning and Development 
(MoPD);  Ministry of Finance; CCIB; IFAD; the relevant ATDA and DDAEP, FNDA , FNEC, FADeC and FNEDD, 
PNOPPA -Benin, mayors of the 5 municipalities . The project coordinator of the GCF SAP project will be invited as guest 
during the PSC to ensure synergies between the 2 projects .  
 
Local Level Governance Structure  
Each municipality  will assign a Project Focal Point, based within the municipality offices,  to oversee and monitor the 
implementation of the project activities in  its municipality . The Focal points  will liaise with  the Mayor and local staff 
members  from the local Agriculture , Water  and Environment Technical Departments , as well as farmers organisations 
and project beneficiaries . The primary functions of the Focal Points  will be: (i) ensuring project coordination with national 
government partners and among commune partners; (ii) monitoring project implementation at municipal  level, identify 
problems or conflict and provide early resolution ; (iii) participating in all supervision missions as well as ad -hoc missions, 
and (iv) reviewing AWPB and project progress at municipal  level. The Focal Points  will liaise closely with the PMU  and 
the LPIUs to ensure effective and timely implemen tation and support them to overcome any challenges on the ground.  
International / National  Technical Assistant Specialists  
 
The project will recruit long -term and short -term international Chief T echnical Advisor  (CTA) and short -term experts, 
who will be based at the PMU  and support the LPIUs to carry out specific sub-regional and local field activities. They 
will be responsible for liaising with FAO -led technical departments and for capacity development of EE and Service 
Provider staf f. They will include: (i) Climate Change Specialist; (ii) Landscape Restoration Specialist; (iii) Water 
Engineer; (iv) FFS Specialist; (v) Capacity Development Specialist; (vi) Agroforestry Value Chains  and Agribusiness


---
*Page 74*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 71 
 
 
66 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Benin%20First/C DN_BENIN_VERSION_ANGLAISE.pdf  Development Specialist; and (v) GIS Monitoring Specialist.  International Technical specialists, such as a Lead 
Safeguards Advisor (LSA) from FAO will be contracted from Rome and/or around the world, on either a long -term or 
an ad hoc basis to support the implementation activities, safeguards  compliance, the elaboration of ComDev/ICT, 
technical materials and training on FFS and/or CRA.   FAO’s Divisions which will provide technical assistance are Forest 
Policy and Resources Division (FOA) ; Climate Change, Biodiversity and Environment - Climate  risks team  (OCB) ; Land 
and Water Division (NSL); Food and Nutrition Division (ESN) ; Plant Production and Protection Division – FFS group 
(NSPCD).  
 
OCRI Platform  
Under Component 3, the OCRI Platform will be established. Platform participants will be selected according to their 
capacity to generate local changes and will be empowered and trained on dissemination of CRA techniques in close 
collaboration with food val ue chain actors. The OBA, MAEP and MCVDD, local communes, CSOs and community 
leaders, including private sector will be directly involved in the planning, implementation, M&E and knowledge -
dissemination. In addition, the Ministry of Finance, CCIB, FNEC and FNDA will be invited to join the platform; more 
specifically, FNEC’s involvement in the platform will ensure long -term funding; synergies between FNEC and FNDA 
will also be sought to increase the resources available to FNEC. The platform will be a forum fo r developing public -
private partnerships and will seek synergies and complementarities with ongoing and future initiatives. Other partner 
initiatives and players will be identified in the inception phase together with the specific approaches and tools that  will 
be adopted in a participatory manner. A Memorandum of Understanding will be signed by key partners and initiatives, 
and a financial strategy developed to sustain the OCRI platform beyond the project.  
Flow of Funds  
FAO as the accredited entity (AE) w ill receive the funds from the GCF at HQ level. The Government of Benin, acting 
through MCVDD , will be an executing entity to whom FAO will transfer funds through the applicable modality, which 
foresee all necessary  provisions for monitoring and supervision , including  regular supervision missions, third -party 
regular spot checks and audits to en sure financial management, procurement and other management requirements 
are in line with agreed standards and practices.  
MCVDD  has been assessed in order to gauge its handling capacity and a mitigation plan has been agreed upon to 
tackle shortcomings . MAE P will execute the activites it co -finances.  
FAO, The Host Country and  FNEC  in their role of EE s will manage project financi al expenditures against budgets and 
execute payments .  
Partners expected to receive GCF proceeds through funds transfer in accordance with FAO’s procurement rules are 
organizations involved in the Project implementation as procured parties.  Procured parties will be contracted in 
accordance with FAO rules and r egulations of procuring goods and services (e.g. FAO Manual Section 507).  
 
Agreements  
FAO will sign a project agreement (to be considered as subsidiary agreement) with the Host Country, covering: i) the 
Host Country obligations; ii) the role of the Host Co untry acting through MCVDD and MAEP for the implementation of 
the project; and iii) the in -kind co -financing to be provided by MCVDD and MAEP .  The Project Agreement will be signed 
by the Host Country, acting thorugh one or more Ministries, who will sign the Project Agreement on behalf of the 
Government . A separate execution and co -financing agreement will be signed by FAO and FNEC. This agreement  will 
also be a subsidiary agreement.  
B.5. Justification for GCF  funding request  (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
A grant of USD 18 453 795  is sought by the GoB to invest in climate change adaptation and enable a paradigm shift 
towards ICRM implemented in Benin’s basin areas.  
Benin's adaptation  and mitigation  needs cannot be addressed through government expenditure alone . As a  
low middle inco me country, Benin has limited resources available for adaptation and mitigation measures to address 
the effects of climate change. The prospect of GCF financing has already been a stimulus for the NDA, MAEP and 
MCVDD to work with FAO to understand how clim ate-change scenarios are going to affect ecosystems in water 
catchments, and the agricultural sector and what the implications will be for the country's economy. GCF support will 
be instrumental for enhancing the climate resilience of vulnerable communitie s and their ecosystems in the Upper and 
Middle Ouémé River Basin. This project is fully aligned with Benin's INDC.  The implementation of the INDC requires 
approximately USD11.6 billion, of which USD 8 billion needs to come from conditional shares66. Apart from its revenues 
from the port of Cotonou (which represent the most of Benin´s GDP), the GoB budget is heavily dependent on


---
*Page 75*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 72 
 
 
67 http://www.gcfreadinessprogramme.org/benin -gcf-readiness -programme   international grants or loans that focus on transport infrastructure. As a result, the NDC is underfunded and relies for 
69% of its budget on conditional (international support) contributions.  
Benin has already benefited from a UN readiness program on GCF67 that has helped to strengthen national 
capacity and reinforce the mandate of the NDA and line ministries, including main streaming climate change in national 
policies and accessing climate finance. The prospect of GCF support has led to a commitment by the GoB to allocate 
USD 3,000,000  in co -financing to this project.  Without the prospect of GCF support, it would be imposs ible to mobilize 
the resources from these stakeholders into a program with the outreach and potential impact offered by this project.  
Benin's social and economic development challenges further exacerbate the vulnerability of its population . 
The Gross National Income per capita (purchasing power parity) for 2018 is USD 870, and approximately 50% of the 
country’s population lives below the poverty line ( Poverty Data World Bank ). Over 50% of its population lives in rural 
areas and about 10% of its population  are undernourished. The vulnerability of rural households is further compounded 
by their dependence on a fragile/deteriorating natural resource base which will worsen with c limate change.  Given this 
scenario, the GCF funding will support the incremental climate -change cost gaps borne by smallholder farmers to 
maintain or enhance their productivity in a changing climate. GCF financing in this project can work to turn these 
constraints into an opportunity to provide evidence of how a decentralized process initiative such as OCRI can provide 
benefits at scale across the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin and motivate increases in budgetary allocations for 
adaptation measures in the fu ture. 
GCF support will be instrumental for establishing climate -resilient land -use planning and management as the 
central paradigm for promoting climate resilience in broader national, regional and local policymaking and 
planning .  By providing an opportun ity to incentivize and scale up the measures to be implemented through the OCRI 
project, and the OCRI platform in particular, the project will add momentum to Benin's current efforts to transition 
towards resilient, inclusive development. Given the GoB's o ngoing process of decentralization, the project also 
represents an opportunity to establish capacities on climate -resilient land -use planning and management, and to 
mainstream climate -change adaptation into regional and local strategies and plans.  
The GCF  support is noteworthy in terms of the catalytic impact it will have in bringing together cross -sectoral 
landscape -level climate -resilient planning initially across 5 municipalities with potential to replicate across the 
whole Oueme Basin . Successful demon stration of this landscape -scale, ecosystem -based approach  in the 5 
municipalities will provide a model for adoption in other parts of the country. Improved planning at the regional and local 
level will promote improved coordination between upstream and do wnstream communities , ensuring that a 
holistic management approach is promoted that takes into consideration the inter -connectedness of ecosystems and 
land-use systems.  
A robust  Financial strategy  will be developed for FNEC  to crowd -in public financing and mobilize community -
level investments for climate -resilient land use . Government co -financing  in the project  (under Component 3)  
demonstrates the government’s commitment to invest in climate -resilient land use. Improved extension modules and 
support, knowledge dissemination and demonstrable activities will encourage CBOs and farmers to invest in improved 
practices.  However, at the moment, such investments from farmers and cooperatives is not yet possible, as their 
agricultural productivity is low, even in decline because of climate change impacts; moreover, they face several barriers 
to access finance and invest in climate -resilient interventions (see barriers, presented in the project ToC). FNEC’s 
strengthened financial strategy will leverage  opportunities for the private sector to become engaged in climate -resilient 
value chains, and strengthen coordination with the public sector, farmers and agribusinesses. Access to microcredits 
and public funds will be facilitated to support projects and in itiatives pertaining to ecosystem restoration and CRA. 
Through FNEC , innovative funding will be sought to further support ecosystem restoration. Pathways to replenish the 
FNEC’s resources  will be identified  during the project, including the development of project Funding Proposals. Results 
of the financial and economic analysis for this project also show that the project investments in capacity -building, wider 
dissemination of climate -resilient farming systems, technical information provided to farmers, inc reased knowledge, 
and mobilization of players across the agricultural value chains have the potential to leverage additional investments 
in resilience -building activities by households associated with access to credit and public/ private investments.  
GCF support will contribute to increase FNEC’s capacity as Benin’s DAE. Under Component 3, FNEC’s capacity 
to access innovative funding for adaptation in the Oueme Basin will be enhanced. First, the project will seek to increase 
FNEC’s resources, through a n expansion of its green -tax base and leveraging of private finance. Moreover, capacity 
building for FNEC will focus on: assessing projects that are submitted to access financial resources based on several 
resilience criteria that will be developed during the project; strengthening FNEC’s capacity to monitor the 
implementation of successful projects, and to disburse fund and ensure fiduciary management; and enhancing FNEC’s 
capacity to develop it -self bankable climate change -related projects that can be fin anced by international fund and


---
*Page 76*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 73 
 
donors. These capacity building interventions will not only ensure the sustainability of OCRI’s financial resources, but 
also strengthen the position of FNEC as an accredited entity in Benin that can attract international cl imate fund.  
 
The grant financing requested from the GCF is needed to make this project viable ; additional cofinancing from 
MAEP through IFAD funded projects has also been mobilized, especially to support Component 2 of the 
proposed project . The project inc ludes considerable support for public goods, as well as technical assistance and 
capacity building geared toward unlocking investment in climate -resilient agriculture during and beyond the project 
implementation period. Although the project will generate e conomic benefits for farmers through this support, this does 
not constitute the type of government investment that would directly generate financial returns and thus enable 
repayment of (even a concessional) loan. In addition, the support the project provi des to farmers is largely geared 
toward improving their capacity to adopt CRA and ICRM practices, while also strengthening the extension, advisory 
and financial services that enable farmers to adopt and sustain climate -resilient approaches to farming. Proj ect activities 
will not crowd -out private investment by beneficiary farmers, but rather act as a catalyst to unlock additional investment 
in climate resilient agriculture. Given this, as well as the poverty and vulnerability status of the farmers targeted by the 
project, grant financing is considered to be the appropriate level of concessionality.  
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max . 500 words, approximately  1 page ) 
The water and soil conservation investments will be maintained by the local extension services, farmers and 
cooperatives, who will receive adequate trainings ; maintenance costs will be mainstreamed into  the local  
development plans (revised under Activity 3 .1.3), and supported through public fund during and after project’s 
implementation . The project -supported soil and water conservation measures and structures are durable and made 
from locally available materials, and thus operations and maintenance (O&M) c osts – see Annex 2, FS, Section 8 – will 
be sufficiently modest that they can cover such costs beyond project closure – particularly given the anticipated 
increases in revenue due to project -supported practices, and the potential for further public and private investments in 
project interve ntions. In a nutshell, project interventions will be ensured in the long run by: i) transferring skills to farmers, 
cooperatives and extension services to continue project’s interventions; ii) strengthening income streams through 
climate -resilient farm pla nning with low -cost CRA techniques to produce crops and high -value agriproducts ; iii) 
institutionalizing the OCRI project through an innovative multi -stakeholder platform and regulatory frameworks; iv) 
strengthening value chains for the commercialisation of resilient agriproducts; and v) leverage further public and private 
fund by demonstrating the significant environmental and economic benefits of the project and by increase FNEC’s 
capacity to finance and implement climate change initiatives. As FNEC’s ca pacity to develop and implement bankable 
climate change -related projects will be enhanced, its position as Benin’s national accredited entity for the AF and GCF 
will be strengthened.  
1. Building capacity in CRA, finance and marketing  
OCRI will promote the  implementation of CRA and agroforestry, supported by hard and soft waterworks that will easily 
be maintained by the beneficiary farmers and local extension services. A To F approach is adopted to ensure the 
availability of facilitators – some of which will  be extension service officers – in each target municipality, who will 
disseminate the training to farmers, using FFS and FBS. Efforts will be made to ensure equal representation of women 
among facilitators, by proactively reaching out to women extension o fficers, including gender parity clauses in the 
service providers’ contracts, vacancy announcement and calls for facilitators. The training will focus on maintaining the 
waterworks and building soft, easy -to-maintain water retention structure like contour lines, so that fields are protected 
against floods and water available for irrigation. Training in CRA and agroforestry will contribute to increase and 
diversify agricultural productivity, using improved, climate -resilient seeds and tree varieties, support ed in the long -term 
by the establishment of nurseries and farmer seed groups in the target municipalities. Farmers’ trainings will also focus 
on financial management and business plans, to facilitate access to credit; and on marketing techniques to develop  
profitable  climate -resilient agribusinesses, that can re -invest  in CRA and waterworks for resilient management in the 
Ouémé Basin. Coaching on finance will be provided with support from FNDA and ATDA; they will provide quality control 
to ensure the financ ial plans developed by the trained cooperatives are aligned with MFI’s requirements; moreover, 
FNDA will ensure the support from several MFI to provide credits to relevant cooperatives that improve their productivity 
and added -value of their agriproducts. Increased productivity, enhanced added -value for agriproducts, and improved 
access to finance – which will also be facilitated by the strengthening of FNEC’s financial strategy – will support the 
long-term implementation of ICRM in the Oueme Basin. Finally , a training on resilience assessment and monitoring will 
be also carried out to increase the capacity of stakeholders to measure and track resilience and adaptive capacity, and 
to demonstrate the benefits of this approach (Activity 3.1.4). This will also contribute to the M&E strategy of the project.  
2. A cost -effective approach which generates benefits beyond project’s sites


---
*Page 77*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 74 
 
Economic sustainability is achieved through the project’s support for viable, cost -effective climate -resilience measures 
that provi de tangible benefits.  As shown in the financial analysis  (Annex 3), all of the proposed investments related to 
the land -based interventions are financially attractive from a land -user perspective. The recurrent costs associated with 
continued use of project -promoted farming, water management and agro -forestry models are modest and can be 
covered by beneficiary households through increased cash flows due to the project interventions. Moreover, the use of 
a low -cost phone App, FarmTree, will enable bankable, climate -resilient planification in farms, which combines the best 
crops, trees and farming techniques given the agro -ecological environment, climate change impacts, and based on 
cost-benefit estimation on the market value of agriproducts.  Finally, investments in ICRM in Upper and Middle Ouémé 
through OCRI project will a lso yield benefits in the Lower Basin, as riverbanks will be restored, water retention in soil 
improved, and flood risks significantly reduced. These benefits will be monitored through the project’s M&E system, to 
showcase the advantages of an ICRM in othe r basin areas and further promote upscaling of project interventions. 
Upscale will further be supported by inviting authorities from other Benin’s basin areas to observe project impacts and 
implementation modalities (OCRI platform and financial facility), as well as offer them training on ICRM approach for 
watershed areas.  
Finally, the project has mobilized cofinaning from the GoB (USD 3,000,000), FAO (USD 1,039,00 1), FNEC and MAEP 
through IFAD ( USD 12,634,280 ). 
 
3. An innovative multi -stakeholder platform  providing solid roots for OCRI  
The OCRI platform will be key to institutionalise project interventions, through a multi -stakeholder coordination 
mechanism, the mainstreaming of ICRM in the SDAGE and LDPs, capacity building , a wide communication strategy 
and an innovative financial strategy for FNEC (see 5. for details) . The project ’s reforestation and waterwork activities 
will be conducted through the OCRI platform .To ensure this, a sustainability strategy for the platform will be developed, 
and fund mobil ise from the GoB and through FNEC. Long -term investments from public and private funds will be further 
supported by the demonstration of the project’s environmental and economic benefits, through rigorous M&E using the 
FarmTree App. The OCRI platform ’s onl ine portal  will support the dissemination of this information, packaged into 
relevant knowledge products . The training material for CRA, farm marketing and financial management will also be 
available on OCRI’s online portal. This will support project up scale in the whole Ouémé Basin or other basins. Finally, 
representatives of other basin’s authorities, like Mono Basin, will be invited to witness the operational platform and its 
achievements, in order to motivate replication.  
 
4. Support to climate -resilie nt value chains to strengthen and create new income streams  
The ICRM approach implemented to the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin, will combine waterworks, CRA and 
agroforestry to enhance ecosystem services, and increase agricultural productivity. One of the interventions to achieve 
this, will be planting of trees along the river and on fields, to protect soil against erosion, facilitate water retention, retain 
moisture, provide shade and restore fertility. In addition, the project has carefully select tree species  – mango, shea, 
cashew – which are resilient to the impacts of climate change, and also provides valuable fruits and  nuts, for which 
there is a local, national and international market demand. The selection of tree species has been informed by a market 
analysis conducted as part of the project’s FS (Annex 2) and includes: shea, cashew and mango trees . The 
diversificatio n of agriculture – crops and agroforestry – towards high -value products, combined with building capacity 
to process, package and sell (marketing) these products on the local and regional market will boost farmers ’ profits, 
thereby generating new income str eams that can be re -invested in project interventions.  Sale agreements between 
producers and buyers will also be sought during the bi -annual municipal forum. The value chain oriented approach is 
aligned with, and supported by MAEP since early 2000, with th e view to increase quality, efficiency and profits within 
the agricultural sector. In addition, the project will support the establishment of farmer saving schemes – or VSLA – in 
the beneficiary communities. This will ensure funds remain available to farme rs beyond the project’s lifetime. These 
schemes, along with training on financial management, will facilitate access to credit. This will also support high -profit 
value chains: loans can be used to tackle current issues linked to the poor quality of agro -products, limited harvesting 
capacity, lack of storage and processing tools. This can be done by using microcredits to invest in the necessary tools, 
labour and equipment to strengthen the production, storage and sale links of the selected value chains.  
 
 
5. A Financial strategy for FNEC  to leverage funds from public and private institutions  
By raising the productivity from selected crops, diversifying agriculture towards high -value agriproducts, and 
strengthening their value chains through trainings in mar keting, processing and business, the project will attract 
investments from the private sector in sustainable agriculture and agroforestry. All economic and environmental 
benefits from the project will be rigorously monitored, captured, compile and dissemin ated as knowledge products, 
packaged for various stakeholders including investors and MFI, with which the project will engage to secure micro -
credits to beneficiary farmers. The strengthened financial strategy of FNEC under Component 3 of the project will  
ensure long -term investments  in climate resilient agricultural development, while at the same time reducing climate


---
*Page 78*
---

B 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0  | PAGE 75 
 
 
 change vulnerability in Benin’s main basins. FNEC has already committed fund during the project, to support 3 micro -
projects that contribute  to climate change adaptation in the Oueme Basin. A roadmap to ensure the facility’s 
replenishment will be produced and a full -scale funding proposal will be developed with FNEC to ensure a first 
replenishment of the fund.  
 
Finally, the project will lever age opportunity to be replicated in other basins of Benin. Indeed Benin include 4 basins: 
Oueme, Mono, Volta and Niger; the latter two are cross boundary basins, therefore their managing authorities are 
multi -country. Authorities of these three additional basins will be invited to attend training sessions on ICRM approach 
to watershed areas. Moreover, they will join field visits in the Oueme Basin to observe concrete benefits of the project 
as well as the functioning of the OCRI platform and its financial f acility (through FNEC); they will also receive regular 
newsletter on the project impacts and achievements; and invited to attend the annual OCRI symposium.


---
*Page 79*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
   
FIC. F  C.FINANCING  INFORMATION  
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi  + vii) Total amount  Currency  
18, 453, 795  million USD ($)   
GCF f inancial instrument  Amount  Tenor  Grace period  Pricing  
(i) Senior loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years Enter  % 
(ii) Subordinated loans  Enter a mount  Enter  years  Enter  years  Enter  % 
(iii) Equity  Enter a mount    Enter  % equity 
return  
 
(iv) Guarantees  Enter a mount  Enter  years    
(v) Reimbursable grants  Enter a mount     
(vi) Grants  US$ 18, 453, 795     
(vii) Result -based payments  Enter a mount     
(b) Co-financing information  Total amount  Currency  
16, 8 60, 781 million USD ($)  
Name of institution  Financial 
instrument  Amount  Currency  Tenor  & 
grace  Pricing  Seniority  
MCVDD  In kind  
 3,000,000  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
MAEP(IFAD)68 Grant  
 12,634,280  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
FAO In kind  
 1,039, 001 million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
FNEC  Grant  
 187,500  million 
USD ($)   Enter  years  
Enter  years  Enter % Options  
 
(c) Total financing  
(c) = (a)+(b)  Amount  Currency  
35,314,576  million USD ($)   
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page)  The proposed project will receive parallel financing from other projects, as follow:  
- GCF Project SAP05 Benin: USD2,020,000  
- CBIT: USD50,000  
 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component  Output  Indicative 
cost 
Options  GCF financing  Co-financing  
Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Amount  
Options  Financial 
Instrument  Name of 
Institutions  
Low carbon 
climate Resilient 
Crop production 
enhanced and 
Ecosystem 
services restored 1.1.Waterwor
ks and tree 
plantation to 
protect river 
banks and 
secure water 
access  USD 16, 633, 
276 USD 
8,507,635  Grants  USD 
644,80 1  In kind  FAO 
USD 
7,480,840  Grants  MAEP 
(IFAD)  
 
68 As per co -financing letter, co -financing from MAEP is via three projects financed by IFAD (see table 1) through a mix or 
loans and grants from IFAD to the Government. Resources from the Government to the project activities targeting project 
beneficiaries will not involve any repayments from project beneficiaries.


---
*Page 80*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
   
in the Upper and 
Middle Ouéme   1.2.25,250 
Farmers 
capacitated 
to implement 
climate 
resilient 
agriculture , 
agro-forestry 
and 
sustainable 
land 
management  USD 
4,742,300  USD 
3,627,900  Grants  USD 
1,114,400  Grants  MAEP 
(IFAD)  
Climate -resilient 
and gender -
sensitive value 
chains, 
supporting 
farmers’ 
livelihoods in the 
Upper and 
Middle Ouémé  2.1.Farmers 
and 
cooperatives’ 
income 
stream 
diversified, 
enhanced, 
and secured 
in the face of 
climate 
change  USD 
4,797,975  USD 
1,634,135  Grants USD 
3,163,840  Grants  MAEP 
(IFAD)  
2.2.Private 
sector 
incentivized 
to invest in 
climate 
resilient 
agriculture 
and resilient 
management 
techniques in 
Ouémé 
Basin  USD 
1,196,000  USD 
510,000 Grants  USD 
336,000  In kind  MCVDD  
USD 
350,000  Grants  MAEP 
(IFAD)  
An enabling 
institutional and 
financial 
environment 
established to 
promote and 
upscale climate -
resilient 
management in 
Benin’s Basins  3.1.OCRI  
project 
institutionalis
ed through a 
multi -
stakeholder 
platform, 
regulatory 
frameworks 
and capacity 
building  USD 
5,076,775 USD 2, 606, 
575 Grants  USD 
2,470,200  In kind  MCVDD  
3.2. 
Strengthene
d FNEC’s 
capacity to 
ensure 
continuous 
support to 
climate -
resilient 
farming in 
the Oueme 
Basin  
 USD 3 27,000 USD 
139,500 Grants  USD 
187,500  Grants  FNEC  
   
3.3.Awarene
ss of ICRM in 
basins’ USD 8 58,150  USD 
574,950  Grants  USD 21,200  Grants  
 
 MAEP 
(IFAD)


---
*Page 81*
---

C 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
   
benefits 
raised 
among 
farmers, and 
public and 
private 
institutions  
 USD272,000  In kind  FAO 
Project 
management & 
maintenance  PMU  
USD 
1,6,83,100   USD 
863,100 Grants  USD 
193,800  
 In kind  MCVDD  
USD 
122,200  In kind  FAO 
USD 
504,000  Grants  MAEP 
(IFAD)  
Indicative total cost  (USD)  USD 35, 
314,576  USD 18, 453,795  USD 16, 860,781  
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page)  
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer?  Yes ☒      No ☐ 
The project hinges strongly on the capacity building component – to individual farmers , agribusinesses and 
cooperatives , and government agencies. The GCF will invest USD 6,625,025 to support capacity building. This will 
cover: i) refreshing 15 Master trainers under Activity 1.2.1 ii) training of 250 facilitators under Activity 1.2.2; iii) training 
of 25,250 farmers on CRA and waterworks maintenance under Activity 1.2.3 ; iv) set up and train seed producer groups 
under activity 1.2. 4; v) training of farmers organised in agribus inesses and cooperatives on business, finance and 
marketing under Activity 2.1.1  & 2.1.2; v i) training of 30 facilitators on the FarmTree App [ also contributing to technology 
transfer ] under Activity 2.1.3; and v ii) training of policy -makers and extension officers on ICRM, mainstreaming of 
adaptation within LDP, and to support project implementation and M&E under Activity 3.1. 2 and 3.1.3 . Trainings on the 
FarmTree Ap p for local extension services and selected farmers will also support technology t ransfer in Benin. The App 
will enable the GoB to carefully monitor the environmental and economic benefits of CRA, agroforestry and waterworks 
to understand cost -benefits of the approach and leverage additional investments in project interventions. Moreove r, at 
the farm level, the App will inform agricultural planning, to strengthen productivity and cash flow from climate -resilient 
agricultural businesses.


---
*Page 82*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
   
EXPD  D. EXPECTED  PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s  Initial  Investment Framework .  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
The project envisions increasing climate change resilience, enhancing food security and improving livelihoods and 
income streams  in the Ouémé Basin of Benin . The potential of the project to contribute to the achievement of the GCF’s 
objectives and result areas is described in S ection H1. The project will contribute to the GCF Adaptation Impact: 
Increased sustainable, climate resilient development . Several GCF result areas  will also be targeted,  namely:  
Most vulnerable people, communities  and regions            
Health and well -being, and food and water security  
Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
Sustainable land use, reforestation and forest management  
1. Most vulnerable people, communities and regions            
The OCRI project will be imple mented in Benin. According to the UNDP Multidimensional Poverty Index, 66.8% percent 
of Benin's population lives in poverty. The low status in terms of human development for the country as a whole makes 
vulnerability to climate change particularly acute an d constrains people’s adaptive capacity and ability to be resilient. 
The intended beneficiaries of this project are 330,000 poor small farmers in 5 municipalities in the Upper and Middle 
Ouémé basin. Most of the households in the selected communes do not have a secure food supply69. Malnutrition of 
infants and young children is particularly serious in the communes of Djougou, Glazoué and Copargo. The majority of 
the population in the 5 municipalities are illiterate. The communities in the central and n orthern departments of Benin 
are particularly vulnerable to climate change. Rising temperatures, erratic and extreme rainfall events are major threats 
to livelihoods. During the past three decades, these regions have been affected by floods on several occa sions. 
Infrastructure and crops were severely damaged by the floods, with agricultural losses of ~70% in some cases. In 
addition to floods, crops are also negatively affected by increased air temperatures. As a result of this, the yields of 
maize and sorgh um – two staple crops in Benin – have already decreased in the project areas. Climate -change impacts 
will further reduce productivity in agricultural landscapes and forest ecosystems.  
 
2. Health and well -being, and food and water security  
The implementati on of ICRM in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin, an approach combining climate -resilient 
agricultural practices, agroforestry and waterworks, will reduce exposure to climate change, improve access to food 
and water, and increase well -being in the target are as, as well as downstream, thereby indirectly benefiting the whole 
population of the Ouémé Basin (6 million people – SDAGE, 2013). Indeed, the restoration of riverbanks and 
ecosystems’ goods and services in the Upper Ouémé Basin will contribute to reduce f lood and flash flood risks in Middle 
and Lower Ouémé ; moreover, water availability will be improved in the target areas through soft and hard waterworks 
and agroforestry, to support agricultural activity. At least 66,000 households (330,000 small -scale pr oducers (50% of 
whom are women), equivalent to the population of the selected 5 municipalities living in the basin area – see FS, 
Section 8.1.5) will have reduced vulnerability to climate change through i) expanding water access and improving water 
availab ility to enable irrigated agriculture (including counter -season) in a context where droughts are more intense and 
seasonality is shifting (from current 4,080 ha of existing irrigated agricultural plots to an additional 680 ha from GCF 
resources  and 1,320 h a from MAEP cofinancing ). This will result in reduced poverty and food insecurity in the Upper 
and Middle Ouémé , while exposure to climate -related risks will be reduced in the whole Basin.  
 
3. Ecosystem and ecosystem services  
The proposed ICRM  approach of the project (which will affect 95,000 ha of land) considers the interactions between 
climate change impacts on water, crops and population, from upstream to downstream areas. It aims to combine 
interventions that restore ecosystems along river banks to reinforce their functions, while tackling the climate and non -
climate causes of ecosystem degradation. As a result, ecosystem functions are restored and enhanced, thereby 
protecting the population against climate change impacts, while at the same time ensuring the production of goods and 
 
69 Food insecurity is especially prevalent in Middle Oueme, affecting 10 to 20% households – and over 20% in 
Glazoue. See WFP, Analyse Globale de la Vulnerabilite et de la Securite Alimentaire (AGVSA), Republique du 
Benin, 2017.


---
*Page 83*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
   
services that underpin agricultural production. These soft adaptation interventions are combined with small water 
infrastructure to ensure water capture, flow and recharge, as well as its sustainable management to enable agricultural 
activities. Finally, introducing new climate -resilient agricultural techniques, which also contribute to ecosystem 
restoration and protection, allows to sustain crop production while resorting the ecological functions that deliver criti cal 
services to humans in a changing climate.  
The watershed approach strengthens the basin's ability to maintain its functions (stabilizing soils through vegetation, 
storing water or regulating the flow and providing socio -environmental services) in light  of climate change impacts 
according to the characteristics of the agro -ecological zones. The up taking of climate resilient agricultural practices 
and protection of the ecosystems and water sources upstream indirectly benefit a larger part of the populati on located 
in the lower basin areas.  
 
4. Sustainable land use, reforestation and forest management  
Although the proposed project focuses on adaptation, its interventions will bring additional impact and benefits via 
carbon sequestration. This will be achieved through implementing sustainable land and water management, 
reforestation and climate -resilient  agriculture under Component 1. These interventions will enhance the ability of 
agricultural landscapes and forest to sequester carbon. The implementation of the project will increase the mitigation 
potential of the area resulting in the sequestration of 1 ,783,633 tCO 2-eq over 20 years. With a total area of 95  001 ha, 
the carbon sequestered per hectare and per year will increase from 2.1 tCO 2-e in the baseline scenario to 3.5 tCO 2-e 
when the project is implemented which corresponds to a carbon balance of – 0.9 tCO2 -eq sequestered per hectare 
and per  year.  
The benefits of the project will enable climate change adaptation, risk prevention and protection of lives, assets and 
livelihoods in the Ouémé Basin. The expected total number of beneficiaries  is 6 million people living in the Oueme 
Basin,  benefitting from reduced vulnerability to climate change and enhanced knowledge and understanding of climate 
change impacts and adaptation options . Out of this, the project will directly benefit 330,000 farme rs, including 50% 
women. The project design team used national and locally available statistics as a secondary source of information to 
determine initial targets for beneficiaries, farmlands, pasturelands, waterworks and community infrastructure. This 
information was combined with information obtained through field visits, interviews and consultations to develop the 
project baseline . 
Direct beneficiaries are people living in the basin areas of the five target municipalities, and who rely directly on 
agricul ture as main activity. They will beneficiate from : i) the installation of waterworks to protect against floods and 
improve water acces; ii) training on CRA to improve productivity under climate change conditions; iii) ecosystem 
restauration and management to enhance the production of goods and services, protect against climate change impacts 
and enhance crop productivity; iv) financial and business training to boost profits in climate -resilient farms; v) improved 
access to finance to invest in their climate -resilient farms; and vi) enhanced understanding of climate change impacts 
and adaptation options in the Ouémé Basin.  
 
Indirect beneficiaries will benefit from: i) protection against climate change impacts, in particular through reduced 
occurrence of floods through waterworks and reforestation on river banks in Upper and Middle Ouémé; ii) additional job 
opportunities in the value chains that will be supported by the project; iii) enhanced knowledge and understanding of 
climate change adap tation, through the awareness raising interventions supported by the project; and iv) strengthened 
governance system that promote integrated management in the Ouémé Basin, in the long -term; this will be insured 
through strengthening of the Ouémé Master Pla n (SDAGE) , revised Local Development Plans and improved capacity 
to mainstream adaptation into agriculture and development plans amongst local stakeholders.    
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Without the proposed proje ct, low yields, food insecurity and high poverty in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin, as 
well as a lack of capacity, and economic and financial opportunities to support small -scale, low carbon climate -resilient 
agriculture, drive the local communities towards unsustainable practices, which underpin the vicious cycle represented 
in B.2. As a result,  yields decline, natural resources are depleted and land degraded;  the communities of  Upper and 
Middle Ouémé are increasingly vulnerable  to floods and flash floods especially in Middle Ouémé, water scarcity 
especially in Upper Ouémé, shifting rainfall seasons, and reduced agricultural productivity in the whole Basin.  
The project will effect a paradigm s hift that results in enhanced climate resilience , low carbon  and improved livelihoods 
for smallholders in the Ouémé Basin. This will be achieved through three complementary components (described in B. 
3). 
 
The whole project is underpinned by  an innovative,  integrated approach for basin management, which will not only 
implement  concrete, on -the-ground adaptation technologies in selected sites – which is often the case in agricultural 
development projects – , but also considers the rippling effects of climate  change from upstream to downstream basin


---
*Page 84*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
   
areas , and how hard and soft adaptation technologies can be combined in the upper and middle catchment  to also 
benefit the lower area . This comprehensive approach will be combined with the strengthening of climate -resilient value 
chains (namely cashew, mango, maize and shea) and the institutionalizing of ICRM in the Ouémé Basin, to ensure 
project’s sustainability and replication. Moreover, regulatory frameworks will be strengthened , cooperatives  supported, 
and finan ce unlock  to provide continuous support to implement ing ICRM in the Ouémé Basin . This will contribute to 
sustained reduced climate -related risks in the Basin, while diversifying and increasing income streams in the Upper 
and Middle areas. Finally, all proj ect’s knowledge products including training modules, toolkits, and M&E reports on the 
benefits of ICRM in basins, will be disseminated widely through a multi -stakeholder platform and other relevant 
communication channels. This, along with the organization of annual symposiums on adaptation technologies for basin 
areas, will contribute to upscale the project beyond its target areas.  
 
The project meets the following GCF requirements:  
- Potential for scaling up and replication:  The project interventions are designed based on best practices and 
recommendations from past initiatives, supporting CRA and water management in Benin or similar countries. These 
interventions are also building on, complementing or upscaling other past and  on-going projects, like the SAP Benin 
(see section B.1). The ICRM approach, which will be valorized in the Ouémé Basin, will be institutionalized through the 
OCRI multi -stakeholder platform, as well as regulatory frameworks; amongst these frameworks, the revised Ouémé 
Master Plan (SDAGE) will serve as an umbrella under which the local (municipal) development plans of all the 
municipalities located within the Ouémé , can be revised to mainstream the ICRM approach. The OCRI  platform will 
also disseminate less ons learned and best practices from the project and cost -benefits assessments to incentivize 
public and private investments in CRA and waterworks. Training manuals on CRA and waterworks, on business and 
marketing techniques, on financial management will be  made available on the OCRI platform. As the project’s 
knowledge products and training material will be shared online and during organized events like symposium, municipal 
forums, sensitization campaigns, field visits, and radio broadcasts, it will facilit ate replication within other non -
beneficiary communities. Furthermore, the project will invite representatives of other basins’ authorities to attend 
training sessions in ICRM, so that they can mainstream this approach into other watershed management plans ; these 
representatives will also be invited to field visits on project sites to showcase the impacts of ICRM. Additional financial 
returns from the beneficiary farmers and improved access to micro -credit and financial tools will enable beneficiary 
agribus inesses, farmers and cooperatives to further invest in CRA and waterworks, thereby ensuring the continuation 
of project activities beyond its lifespan and potentially expanding to additional sites.  This will also be supported as 
farmers’ cooperatives will have increased access to micro -credit (to invest in the agribusinesses) and private sector is 
incentivize to invest in CRA (through Component 2).  
 
The project waterworks, CRA and support to key value chains are fully aligned with existing plans and strategies in 
Benin, namely the SDAGE (waterworks), the Strategic Plan for the Development of the Agricultural Sector (PSDSA) 
and Plan National d’Investis sements Agricoles et de Sécurité Alimentaire et Nutritionnelle (PNIASAN) ( for CRA and 
value chains). This creates an additional potential for replicating and upscaling successful OCRI interventions through 
national investments, in other parts of Benin.  
 
-Innovation : Numerous adaptation technologies , successfully tested in previous projects (see Annex 2, FS, Section 7 
and 8 ), such as drought -tolerant crop varieties, locally adapted food and cash crop species, agroforestry techniques, 
conservation agricultur e, multiplication of quality seed and vegetable materials, rainwater collection systems, and 
composting will be implemented as part of the innovative practices and technologies introduced by the project  in the 5 
beneficiary municipalities . As such, the project is upscaling good practices among new communities. FFSs, lead 
farmers peer -learning, demonstration plots and evidence -based research will be adopted to ensure sustainable 
production intensification in a changing climate. Capacity devel opment and technical trainings will support their 
implementation to enhance soil fertility and water conservation, agro -ecosystems restoration and improved food 
security of rural communities via the establishment of climate -resilient productive agro -ecosys tems. Furthermore, the 
organizational and technical capacities of local community -based organizations will be strengthened with the objective 
of increasing and diversifying agricultural production in a changing climate . While other projects are promoting C RA 
and strengthening cooperatives, the OCRI project will combine this with waterworks in key areas of the Upper and 
Middle Oueme Basin. Specific infrastructure in the Upper Oueme will regulate water flows and reduce erosion, thereby 
reducing flood risk in the Middle and Lower Oueme areas. This will be enhanced by planting trees on the degraded 
Oueme banks. This Integrated Climate -Resilient (ICRM) approach to watershed management, combining strategic 
infrastructure with reforestation and sustainable land man agement practices, is new in the area. Most project only focus 
on improving agricultural productivity, sale and water access, without addressing flood problems at their source – 
specifically in upper basin areas.  
 
In addition , the project will make use of  innovative appropriate climate resilience assessment/monitoring tool that are 
cost-efficient (eg FarmTree) in the  selected municipalities, as an innovative adaptation technology. Local facilitators


---
*Page 85*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
   
and extension officers will be trained to use the App for  farm planning and M&E purposes. This App will not only ensure 
rigorous monitoring of the project’s costs and benefits, and its impacts on ecosystems and nutrition; but it will also guide 
the planning of low carbon climate -resilient farms that produce agri -products through a combination of crops and trees, 
using varieties which are best sold on the local market. A letter from FarmTree company on FarmTree policy on l egal 
tool access, copyright, intellectual property and due d iligence , has been included in th e proposal package. Moreover, 
the project will unlock finance for climate -resilient value chains in the Oueme Basin. Not only will new saving schemes 
– VSLA through FAO’s caisse de resilience  approach – be introduced (which have proven efficient in other W est African 
countries but are not yet implemented in Benin), but also farmers’ access to micro -credits and loans will be enhanced 
and secured. First, VSLA ensures financial resources which provide guarantees for accessing loans; second, signed 
commitment f rom FNDA to facilitate such access is a key support for the project, which demonstrate the government’s 
commitment. Another innovation is the use of Dimitra clubs, by the project, to foster c ommunity engagement for 
empowerment, individual and collective ag ency as well as enhancing women’s participation and leadership in decision -
making processes represent key added values in this project. Finally, the project innovates by enhancing FNEC’s 
capacity to support innovative climate change -related initiatives in the Oueme Basin; this will be Benin’s first facility to 
provide financial and in -kind resources in support of innovative, climate -resilient activities that also contribute to restore 
and/or protect riverbank ecosystems while making small -sclae farmers clim ate-resilient. The financial resources from 
FNEC will be increased and re -oriented towards support for climate change -related projects. A concrete replenishment 
plan through public and private sector investments will be developed.  
 
- Potential for knowled ge sharing and learning : This potential will be essentially supported through: i) a To F 
approach and trainings in farmer’s schools; ii) a rigorous M&E system; and iii) the OCRI platform with a robust M&E 
system and communication strategy. Firstly, u nder Component 1, facilitators will be trained on CRA, waterworks and 
agroforestry, and FFS established to enable the training of thousands of farmers in Upper and Middle Ouém é during 
the project; training interventions will continue after the project, supported by the trained local extension officers and 
facilitators. Moreover, the training modules will be made available through the OCRI platform. Secondly, under 
Component 2, a rigorous M&E using innovative Apps will be implemented by local officers and facilitators who will 
receive adequate training and equipment. For example, FarmTree App  enable s to capture the environmental, climate -
change, nutrition, gender -responsive and e conomic benefits of the climate -resilient interventions . The data will be used 
to produce knowledge products on the project’s benefits, that will be especially geared towards the private sector to 
incentivise investments. Thirdly , under Component 3, the OC RI platform will be designed to further catalyse the impact 
of the project. It is specifically set up to focus on knowledge -sharing, project M&E and governance, scale -up and 
institutionalisation of climate -resilience measures. The platform will use partici pation and proactive communication to 
institutionalise the project's innovative approaches and techniques . It will broaden the replication and dissemination of 
practices and knowledge to other vulnerable municipalities  by documenting , capitalis ing and diss eminat ing successful 
experiences and lessons learnt on the implementation of climate resilient practices, techniques and approaches. The 
OCRI platform will produce a multiplier and aggregation effect through participatory review of local development plans  
and capacity building. The Platform will also enable knowledge sharing through organising the annual OCRI 
symposium .  
- Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment:  The project’s low carbon ICRM approach will transform 
current approaches that a re largely restricted to single sectors and do not promote resilient basin management to 
reduce climate change impacts from upstream to downstream areas, while at the same time enhancing agricultural 
productivity  and diversifying income streams . The OCRI  project is promoting a shift away from conventional, siloed 
planning processes towards collaborative and cross -sectoral coordination between relevant departments (agriculture 
and water, through the OCRI platform)  and with the private sector,  to develop inte grated solutions that include ecological 
and socio -economic considerations at the landscape level. The potential for integrated sustainable management and 
ecosystem restoration in basins to buffer climate change impacts and support local livelihoods is rec ognised as vital 
for providing adaptation benefits. Through the establishment of the OCRI multi -stakeholder platform  and its financial 
facility (FNEC) , the project enables sustained participation of public and private stakeholders into its interventions. 
Moreover, the project invests strongly in technical assistance and developing stakeholders’ capacities, thereby ensuring 
project’s ownership by local and national institutions  at project’s end. With this regards, FNEC’s capacity to develop 
bankable projects  and to implement and monitor them will be significantly improved, thereby unlocking access to climate 
finance in Benin.  
 
Furthermore, the project will create an enabling environment for adaptation innovations and market development in 
selected , climate -resilient  value chains. First, it will address existing barriers to credit access for smallholders, through 
capacity building interventions  and reaching out to MFI to secure loans . Second, it will incentivize investments in its 
interventions (via FNEC) throu gh a demonstration of the economic benefits of an integrated approach to planning and 
implementation of adaptation in basin areas, that combine waterworks with CRA and agroforestry. Third, the OCRI 
platform will provide an innovative space for national and  local governmental agencies to implement ICRM . Finally, a


---
*Page 86*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
   
focus on market development for value -added products from agriculture will ensure that livelihood interventions are 
sustainable.  
 
- Contribution to the regulatory frameworks and policies: The project will contribute to Benin's regulatory framework 
and policies especially at the local and regional level. The local authorities and extension services of the five target 
municipalities will be fully involved in the coordination and implementatio n of the activities,  through the Local Project 
Implementation Units (LPIUs) , which will be part of the OCRI platform. Extension services in water, agriculture and 
forestry (environment) will receive trainings on ICRM for basin areas, CRA and waterworks. Th ey will be involved in the 
revision of the LDPs  in the view to mainstream ICRM; and they will be capacitated to implement these revised plans. 
Moreover, the SDAGE  will be strengthened to insure the promotion of an ICRM approach, that considers climate chan ge 
impacts from upstream to downstream areas. The plan will service as an umbrella to guide the revision of the local 
development plans, in order to guide future public investments for local development towards climate -resilient 
management in basin areas. The project’s scalability will be further enhanced by collaborating with ongoing initiatives 
on agricultural development, reforestation and sustainable forest management. For instance, the project is fully aligned 
with the Strategic Plan to Develop the Agr icultural Sector (Plan Stratégique de Développement du Secteur Agricole – 
PSDSA), which provides strategic guidance for agricultural policies for the period 2017 –2021. This plan aims to ensure 
sustainable food security in Benin by improving agricultural pr oductivity, promoting climate resilience within the 
agricultural sector and strengthening value chains for selected crops and tree products. The proposed project’s 
interventions on agriculture and value chains are closely aligned with the PSDSA, which will  benefit from lessons 
learned from project interventions to upscale them across Benin.  
Finally, as indicated in Annex 2, FS, Section 6, the proposed OCRI project is fully aligned with, and support, the 
implementation of Benin’s INDC – through which Benin c ommits to implement adaptation action in three priority 
economic sectors: agriculture, water resources and forestry. Within these sectors, Benin aims to reduce the vulnerability 
of communities and ecosystems to climate change using appropriate measures.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The project fully supports the implementation of SDGs in Benin, in particular SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security 
and improved nutrition; SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well -being; and SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat 
climate change and i ts impacts. In addition, the following co -benefits are expected:  
Environmental co -benefits : The ICRM approach implemented to basin, through a mix of soft and hard climate resilient 
interventions (intercropping, agricultural diversification, increased tree  planting of agroforestry  species, improved water 
recharge, protection of water sources, and soil improvements) will not only make the farms more climate resilient and 
productive. It will also restore land coverage and quality through agroforestry and redu ced soil erosion, improve 
ecological functions and services of the ecosystems through agroforestry, sustainable management and water 
retention, enhance biodiversity, contribute to reduced deforestation through improving income streams and food 
security (th ereby breaking the vicious cycle of overexploitation of the natural resources – see baseline problem in 
Section B.1), and enhance water reserves and availability. The project will intensify the provision of ecosystem services 
to support food security in th e target areas, and to pro tect against climate -related risks like floods and flash floods in 
the whole Ouémé Basin.  More precisely, overall reduction of soil erosion will take place over 95,000 ha.  
 
Social co -benefits : The project will contribute to impro ve well -being, health and save lives  of up to 6 million people living 
in the Oueme Basin of Benin . This will be achieved through enhancing food and nutrition security in the Upper and 
Middle Ouémé ; and reducing floods, flash floods and water scarcity risks in the whole Ouémé Basin. Moreover, it will 
support women’s empowerment through better access to key productive assets, income generation and vocational 
training ; and overall diversify livelihood  options and income streams for farmers, which constitute the vast majority of 
the population in the Ouémé Basin . 
 
Economic co -benefits : The outcomes of the project will provide better and diversified livelihoods and production options 
for women, men and y outh smallholder producers as well as a projected prevention of losses between 30% (for 
vegetables); 1 -10% (for staple crops). Climate -resilient farms will be more efficient in terms of water conservation and 
input use, reinforcing the sustainability of ag ro-ecosystems, improving food, land and water security for rural households 
beyond those directly involved in the project. Another co -benefit will be that farmers’ workload will be reduced 
(especially that of women), allowing for further income -generating or household activities. Improved access to financial 
services and inputs for small -scale producers (including women and youth) will contribute to increases in yields and 
value addition in a number of food value chains. Local communities will have better a ccess to water for agricultural and 
livestock production. Increased agricultural productivity will reduce Benin's reliance on food imports and has the 
potential to increase the country's exports. The project has an estimated economic rate of return of abou t 20%. At a 
10% Discount Rate it has a Net Present Value of USD 62 million , and costs per beneficiary of about USD 132. Non-


---
*Page 87*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
   
quantifiable economic benefits include improved health due to increased food security and the ripple effect of the 
success of several  groups on the local and national economy.  
Gender -sensitive development impact:  Gender -equality is a cr  
oss-cutting theme within the project, which aims to ensure women´s full and effective participation. Capacity building, 
awareness raising and knowledge dissemination regarding the effects of climate change will be differentiated by 
gender; training modules th at specifically targets women, for example on processing and selling high -value crops, fruits 
and nuts, will be implemented, and women’s groups equipped with relevant processing tools. More precisely, the project 
will directly beneficiate to 165  000 women,  who will have increased agricultural productivity and income, and/or be less 
vulnerable to climate change impacts. Women will also be challenged to develop innovative adaptation technologies 
through an annual award that will benefit at least one women’s c ooperative or agri -business every year. The gender -
specific interventions promoted by the project will ensure equality to adapt to the impacts of climate change on a 
sustainable basis. The project includes a Gender Assessment and Action Plan (see Annex 8),  which will operationalise 
gender -responsive adaptation actions through the project results framework.  
D.4. Needs of recipient  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Vulnerability  
Benin's total population now stands at 12 million people, 52% of which live in rural areas, according to World Bank 
figures for 2018. According to the UNDP Multidimensional Poverty Index, 66.8% percent of Benin's population lives in 
poverty. The low status  in terms of human development for the country as a whole makes vulnerability to climate change 
particularly acute and constrains people’s adaptive capacity and ability to be resilient. The intended beneficiaries of this 
project are 330,000 poor small farm ers in 5 municipalities in the Upper and Middle Ouémé basin. Most of the 
households in the selected communes do not have a secure food supply . Malnutrition of infants and young children is 
particularly serious in the communes of Djougou, Glazoué and Coparg o. The majority of the population in the 5 
municipalities are illiterate. The communities in the central and northern departments of Benin are particularly 
vulnerable to climate change. Rising temperatures, erratic and extreme rainfall events are major thr eats to livelihoods. 
During the past three decades, these regions have been affected by floods on several occasions. Infrastructure and 
crops were severely damaged by the floods, with agricultural losses of ~70% in some cases. In addition to floods, crops 
are also negatively affected by increased air temperatures. As a result of this, the yields of maize and sorghum – two 
staple crops in Benin – have already decreased in the project areas. Climate -change impacts will further reduce 
productivity in agricultu ral landscapes and forest ecosystems.  
Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
Benin is a Low Middle Income developing country in terms of human development, ranking 163 out of the world’s 188 
countries70. The government debt -to-GDP ratio has been increasing over the past decade, and now stands at 41.5%, 
making it unfeasible for the GoB to allocate much of its budget to climate -change risk measures. There is a critical need 
in Benin for grant funding to fina nce technical assistance, training and other investments needed to change skills, 
knowledge, mind -sets, relationships and ways of working a managing natural resources and production in the face of 
climate change. Yet neither the domestic private sector, go vernment nor multilateral financial institutions are currently 
in a position to provide grant resources for these kinds of public goods. The proposed project will enhance the climate -
resilience of these vulnerable rural communities in Upper and Middle Ouém é Basin, with additional benefits in the 
Lower Basin. This will be achieved by using GCF resources to catalyse a shift to ICRM in the Ouémé Basin, thereby 
directly addressing the threats climate change poses to the livelihoods of these communities.  
Benin's  governance arrangements – whereby resources, policies, operations and expenditures are decentralized to the 
department level – imply that the capacity to meet the needs of the people of Benin to adapt to climate change must 
be developed at the departmenta l and municipality level. In recognition of this, the project includes regional (Oueme 
level) investments under Component 3 in coordination , monitoring tools, and knowledge systems to support  ecosystem 
planning  and adaptation . Moreover , through this  projec t, the GCF will  allocate more than 16 percent of its project 
resources to directly strengthening institutions and implementation capacity of the affected population through skill -
building and technology transfer to farmers and the organizations working wit h them such as FFS, input suppliers, 
traders, and local savings banks  (see Section C3) . The economic, social and institutional needs that they respond to 
are described above in terms of vulnerability.  
Finally, there is an investment gap in the Middle and U pper Oueme Basin for climate change adaptation and mitigation 
interventions. Currently, no project is supporting low carbon climate -resilient land and water management in the 
 
70 UNDP Human Development Repor t 2019.


---
*Page 88*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
   
watershed of Middle and Upper Oueme; while climate change adaptation projects ten d to focus on the Southern part 
of Benin (including Lower Oueme Basin) - except for the new GCF SAP project. The impacts of projects implemented 
in the lower basin are impaired by climate change impacts in the Upper and Middle Oueme, in particular heavy ra infalls, 
soil erosion and silting, which lead to floods and flash floods in the lower basin. Therefore, the OCRI project will address 
the existing investment gap in Middle and Upper Oueme by implementing an ICRM approach that will not only reduce 
climate c hange vulnerability in the target sites but  also along the whole Oueme Basi n.  
D.5. Country ownership  (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The proposed axes of intervention are aligned with the Benin INDC. Specifically, the adaptation measures of the INDC 
emphasize food and water security via implementation of climate -resilient practices and technologies. The activities 
proposed under the pro ject are therefore a national priority and fall within PAG 2016 - 2021, the Benin INDC, NAPA 
and PSDSA 2025 and PNIASAN 2017 - 2021 -2025. Interest in the project has also been demonstrated by the support 
of a large number of governmental and non -government al organizations via projects/programmes on similar pilot 
initiatives that are synergistic and could be scaled up. The Ouémé watershed Masterplan (SDAGE, 2013), envisages:  
• construction of small -scale dams and irrigation schemes for integrated and effective  watershed 
management, similar to  the implementation of climate -resilient practices promoted through the project;  
• agricultural farmland management on the watershed, in adherence with the implementation and replication 
of practices and the promotion of sust ainable livelihoods of climate -resilient agro -sylvo -pastoral 
ecosystems;  
• restoration of agricultural land as planned through the dissemination of integrated land and water practices;  
• integration of an adaptation dimension in the development plans and capac ity development, aligned with 
governance and local support to communes . 
The project has been developed in response to a request from MAEP in 2017, together with key stakeholders, including 
MAEP ,MCVDD, FNEC, GCF/NDA, IITA, INRAB and especially local communi ties. The roles of the various institutions 
mentioned above in the management and implementation of the project are outlined in the Feasibility Study.  The NDA 
is fully supportive of the project , as are MCVDD , MAEP  and other stakeholders . 
 
 The Ouémé Basin Agency  (OBA)  will join the multi -stakeholder platform as main partner. OBA is a public 
scientific and social institution under the supervision of the Water Directorate . The mission of the Agency is to 
coordinate, plan and promote the valorization of water through sustainable management and rational use of the water 
resources of Ouémé Basin. It is responsible for: managing financial, material and human resources; managing 
inventories and fixed assets; developing and  monitor budget execution; preparing the financial statements; tracking 
disbursements and replenishments of accounts; managing supplies and contracts; processing salaries and other 
employee benefits. As of yet,  only the management committee has been  establ ished.  
 
FNEC’s capacity to design and manage climate change -related projects will be enhanced. FNEC is Benin’s 
National Accredited Entity for the AF and the GCF. Through OCRI project, FNEC will receiving capacity building support 
from FAO to identify or design, implement and monitor climate change -related projects. Moreover, FNEC will be able 
to lev erage additional resources through increased capacity to design and manage bankable funding proposal that will 
support the replenishment of the Facility. This will unlock future climate investments in Benin.  
 
The project design phase consisted of an intensive stakeholder consultation process including FPIC consultation with 
indigenous communities, transparent communication and easy access to relevant information. The consultations 
ensured that the project is fu lly supported by the Government and inserted in the development priorities at national 
and municipal levels. Via the OCRI platform (see Component 3 in the project description) stakeholder consultations 
will be continued during the project implementation.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
The main objective of the project called the " Ouémé Climate Resilient Initiative" (OCRI) is to promote the climate 
resilience of landscapes and rural communities in the Upper and Middle Ouémé Basin  in Benin. The project intends to 
enable the adoption  and dissemination of adaptation  and mitigation  practices and technologies , to strengthen low 
carbon climate -resilient value chains,  and to establish an integrated  multi -stakeholder governance mechanism  for 
climate -resilient management in the Ouémé Basin . On-the-ground interventions in CRA, agroforestry and water works 
are based on best practices for the basin context, as identified in past initiatives and through scientific literature (see 
FS, Section 7). Such practices are proven climate change adaptation and mitigation technologies to enhance high-
value, vegetab le production, and diversify  agriculture production by integrating trees on annul c rop land.  To further 
support strengthened, diversified income streams under climate change, the project will promote use of an innovative 
farmers’ App – FarmTree. This techn ology has been identified as the best, low -cost option to support climate -resilient 
crop and tree planning, while at the same time providing cost -benefits estimates to farmers.


---
*Page 89*
---

D 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
   
However, the GoB does not have the financial and technical capacity, nor the knowledge, to implement the proposed 
interventions and initiate a paradigm shift towards resilient integrated management in the Ouémé Basin. The main 
financial constraints and obs tacles to the implementation of climate change adaptation measures in the five 
municipalities  are the high cost of investments, the difficult mobilization of financial resources from public and private 
sectors, and the lack of qualified human resources.  The proposed financial model of OCRI will leverage the 
dissemination of proven low carbon climate -resilient practices and technologies, and lead farmers to generate 
productive and sustainable farming models. Technical assistance, knowledge dissemination adap tation and 
sustainable production will be streamlined from farm to landscape levels via capacity development, so that the objective 
of increase d resilience of vulnerable smallholder farmers in the Upper and Middle Ou émé can be achieved.  
These investments would not be possible without the project due to barriers such as limited know -how on adaptive 
practices. With the GCF funding, the successful demonstration of this area will attract more investments through this 
project, and will remove an ent ry barrier for other donors and the private sector to finance similar needs in the country.  
This will be further ensured by developing a robust, innovative financial strategy (under component 3): the strategy will 
expand FNEC’s resources and provide loans and grants to cooperatives and small organisations in the Oueme Basin. 
The loans and grants will support CRA interventions that also promote ecosystem restoration and protection. Pathways 
to replenish the Facility at project’s end will be identified in ord er to ensure its long -term efficiency.  
Assessment was made of the net present value (NPV)71. The NPV determines the present value of net benefits by 
discounting the streams of benefits and costs back to the beginning of the base year. The analysis below is  presented 
in more detail in the attached EFA (Annex 3) in Excel (single crop based projections, tab “Indicators for Proposal), 
where it is projected over 30 years. With a Discount Rate of 10%, the Net Present Value of the project (including 
investment cos ts) is  of USD 69.4  million. This also means that for farmers, the interventions are economically viable, 
and therefore sustainable. The internal rate of return (IRR) of the project calculated over a period of 30 years amounts 
to 18%. These results do not t ake into account the non -quantifiable economic co -benefits (see Section D.3) or the ripple 
effect of the success of several groups on the local and national economy. Annex 4 also highlights the project’s cost 
per beneficiary at US$ 107. Figure  13 shows the  annual  project cost -benefit balance.  The  project investment is of 
US$35,314,576, spread over six years. The project breaks -even after eleven years from project start. The annual 
project impact increases considerably after Year 10 to an annual improved pr oduction value of around US$ 30 million 
in Year 15, because by then trees start producing.  
 
 The impact  farmers’ income is calculated by dividing the annual project impact (in increased production value over the 
baseline) divided by the number of direct beneficiaries.  If we assume a daily wage of FCFA 3000 -5000 (~US$ 9, upper 
value is chosen; 250 working days per year), this will lead to an  additional employment of 2,800 jobs by year 10 
after project start, and 8,900 additional jobs by year 30 afte r project start . 
  
The project will improve  the livelihoods of the beneficiaries in the targeted project areas, by reducing vulnerability to 
climate change -related hazards, by enhancing agricultural productivity and income through climate -resilient practices 
and crops/trees diversification, and through saving schemes and facilitated loan (FNDA) and grants (FNEC) access. As 
a result, farmers will be able  to increase trade sales . By the end of the project, farmers and local traders wi ll have set 
up value chains for both vegetables and tree products, that will sustain beyond the project period. With the multi -actor 
coordination, knowledge management and M&E, local and national actors will also have the capacity to build on and 
expand th e proposed innovations leading to climate -resilient farming.  While farmers need to adapt their farming 
practices to climate change, at the same time they need to meet increasing quality standard requirements set by the 
private sector. Hence capacity build ing is required. The private sector requires a reliable supply from farmers for growth. 
Farmer cooperatives and women groups will be trained so that farmers have the knowledge and skills to produce the 
required quality and quantity of produce for the priva te sector in a timely manner, using sustainable, climate -resilient 
practices. To facilitate a market for smallholders, the OCRI platform will have a space for networking dedicated for 
farmers, cooperatives, sellers, and private sector ; the latter  will be a ble to suggest specific trainings for  farmers in 
adhering to product requirements for the private -sector choice. Budget for training is allocated, the condition being 
secured offtake of farmer produce. Farmer extension workers in the private sector will be  selected  as trainers of trainers 
in an FFS.  
 
 
 
71 The NPV was calculated based on crop prices for 2022.


---
*Page 90*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
  
  
LOGI   E. LOGICAL  FRAMEWORK   
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework  to which the project/progra mme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co -financing.   
E.1. Project/Programme Focus  
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross -cutting proposals, select both.  
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation)  
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation)  
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1 -2 pages)  
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the parad igm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Acco rdingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the cu rrent state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three -point -scale rat ing (low, medium, and high ) provided in the guidance note.  Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In  doing so, please refer to section B.2 (a) (theory of 
change).         
Assessment 
Dimension  Current state (baseline)  Potential target scenario  
(Description ) How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description ) Description  Rating  
Scale  Farmers in the Upper and 
Middle Oueme Basin are 
very vulnerable to climate 
change impacts. These 
impacts result in soil 
fertility losses, land slides 
and floods, as well as 
reduced productivity. As a 
result,  farmers  – who have 
limited technical support 
for agriculture and low 
access to financial 
services – tend to  clear 
additional land (e.g. 
forests) and set up fields 
near the Oueme river. 
These unsustainable Low The paradigm shift will involve a move away 
from unsustainable agricultural practices  in 
the Oueme Basin of Benin . Technical support 
will be provided through FFS and FBS to 
scale up  CRA and sustainable land and water 
management in the Upper and Middle Oueme 
Basin ; and to enable access to financial 
servic es that can be invested in resilient VC 
crop production and sale . As productivity 
increases, and marketing of key VC products  
is boosted, farmers’ behavior will change 
towards sustainable, climate -resilient and low -
emission land and water management  in the 
Oueme Basin.  The interventions of the project will contribute 
to reduce CO2 emission through reforestation 
and sustainable land management ; they will 
directly benefit 330,000 farmers living in the 
five target municipalities, who will bec ome 
less vulnerable to climate change impacts. In 
addition, agricultural financial services like 
micro -credits (from selected MFIs working 
with FNDA) and subsidies (from FNEC) will 
be scaled up and more accessible to farmers 
for investments in CRA and VCs.


---
*Page 91*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
  
  
practices, aiming at 
providing new income (e.g. 
sale of wo od/ charcoal) or 
finding more fertile fields  
(near the river bed) , 
contribute to  degrade land 
and increase  GHG 
emission in Benin which, in 
turn, increase farmers’  
climate change 
vulnerability.  
Replicability  There is currently no ICRM 
approach to w atershed 
management  implemented  
in Benin; in particular, a 
land and water 
management approach 
that considers the r ippling 
effects of upstream 
watershed management 
on downstream population  
and livelihoods , and that 
support s CRA, is not 
implemented.  Therefore, 
replication is not yet 
possible.  
There are however some 
CRA techniques that are 
currently promoted in the 
Oueme Basin. The best 
practices will be replicated 
by the project, but as par t 
of the ICRM overall 
approach, to ensure 
benefits (in terms of 
climate change impact 
reduction) for upstream to 
downstream population in 
the Oueme Basin.  Medium  The project will demonstrate the benefits of its 
ICRM approach, applied to the Oueme Basin . 
Technical support  to farmers , investment in 
infrastructure, exchange visits for farmers and 
basin authorities, rigorous M&E of project 
impacts, and institutional strengthening will 
foster the replication of CRA in other 
communities/ sites, and of ICRM in other 
Basin of Benin (and possibly cross -boarder 
basins).  The CRA interventions will be informed by 
existing good practices and successful 
methods that were collected during the field 
visits in Benin. These CRA interventions will 
be combined with other measures for soil 
erosion control and water management, in 
order to ensure climate -resilient management 
in a watershed landscape. This ICRM 
approach has not been implemented yet in 
Benin, therefore lessons learned d will be 
carefully monitore d and inform any efforts to 
replicate the work in other Basin areas within 
and outside of Benin.


---
*Page 92*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
  
  
Sustainability  The GoB is committed to 
promote adaptation within 
the agricultural sector, 
which is a key priority for 
the country. However, the 
current institutional 
framework in the Oueme 
Basin , coordination level,  
and technical capacity of 
local government  do not 
support integrated water 
management in watershed 
landscape ; Climate 
change and ICRM are also 
not yet integrated into key 
local plans . And 
sensitisation and 
knowledge of this 
approach to climate 
change adaptation is low 
among public and private 
stakehodelrs. Therefore, 
sustainability is not yet 
possible.  Low The paradigm shift will ensure the 
institutionalization of OCRI’s approach  in the 
Oueme  Basin. This will be achieved by setting 
up a fully functional OCRI platform , building 
capacity among local extension  services and 
stakeholders, and revising relevant regulatory 
frameworks to mainstream ICRM approach . In 
addition, the project benefits will  be 
demonstrated on farmers’ fields, which will 
sustain their interest in implementing CRA 
and sustainable land management. Benefits 
will also be captured through rigorous M&E  
and knowledge products will be disseminated, 
as well as field visits organsied t o incentivize 
long-term behaviour changes for resilient, 
low-carbon land management in the Oueme 
Basin.   The project will work closely with regional and 
local authrotiries in the selected communes to 
build their capacity for ICRM, revise with them 
relevant  development plans to guide future 
investments in the Oueme Basin, and facilitate 
the maintenance of project interventions like 
the waterworks. In addition, private sector 
actors like MFIs and agribusinesses will be 
informed of the benefits of project 
interventions in terms of increased agricultural 
productivity and enhanced crop quality. This 
will ensure their long -term engagement and 
parterships with OCRI farmers, to invest in the 
production of key VC crops.  
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1 -4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and  or suppleme ntary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area  and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme -specific i ndicators should be developed under section E.5  (project/programme specific indicators) .  
GCF Result Area  IRMF  
Indicator  Means of Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions  / Note  
Mid-term  Final72 
 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities  Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new Field reports  
Mid- and end -term project 
evaluation  0 male  
 
0 female   100,000 men 
and 50,000 
women actively 
plan for climate -330,000 ( of 
which 165,000  
women ) have 
adopted CR A 
and diversified Trainings lead to the long -term 
behavior change, and adoption 
of CRA and sustainable land 
 
72 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emiss ion reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are  expected to be effective.


---
*Page 93*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
  
  
 climate -resilient 
livelihood options  Scorecard assessment of 
uptake of CRA and 
diversified income streams 
amongst project 
beneficiaries  
SHARP resilience 
assessment scores (report 
and data)  resilient 
agriculture  their income 
streams   management in the Ouémé 
Basin  
Support to CRA and value 
chains effectively lead to 
enhanced food security and 
income streams, so that 
farmers do not go back to 
unsustainable practices  
ARA2 Health, well -
being, food and water 
security  
 Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security  FAO and regional stat  
Project mid - and end -term 
evaluations  
Surveys of households in 
Upper and Middle Ouémé   
SHARP resilience 
assessment scores, 
including HDDS and FIES 
(report and data)  AGVSA report 
(2017): 10 -20% 
household in 
Middle Oueme; 
>20% in Glazoue; 
and 5 -10% in 
Upper Oueme  10,000  
households , of 
which 2,500 are 
female -headed,  
are food -
secured  66,000 
households (of 
which 16,500 
are female -
headed)  are 
food-secured  Based on FAO, food -secured 
households are defined as 
households in which, at all 
times, physical and economic 
access to sufficient, safe and 
nutritious  food that meets their 
dietary needs 
and food preferences for an 
active and. healthy life, is 
insured . 
In Upper and Middle Oueme, 
approx. 25% of the households 
are headed by a woman; the 
average household size is 5 
people  
Changes in baseline will be 
monitored through field surveys 
and during the project terminal 
reviews.  
Final target is determined 
based on the number of direct 
beneficiaries  
The implementation of CRA 
and agroforestry effectively 
lead to increased productivity 
after project Y 2  
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services  
 Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non -
forest , freshwater and GIS and satellite maps  
M&E reports using 
TreeFarm App  0 Restoration of 
60 000  ha in 
Upper and 
Middle Ouémé Restoration of  
95 000 ha in 
Upper and 
Middle Ouémé The ecosystems are not 
degraded to a point where th ey 
cannot be restored anymore


---
*Page 94*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
  
  
coastal marine areas 
brought under resoration 
and/or improved 
ecosystems   of agricultural 
fields through 
CRA, 
agroforestry and 
sustainable 
management  of agricultural 
fields through 
CRA, 
agroforestry and 
sustainable 
management  
 Support to CRA and value 
chains effectively lead to 
enhanced food security and 
income streams, so that 
farmers do not go back to 
unsustainable practices  
Restoration of river banks and 
fields along the Upper and 
Middle Ouémé River lead to 
reduced exposure to climate 
risks in downstream areas  
MRA4 Forestry and 
land use  
 Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  Biennial Update Reports 
(BUR) submitted to 
UNFCCC and available in 
UNFCCC platform  0 267 546 tCO2 
sequestered (i.e. 
89 182 tCo2 eq 
x 3 years)  535 092 tCO2 
sequestered (i.e. 
89 182 tCo2 eq 
x 6 years)  
 
1 783 633   tCO 2-
eq over 20 years  CO 2 emission reductions are 
estimated with FAO Ex -ACT 
tool 
 
CO2 emission reductions are 
estimated with FAO Ex -ACT 
tool; 
Project lifetime: 20 years  
Annual emission reductions: 
89 182 tCO2 -eq/yr Lifetime 
emission reductions: 1 783 633  
tCO2-eq over 20 years  
For more information on 
assumptions see GHG 
estimation report


---
*Page 95*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
  
  
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5 -8 as applicable)   
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis -à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be asse ssed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to comple te this section.  
Core Indicator  Baseline context  
(description)  Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline)  Target scenario  
(description)  How the project will contribute  Coverage  
Core Indicator 5: 
Degree to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission 
climate -resilient 
development pathways 
in a country -driven 
manner  There is no regional 
coordination body to 
facilitate a climate -
resilient, integrated 
management of the 
Oueme Basin.  
The Ouémé Master Plan 
maisntreams  climate 
change to some extend, 
however needs to be 
updated and effectively 
implemented  
The PDL do not 
mainstream adaptation  low The project will strengthen 
regional and local institutions 
and development 
frameworks by building the 
capacity of local government 
stakeholders, improving 
existing development plans 
and ensur ing the 
mainstreaming of adaptation 
concerns  into these plans . 
The project will also set up 
the OCRI platform to 
promote the long -term 
implementation of ICRM in 
the Oueme Basin.  Project Component 3 is dedicated to establishing a 
robust institutional environment for climate -resilient 
development in the Oueme Basin. Project outputs 
include the strengthen ing of the  Ouémé Master Plan 
and revision of  PDLs to mainstream adaptation ; the 
design and operationalization of the  OCRI platform to 
coordinate efforts and funding for ICRM in the Ouémé 
Basin ; the training of staff members of MAEP , MCVDD, 
extension service officers and members of OBA and 
other basin authorities on ICRM  Multiple 
sub-
national 
areas 
within a 
country  
Core indicator 8: 
Degree to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  Awareness of climate 
change appropriate 
responses is low  among 
farmers and stakehodelrs, 
in particular at the local 
level. There is also low 
awareness of ICRM for 
watershed landscapes in 
Benin, as a way to reduce 
climate change 
vulnerability of upstream 
to downstream population.  low The project  will contribute 
to generate new kowldge  
supporting climate -
resilient, low -emission 
development in 
watershed landscapes of 
Benin. Components 2 & 3 
will carefully monitor 
project impacts and 
develop and disseminate 
knowledge products to 
support this le arning 
process in Benin. In 
addition, the CRA  
technologies promoted 
under Component 1 are 
informed by existing best The project’s knowledge management strategy will 
ensure that all lessons and best practices are shared 
with target audiences, including (e.g.) oth er 
municipalities, Basin authorities, and farmers; as well 
as government institutions and donors that promote 
agriculture and VC in Benin.  
 
National 
level (one 
country)


---
*Page 96*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
  
  
practices in Benin or 
similar context.  
Core indicator 7: 
Degree to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transform
ation at the sectoral, 
local, or national level  Farmers in selected 
VCs are not meeting 
quantity and quality 
production standards . 
They have  low capacity 
for production, 
harvesting, storing, 
packaging and 
transporting crops to 
sale p oints. There is 
also a lack of 
structuration and 
organization within key 
VCs as farmers  tend to 
sell their crops on an 
individual basis, just 
after harvest when 
prices are low.  low The project will promote 
the development of 
climate -resilient, profitable 
VCs. Production will rely 
on climate -resilient, low -
carbon technologies, 
farmers’ organization and 
business skills will be 
enhanced and sale 
facilitated through regular 
contacts between 
producer s and buyers. 
Market development will 
be further supported by 
public (FNEC) and private 
(MFIs) invetsments and/or 
support to CRA.  The project  will support the government’s efforts 
to boost key VC and to promote CRA to improve 
productivity and livelihoods in rural areas of Benin. 
Component 2 of the project will particularily focus 
on organisaing farmers and equipping them with 
the skills to access micro -finance, invest efficiently 
in the field, and boost their profits. Private sector 
institutions like MFIs will also be sensitized on the 
benefits of providing financial services for CRA.  Multiple 
sub-
national 
areas 
within a 
country  
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators  (project outcomes and outputs)  
The performance indicators for progress reporting during implementation should seek to measure pre -existing conditions, progress and results at the most relevant level for ease of 
GCF monitoring and AE reporting. Add rows as needed.  
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  Project/programme 
specific Indicator  
 Means of 
Verification 
(MoV)  Baseline  Target  
Assumptions / Note  
Mid-term Final  
Climate Resilient Crop 
production enhanced and 
Ecosystem services restored in 
the Upper and Middle Ouéme   Changes in level of 
agricultural productivity  
 
Protection against climate -
relayed risks  Surveys 
amongst 
direct 
beneficiaries  
 
Surveys and 
stat in the 
Ouémé 
Basin to 
assess 
changes in 
risk 
exposure  <5% of households 
diversify production 
purposely  20,000  households 
have improved 
agricultural 
productivity  66,000 
households have 
improved 
agricultural 
productivity  
 
6 million people   
are less exposed 
to climate -related 
risks


---
*Page 97*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
  
  
 
SHARP 
resilience 
assessment 
scores 
(report and 
data)    
 
Climate -resilient and 
gender -sensitive value 
chains, supporting farmers’ 
livelihoods in the Upper and 
Middle Ouémé   
 Changes in level of income  
 
Diversification of income 
streams towards climate -
resilient high -value 
products   
Surveys 
amongst 
project 
beneficiaries  
 
SHARP 
resilience 
assessment 
scores 
(report and 
data)  Baseline on 
farmers’ income 
TBC  using 
SHARP tool at 
project onset  20,000  households 
have diversified 
their agricultural 
production  +10% income for 
project 
beneficiaries  
 
66,000 
households have 
diversified their 
agricultural 
production  Support provided t o value chains is 
sufficient to incentive farmers and 
cooperatives to invest in new climate -
resilient products  
 
The implementation of CRA and 
agroforestry effectively lead to 
increased productivity, which enables 
sale of agriproducts  
An enabling institutional 
and financial environment 
established to promote and 
upscale climate -resilient 
management in Benin’s 
Basins  A fully -functional OCRI 
platform   
 
A robust financial strategy 
for FNEC  
 Scorecard 
assessment 
of OCRI 
platform  
 
Surveys 
amongst 
members of 
the platform  
 
Review if the 
resources 
(amount + 
sources) 
available 
within FNEC 
to support 
projects  Governmental 
departments act in 
silos; public and 
private sector act 
independently ; 
currently FNEC 
has between 
USD50 -100,000 
available every 2 
years to finance 
climate change 
related projects  n/a 1 fully -functional 
and autonomous 
OCRI platform  
 
FNEC resources 
increasing by 20% 
(including 
investments from 
private sector)  
 
1 full -scale project 
to replenish the 
Facility  
 Government, pr ivate sector, civil 
society and producer organizations 
are ready to overcome barriers for 
collaboration  
 
Green -tax can be expanded to 
increase FNEC’s revenue  
 
Private sector is incentivised to invest 
resources in ICRM  
Project/programme co-benefit indicators  
Co-benefit 1:  livelihood of 
165,000 women improves  Women are satisfied by 
the support provided by 
the projects  Scorcards 
among 
women on 
their level of Baseline on 
women’s 
perception of their 
livelihoods TBC  100,000 women 
with improved 
livelihoods  165,000 women 
with improved 
livelihoods  Women can fully, and equally 
participate to the project activities, 
thanks to the Dim itra approach 
promoted in each commune


---
*Page 98*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
  
  
satisfaction 
with the 
project  using SHARP tool 
at project onset  
Co-benefit 2:  farmers’ 
income increases  Changes in the level of 
income  Surveys 
amongst 
project 
beneficiaries  
 Baseline on 
farmers’ income 
TBC  using 
SHARP tool at 
project onset  n/a +10% income for 
project 
beneficiaries  Demands for value chain crops 
promoted by OCRI is significant 
enough to aobsorb new production  
Farmers and buyers are well -
connected  
 
E.6.  Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub -activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in the implementation timetable. Add rows as needed.  
Activity  Description  Sub-activities  Deliverables  
1.1.1.  Build water 
harvesting and retention 
infrastructures  The project will subcontract 
relevant local companies ti 
build  hard and soft 
infrastructures such as micro -
dams, dykes, cisterns and 
surface boreholes, as well as 
‘soft’ contour ploughing, and 
stone lines that can easily be 
reproduced and maint ained by 
the communities (see training 
under Activity 1.2.3). Each 
beneficiary village will receive 
1 micro -dam, equipped with 
solar pumps and irrigation 
pipes, to feed agricultural 
plots under Output 1.2. Simple 
adaptation techniques, like 
contour and mul ching, will 
also contribute to improve 
water retention especially in 
drought - and flood -prone 
areas, like Upper and Middle, 
as demonstrated in previous 
projects  Based on OCRI feasibility 
Study on waterworks:  
1.1.1.1.  Construction of 
surface water storage  
structures or harvesting 
structures (Small earth dams, 
water rising structures, etc.)  
1.1.1.2 Rehabilitate 23 old 
surface water collection 
structures  
1.1.1.3 3 Development of 
small irrigated perimeters with 
full water control 1.1.1.4  
Development for the 
protection of water sources 
(river, head of streams, 
artesian boreholes, etc.)  
1.1.1.5  Support for 
waterworks guidance  
1.1.1.6 Set up 1,320 ha of 
irrigated land in Glazoue and 
Djougou  
1.1.1.7 Secure government 
support to coinvest in 
waterworks  
 - 30 new surface water structures are built  
- 23 surface water collection structures are rehabilitated  
- 680ha of irrigated plots are established ( GCF ) + 1,320 ha ( MAEP ) 
- 14 water sources are built  
- 44 artesian boreholes  are built  
- 5 micro -dams are built 
 
This will be verified through activity reports  
1.1.2  Strengthen degraded 
river banks and restore land 
with tree .   This activity will especially 
focus on Upper Ouémé and 
contribute to reduce flood 1.1.2.1 Conduct detailed 
biodiversity analysis in Upper 
and Middle Ouémé to identify -5,000 ha + 4,000 ha ( MAEP/ ) of degraded river banks and fields are reforested  
 
-5 nurseries are built


---
*Page 99*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
  
  
risks in Middle and Lower 
areas. Trees will be pla nted 
by workers hired by the 
project on river banks and 
fields to restore vegetation 
coverage, reduce flood risks 
due to heavy rainfalls falling 
on bare land, restore fertility, 
provide shade and keep 
moisture in a context where 
heat stresses and 
evapotran spiration increase.  
Reforestation sites will be 
determined at project onset. In 
addition, one community -
managed tree nursery will be 
built in each beneficiary 
community, to accommodate 
10,000 trees/year.   site specific locally -relevant 
and resilient tree species - 
conduct technical and 
hydrological studies to identify 
best site for the micro -dams  
1.1.2.2  Set up 5 community 
tree nurseries and provide 
technical support to produce 
high-quality seedlings  
1.1.2.3. Plant 5,000 ha of 
trees along degraded river 
banks and fields  
1.1.2.4 Plant additional 
4,000ha of trees in  Glazoué, 
Zagnando and Zogbodomey  
(MAEP)  
1.1.2.5 FAO provides  
Technical support to produce 
high-quality tree seedlings to 
enhance rural community 
resilience to climate change  
 
 
  
This will be verified through activity reports  
1.2.1 Train 15 FFS Master 
Trainers  and facilitators 
(women and men )  15 existing FFS Master 
Trainers (mix of agronomy, 
livestock, forest, land  and 
water experts) (at least 30% 
women) will be selected and 
trained. Four training sessions 
(one week x session) are 
organized to refresh and 
update the Master Trainers on 
the FFS methodology and on 
the key technical issues 
needed by the project. These 
Master Trainers will conduct 
the ToF, which are described 
in the following activity.   1.2.1.1 Develop training 
courses  
1.2.1.2 Select 15 Master 
trainers to train and capacity/ 
skills assessment  
1.2.1.3. Implement 4 x 1 -week 
training sessions  15 Master Trainers are ‘refreshed’  (At least 30% women)  
 
This will be verified through review of training attendance list and 2 scorecard 
assessments (pre and post -training) of the trainer’s capacity to train on CRA  
1.2.2.   Training of 250 
Facilitators (at  least 40% 
women)  The activity will train 250 
trainers  that is  50 per 
selected municipality – to 
become OCRI facilitators. 
First, a training curriculum will 1.2.2.1 D evelop  training 
curriculum and modules on 
gender -responsive CRA; 
agro-forestry; sustainable land - Training modules  integrating gender concerns are developed and adapted to 
local context  
- 250 facilitators are formed (at least 40% women)  
-  All trainers are trained on gender -responsive and participatory approaches


---
*Page 100*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
  
  
be developed based on the 
key priorities of the Ouémé 
Basin. This activity will include 
a validation workshop, which 
involve technical experts and 
FFS Master Trainers. 
Secondly, according with the 
curriculum, the training 
material will be compiled and 
adjusted, covering the 
following thematic : FFS 
methodology, climate -resilient 
agriculture (CRA); agro -
forestry; sustainable land 
management (with focus on 
river banks); and construction 
and maintenance of small 
waterworks.  Gender equality 
will be integrated throughout 
the curriculum. In addition, 
there will be specific modules 
and sessions on gender -
responsive and participatory 
approaches to capacity 
development and community 
engagement including the 
Dimitra Clubs approach. The 
training modules will be 
dissem inated on the 
knowledge portal of OCRI 
platform (Activity 3.1.1). 
Finally, the modules on CRA 
will offer various ‘starter kits’, 
with specific adaptation 
options and seed varieties, 
from which project 
beneficiaries can choose, 
based on the needs and 
specif icities of their farm (to 
be distributed under Activity 
1.2.2). Once the training 
modules are ready for use, 
250 facilitators (50 per 
municipality) will be trained: 
the project will organize 10 management (with focus on 
river banks) water works   
1.2.2.2 Organise 10 training of  
facilitators sessions of a 5 -
month duration, to 
accommodate 25 facilitators 
per session (for a total of 250 
facilitators trained)  This will be verified through review of training attendance list and activity 
reports ; and 2 scorecard assessments (pre and post -training) of the Facilitators ’ 
learning through the modules


---
*Page 101*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
  
  
Training of Facilitators (ToF), 
for a duration of 5 months 
each (sequential training - 1 
week per month) to follow the 
entire production season. 
Each ToF will be attended by 
25 facilitators. These 
facilitators will come from local 
extension services in forestry 
and agriculture, local rural 
irrigation and waterworks 
department of MAEP, young 
educated community 
members and leads, 
technicians or members of 
agri-businesses. They will be 
chosen based on their 
willingness to become OCRI 
facilitators to continue the 
training beyond the project’s 
lifespan.  Women’s 
engagement will be 
proactively sought to promote 
equal participation.  
1.2.3 Implement climate 
resilient agriculture  including 
agroforestry, to enhance 
agricultural productivity under 
climate change.  
  Training will take place in 650 
farmer field schools (FFS), 
including 100 schools 
dedicated to women , including 
30 dedicated to women 
associated with the 204 
Dimitra Clubs; plus 225 FFS 
set up with MAEP cofinancing . 
The 250 facilitators trained 
under Activity 1.2.2 will 
disseminate the practices 
through the established FFS 
to a total of  16,250 farmers 
(25 farmers per FFS  set up 
with GCF resources ) – 
including at least 50% women 
– spread over the 5 target 
municipalities. There will be 
130FFS through the project 
lifespan per target municipality 
(spread between selected 1.2.3.1  Set up 650 FFS and 
select training beneficiaries in 
areas not covered by MEAP; 
or beyond the MAEP project 
period . Each FFS will include 
20 training sessions and 
involve 25 farmers (at least 
40% women) 1.2.3.2 Technical 
support, coaching and 
supervision to the 
implementation of 650 FFS  
1.2.3.3  Provide training to 
additional farmers in Glazoué, 
Djougou, Zagnando and 
Zogbodomey  
 16,250 (GCF)  plus 9,000 ( MAEP ) farmers are capacitated to implement CRA on 
their fields (including 50% women)  
 
This will be verified through review of training attendance list and 2 scorecard 
assessments (pre and post -training) to assess understanding and uptake of 
CRA among trained farmers)  
 
204 Dimitra Clubs (3 per 68 villages) established and functioning


---
*Page 102*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
  
  
villages). Each FFS will last 4 -
to-5 months (following length 
of the growing season). The 
16,250 training beneficiaries 
will also receive farmer’s 
starter kits, including small 
tools like spade, water can, 
trowels, wheelbarrow, as well 
as improved seeds . An 
additional 9,000 f armers will 
be trained with 
MAEPcofinancing.  
1.2.4  Increase access of 
adapted quality seeds and 
plant propagation material  First, the project will set up  or 
rehabilitate  nurseries for the 
production of quality 
seed lings; then, selected 
farmers will be organized into  
seed producer groups in order 
to multiply/ reproduce 
improved climate adapted 
seeds. This will enable 
communities to continue 
climate -resilient farming 
beyond the project’s cycle.  1.2.4.1 Rehabilitate/build  and 
operationalise 1 nursery per 
target municipality  
1.2.4.2 O rganise and support 
1 seed producer group  per 
municipality  
1.2.4.3 Train technicians and 
farmers to collect, handle and 
dispatch shea seeds and to 
produce seedlings.  - 5 comm unal tree seed supply facilities established  
- 15 Communal Nursery managers trained every year on nursery technics 
related to targeted plants.  
- 5 tree seeds producer groups established and supported through training.  
 
This will be reviewed through activity reports  
 
2.1.1  Increase income of 
5,000 farmers through training 
on business and marketing 
techniques and equipment 
using FAOfarm business 
schools (FBS) methodology    The training will take place on 
the 100 most -productive FFS; 
FBS will be set up and 
farmers not yet organized in 
cooperative, will be: 
cooperatives (approx. 100 
cooperatives) will be 
organised around key value 
chains: mango, shea, cashew 
and maize. The learning 
programmes will be designed 
to develop business and 
marketing sk ills among 
cooperatives. Processing, 
packaging and storing 
equipment for shea, cashew, 
mango and maize will be 
provided to the cooperatives 
in need. An additional 100 
FBS will provide training to 2.1.1.1 Train 2,500 farmers 
organized in agribusinesses 
and cooperatives – including 
33% women.  Each FBS will 
include 20 training s essions 
and involve 25 farmers  
2.1.1.2  FBS coached and 
supervised: coaching, 
reporting, monitoring & 
evaluation process, by a 
group of local focal points 
(FBS experts); 1 month per 
FFS, funded by the FBS 
funder  
2.1.1.3 Provide at least 15 
small processing/ packaging/ 
storing units to cooperatives  
2.1.1.4 Train and equip 
additional cooperatives   for 
post-harvest, processing, 
storing and sale of - 2,500  farmers are trained by GCF and 2,500 by MAEP on business and 
marketing techniques  
- 15  small processing/ packaging/ storing units are distributed to cooperatives  
 
This will be verified through activity reports, review of training attendance list and 
capacity assessment (scorecard to assess understanding of business and 
marketing techniques a mong trained farmers)


---
*Page 103*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
  
  
2,500 more farmers under the 
MAEP  cofinancing  agriproducts in Glazoue, 
Zogbodomey, Djougou and 
Zagnanado  
2.1.2 Improve access to 
micro -credit and investments 
for agriculture   The 5,000  farmers trained 
under Activity 2.1.1 will also 
receive training on financial 
management for cooperatives, 
and developing business 
plans to boost their financial 
profits (through better financial 
management) and to address 
current barriers in accessing 
micro -credits (see B.1 on 
barrie rs; as well as Annex  19 
Section 3 ). Training will be led 
by ADTA, and modules will be 
prepared with support from 
FAO coaches. A gender -
specific module will be 
developed to enable women’s 
access to credit and buy 
equipment to support their 
activities in the processing of 
high-value nuts and crops.  2.1.2.1 Develop training 
material addressing current 
barriers to credit ac cess 
2.1.2.2 Organise  5 training 
sessions for each FBS to train 
2,500 farmers  
2.1.2.3 Establish Village 
Savings and Loans 
Associations to foster low -
threshold small loan provision  
2.1.2. 4 Improve access to 
financial services for farmers 
in Glazoue and Djougou  5,000  farmers are trained on financial planning and management (at least 50% 
women)  
 
 
This will be verified through review of training attendance list and capacity 
assessment (scorecard to assess understanding of financial planning among 
trained farmers) as well as  operational and financial performances . 
2.1.3   Train  facilitators 
(selected educated young) 
and national/local climate 
change experts (from relevant 
institutions eg MCVDD, 
MAEP) on the use of  
assessment and/or monitoring 
Instruments for Resilience  
(TreeFarm App are the 
identified tools).  Train 10 facilitat ors (selected 
educated young) and 20 
climate change experts (from 
relevant institutions eg 
MCVDD, MAEP) on the use of 
FarmTree App  (at least 45% 
facilitator are women and at 
least 50% are youth)  
 
 2.1.3.1 S elect 10 facilitators  (2 
per target municipality) and 20 
experts from MCVDD and 
MAEP (national and municipal 
services) to be trained on the 
tools  
2.1.3.2 E quip them and train 
them  through 1x 5 -day 
training session in Cotonou  10 facilitators are equipped with  the TreeFarm App  
 
20 CC experts from MCVDD and MAEP are trained on resilience monitoring tool 
(FarmTree App)  
 
This will be verified through attendance list and activity reports; and scorecard to 
assess participants’ understanding and ability to use the Apps and tools  
2.2.1  Disseminate information 
products packaged for private 
sector to demonstrate the 
socio -economic benefits of 
waterworks, CRA and 
agroforestry  This will target investors and 
credit organisations in the field 
of agriculture. The 
demonstration will be 
supported by the  data and 
results produced with the 
FarmTree App under 2.1.3, 
and the  M&E under Activity 
3.1.4, which will conduct a 
rigorous monitor ing of project’s 2.2.1.1  Develop information 
products packaged for private 
stakeholders and finance 
institutions  
2.2.1.2  Disseminate the 
products via the OCRI 
platform, flyers and booklets 
distributed  
2.2.1.3 Field visit in each 
project municipality  for private 
stakeholders (including MFI, Flyers and manuals showcasing the economic benefits of waterworks, CRA and 
agroforestry are produced and disseminated  
 
This will be verified through activity reports


---
*Page 104*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
  
  
interventions and impacts. 
This demonstration of project’s 
benefits, combined with the 
financial and marketing 
training activities under Output 
2.1, will improve access to 
public and private funds and 
credits for farmers, including 
from go vernment -managed 
FNDA.  wholesaler, export companies, 
etc.) to showcase the benefits 
of project activities  
 
2.2.2  Organise municipal 
forums to connect farmers 
and small businesses to local 
and reg ional buyers  Relevant buyers will be 
identified and connected to 
farmers through these ‘match -
making’ forums . The municipal 
forums will be organized twice 
a year, as opportunities for 
producers to showcase their 
innovative climate -resilient 
production prac tices, and their 
resilient products, as well as to 
conclude trade agreements 
between farmers and buyers of 
resilient agri -products, or 
receive new demands for 
alternative products from the 
buyers, based on market 
demands.  Women and 
women -led cooperatives and 
agribusinesses will be invited o 
showcase their practices and 
products.  2.2.2.1 Further Identify 
relevant buyers in each 
municipal to invite to the 
forums  
2.2.2.2 Liaise with the GoB 
and municipal authorities to 
provide support to the forums 
and to facilitate trade 
agreements between farmers 
and buyers  
2.2.2.3 Organize bi -annual 
forums (5 in total, from project 
Y3)  
2.2.2.4 Ensure partnerships 
between farmers, processing 
companies and buyers in 
Glazoue, Zogbodomey et 
Zagnanado  5 bi-annual forums  are organised  
 
This will be verified through activity reports  
3.1.1  Establish and activate  
the OCRI platform  ensuring 
adequate and meaningful 
participation of women and 
women’s organizations at 
local and national level  A first step to set up the 
platform will be to identify, 
through consultations, all 
relevant institutions and 
stakeholders to join the 
platform’s  coordination 
mechanism. Then the 
following elements of the 
platform will be designed:  
- Operational system including 
legal status, role and 
responsibility;  3.1.1.1 Further identify 
relevant stakeholders to 
participate on the platform, 
including their roles and 
responsib ilities  
3.1.1.2 Design the platform 
operational strategy , and 
multi -stakeholder coordination 
mechanism  
3.1.1.3 Design the platform’s 
financial and communication 
strategies – including an - 1 signed agreements between OCRI platform members  
-1 fully -functional OCRI platform is established and operational, and has a legal 
status  
 
This will be verified through activity reports, OCRI’s strategic documents, online 
portal and survey among the members of the platform to assess its functionality


---
*Page 105*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
  
  
- A coordination mechanism to 
engage all relevant 
stakeholders to join efforts for 
ICRM in the Ouémé Basin  
(especially on the reforestation 
and small waterworks; and 
M&E of their impacts) .  
- A communication strategy to 
disseminate project -related 
information, raise awareness 
of climate change  and gender , 
and the socio -economic 
benefits of an ICRM appl ied to 
basin areas, and set up the 
Annual Symposium.  
- A financial strategy to ensure 
the continuation of the platform 
beyond the project.  
 online portal to be hosted by 
MCVDD  
3.1.1.4 Disseminate all 
training modules, knowledge 
products, and project’s 
lessons learnt and best 
practices on the platform’s 
online portal  
3.1.1.5  Ensure government 
support to OCRI platform  
3.1.2 Implement regional and 
local climate -resilient 
development plans in the 
Oueme Basin to ensure long -
term investment in low carbon 
integrated climate resilient 
management  The Ouémé Master Plan 
(SDAGE) will be revised to 
address the gaps identified in 
the FS (see Section 6.3), and 
implemented by OBA .  The 
revised Master Plan will 
integrate gender concerns  
The strengthened SDAGE will 
serve as the umbrella under 
which project activities linked 
to tree plantation and 
restoration of the riverbanks 
(Output 1.1) will take place. 
Moreover, ICRM will be 
mainstreamed into the PDL of 
the 5 target municipalities  to 
guide future (post -project) 
local governmental 
investments in the Ouémé 
Basin. It will provide guidance 
for waterworks (and their 
maintenance) and other sof t 
and hard adaptation 
technologies . 
Relevant staff members from 
OBA and local extension 3.1.2.1 Organise participatory 
workshop to discuss options 
for strengthening the SDAGE  
3.1.2.2  Revise  the Oueme 
Operational Management 
Plan with all relevant 
stakeholders and validate 
through a workshop  3.1.2.3 
Organise 1x5 -day training 
sessions on ICRM targeting 
extension officers  and OBA 
staff members  
3.1.2.4 Revise  local 
development plans  - 1 validat ion workshop to validate the SDAGE and the LDPs strengthened  to 
mainstream ICRM approach in watershed management  
- 10 extension officers (2 per municipality) and 5 members of OBA are trained to 
implement ICRM in the Oueme Basin  
- 5 members of other basin a uthorities are trained to implement ICRM  
 
This will be verified through activity report and list of participants to the validation 
workshop; scorecard assessment of stakeholders’ understanding and capacity 
to implement ICRM in watersheds


---
*Page 106*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
  
  
officers will be trained to 
implement the SDAGE and 
LDPs.  
3.1.3  Implement rigorous 
M&E on land restoration in the 
Ouémé Basin  10 Staff members of MCVDD 
and MAEP, as well as 10 
extension officers  (2 per site)  
from the forest department in 
the target municipalities will 
receive technical support from 
FAO to conduct rigo rous M&E 
of the impacts of tree 
plantation among the Oueme 
riverbanks. Moreover, they will 
be capacitated to implement 
the SHARP tool (or similar 
resilience assessment 
approaches) during target 
training sessions. Finally, 
extension officers will be 
capacit ated to provide advises 
on climate -resilient agriculture 
and adaptation to farmers 
living in their commune.  3.1.3.1  Organize 1x 5-days 
training workshop to train 20 
officers on M&E techniques  
with FAO support  
3.1.3.2 Train 10 extension 
officers to provide advises on 
climate -resilient agriculture  
3.1.3.3 Conduct mid -term 
evaluation  
3.1.3.4 Conduct end of project 
evaluation  
3.1.3.5 Carry out a project 
impact study  
 10 staff members of MAEP and MCVDD , 10 extension service officers are 
trained on M&E and CRA  
 
1 mid -term and 1 end of project evaluation reports  
 
This will be reviewed through attendance lists and scorecard assessment on 
understanding of M&E practices ; and review of the reports  
 
3.2.1  Develop a robust 
financial strategy for FNEC  A long -term strategy and 
roadmap to strengthen and 
replenish FNEC’s financial 
resources will be developed 
(through expanded the green -
tax basis, leveraging private 
finance, and developing 
bankable projects); its 
resources will be re -oriented 
to specificall y support climate -
resilient initiatives (with the 
development of a checklist to 
facilitate the selection of 
relevant projects).  
 3.2.1.1 Review FNEC’s 
existing financial strategy and 
identify gaps and 
opportunities to expand it  
3.2.1.2. Organise 
consultations with FNEC and 
MCVDD to discuss best 
options for increasing FNEC’s 
resources  
3.2.1.3 Organise validation 
workshop with GoB to validate 
the financial  strategy  
3.2.1.4 Through consultation 
with FNEC, identify relevant 
criteria to facilitate the  
selection of relevant climate 
change adaptation projects to 
be financed through FNEC’s 
resources  
 1 validation workshop to validate and formally adopt the strengthened financial 
strategy of FNEC  
 
This will be verified through reviewing the workshop parti cipants’ list, the 
Facility’s roadmap, and  survey among the members of the Facility


---
*Page 107*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
  
  
3.2.2 Build  FNEC’s capacity to 
design, select, implement and 
monitor climate change -
related projects  GCF fund will be used to 
provide technical assistance 
and build FNEC’s capacity to 
design bankable climate 
change projects, which can 
attract investments from 
private sector institutions 
(because of their 
demonstrated returns), or 
receive funding from national/ 
international funds and 
donors. At the end of the 
project, FNEC will have 
designed at least one fully -
fledged Funding Proposal, 
with high potential to receive 
funding from international 
donors . GCF fund will support 
FNEC to develop such 
proposal (capacity building) 
and submit it to the most 
adequate fund by  project’s 
end. Finally, training on 
gender -responsive budgeting 
will be provided to FNEC’s 
members to ensure  the use of 
fund will take into account 
women -specific needs and 
priorities.  
 3.2.2.1 Conduct a detailed 
assessment of FNEC’s 
capacity to design, i mplement 
and monitor climate change -
related projects  
3.2.2.2 Design training 
modules and t rain 5 members 
of FNEC (2x1 -week training) 
3.2.2.3 Provide regular 
support to FNEC to design a 
bankable climate change 
project to submit to the AF or 
GCF  - 1 fully-fledged funding proposal submitted to GCF or AF  
 
This will be verified through review of the proposal and training attendance list.  
3.2.3 Provide finance to 3 
micro -projects that contribute 
to climate change adaptation 
and ecosystem restoration in 
the Oueme Basin  to the 
benefits of small -scale farmers   Provide finance to 3 micro -
projects (that contribute to 
climate change adaptation 
and ecosystem restoration in 
the Oueme Basin – to the 
benefits of small -scale 
farmers (FNEC co -financing)   
This activity will be funded by 
FNEC. A call for proposal will 
be opened and farmers’ 
associations and 
cooperatives, trained in the 
FBS, will be requested to 
submit proposals for initiatives 
that focus on climate -resilient 3.2.3.1 Open call for proposal  
3.2.3.2  Review received 
projects and select, contract 
and finance the successful 
ones  - 3 micro -project implemented  
 
This will be verified through submitted proposals and results from the M&E 
process.


---
*Page 108*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
  
  
agriculture and ecosystem 
restora tion and/or protection 
in the Oueme Basin. The call 
for proposal will be launched 
based on current FNEC’s 
procedures. To ensure the AE 
can oversee these projects in 
an appropriate fashion, FAO 
will work with FNEC to 
develop a project selection 
‘check -list’, which ensure the 
selection of projects aligned 
with OCRI approach and 
gender -responsiveness; FAO 
will also strengthen FNEC’s 
capacity to monitor the 
implementation of these 
micro -projects on the ground, 
produce detailed progress 
reports, and ensure finan cial 
transparency.  
 
3.3.1 Organise knowledge 
dissemination events and 
products on OCRI  with full 
integration of gender . This will include:  
- Farmers’ field visits for 
neighbouring communities  
(100 farmers for each project 
site), during Y4 -5 of the 
project, to showcase OCRI’s 
results;  
- Field visits to project sites for 
5 members of Benin’s basin 
authorities (Volta, Niger and 
Mono)  
- Radio shows to broadcast 
information about climate 
change related risks in Upper 
to Lower Ouémé regions . The 
information will be prepared 
and packaged based on the 
communication strategy 
developed under Activity 3.1.1. 
Radio hosts will be trained 
and, if possible, the radio hosts 
trained under the SAP project 
will be used to broadcast 3.3.1.1 O rganize  5 field visits 
for 100 farmers per 
municipality (5), livi ng in 
neighboring communities that 
did not directly beneficiated 
the project  
3.3.1.2 Organise 1 x 1 -week 
visit for representatives of 
Benin’s other basins  
3.3.1.3 Synergise with SAP 
project to t rain 10 radio 
broadcasters to disseminate 
climate change relat ed 
information and organize radio 
broadcast with local radio in 
each municipality  
3.3.1.4 Develop and package 
knowledge products on the 
projects, according to the 
needs of each targeted group  
3.3.1.5 Organise sensitization 
campaings on CC in Glazoue  
and Djougou  - 5 farmers’  field visits  are organised  
- 1 exchange visit for Benin’s other basins authorities  
- Various knowledge products  are produced  
 
This will be verified through activity reports  and attendance lists for the visits


---
*Page 109*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
  
  
information in t he Ouémé 
Basin;  
- Knowledge products to raise 
awareness of CCA in basins 
for governmental institutions, 
agro-businesses and 
cooperatives, and 
smallholders in the whole 
Ouémé Basin.  
3.3.2 Organise  OCRI Annual 
Symposium  The symposium will be 
targeting agri - businesses, 
entrepreneur, and 
cooperatives to showcase 
their innovative climate -
resilient practices and their 
benefits.  3.3.2.1  Identify relevant 
participants  from agri -
business (producers, sellers, 
manufacturer, etc.) and policy -
makers to attend the 
symposium  
3.3.2.2 Organise 1 
symposium per year from 
project Y2 , with support from 
MCVDD and MAEP  
3.3.2.3 FAO supports OCRI 
Annual S ymposium  
 5 symposiums are organised  
 
This will be verified through activity reports  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Project monitoring and reporting  
In its role as Accredited Entity, FAO (specifically the FAO -GCF project supervision team) will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project in accordance 
with the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) signed between FAO and the GCF. As per the G CF Monitoring and Accountability Framework, and in accordance 
with the AMA, FAO will provide the GCF with an Inception Report, Annual Performance Reports, an independent Mid -term Evaluation report, a Project Closure 
Report and an independent Final Evaluati on report. FAO will also provide semi -annual and annual Financial Reports throughout project implementation . 
Evaluation  
 
In accordance with the AMA between FAO and GCF, the FAO Office of Evaluation will be responsible for the independent interim and final evaluations for OCRI. 
The evaluations will use a question -driven approach and according to the GCF evaluation criteria. The interim evaluation will be instrumental in contributing – through 
operational and strategic recommendations – to improve implementat ion, setting out any necessary corrective measures for the remaining period of the project. The 
final evaluation will assess the relevance of the intervention, its overall performance, coherence in climate finance delivery with other multilateral agencies,  gender 
equity, innovativeness in results areas , as well as sustainability and scalability of results, and lessons learned. The evaluation should also assess the extent to wh ich 
the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s higher -level goal of achieving a paradigm shift to low -emissions sustainable dev elopment pathways and climate -
resilient sustainable development in Benin. The evaluations will draw on different evaluation methods and tools. In addition to primary data collected by the evaluators 
and secondary national data, both interim and final evalu ations will draw on the monitoring reports and activities prepared by project staff. Careful attention will be 
paid to the disaggregation of data, results and outcomes by gender.  The project will include an impact evaluation. A budget of USD350 000 has bee n included to 
cover costs associated to the IE. Detailed IE design will be carried out during early implementation.


---
*Page 110*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
  
  
 
 Responsibility for project -level monitoring will rest with a designated monitoring officer, located within the Project Coordination Unit. T he PMU  (established through 
the OCRI platform) will set up a monitoring system to be led by the monitoring officer. The monitoring system will serve to t rack and report on the project 
implementation overall, including the implementation of the outputs, out comes and impacts detailed in the results framework, shown above in Section E Logical 
Framework. It will also track implementation of the project’s Gender Action Plan and Environmental and Social Management Plan . Monitoring data will be stored, 
compiled an d displayed in a dedicated module of the project MIS to be developed and deployed by the PMU . To ensure regular monitoring of on -the-ground 
interventions, the monitoring team will work with, and supervise, selected farmers and extension officers on the gro und. This will contribute to ensure project 
ownership. They will be equipped with smart phone that includes an innovative app (FarmTree, under development ) which captures the environmental, social, and 
economic performance of project interventions.  The project’s M&E methodologies, procedures, systems and design will be established within the inception phase 
of the project under activity 3.1.4.  
 
Project monitoring officer will monitor AWPB implementation and the outputs that result from it, including those that are detailed in the results framework, on an on -
going basis. They will use the data and information from this monitoring reported to them by project staff, project partners and beneficiaries to prepare the draft 
performance reports, which will i n turn be sent to the Project Steering Committee and the FAO –GCF project supervision team (in its role as Accredited Entity). Using 
these inputs, the FAO –GCF project supervision team will bear overall responsibility for ensuring that all relevant reporting  is provided to the GCF in a timely manner 
and in accordance with the formats and standards agreed by the two organizations and the GoB. The monitoring team will also s hare monitoring findings with the 
project management staff so that they may discuss impl ementation issues as they arise. This will take place in the form of knowledge -sharing events and briefings 
within the PMU, PMU  and LPIU management teams.


---
*Page 111*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
   
RISK  F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)   
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 Weak collaboration between stakeholders  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Weak collaboration between stakeholders from different governmental ministries and departments; and from the private 
sector may negatively affect project implementation, result in limited information and knowledge -sharing on climate -
resilience  practices and technologies, and ultimately impairs the overall long -term project impact.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
The GoB including the various stakeholders to be involved in the OCRI  multi -stakeholder platform have been 
extensively consulted during the project design phase; all governmental institutions that will participate on the OCRI 
platform have review and validated the project. The OCRI platform will be designed, based on extensive consultations 
with stake holders from public and private sector to identify best institutions to involve, along with their role and 
responsibilities on the platform. Participation on the platform will be on a voluntary basis, but encouraged through the 
demonstration of the project ’s benefits. The establishment of OCRI multi -stakeholder mechanism will be supported by 
FAO, which has experience in multi -stakeholder engagement processes, and this will ensure project ownership by 
Benin institutions. All together these interventions will  lower the risk probability to Low.  
Selected Risk Factor 2 Quantity and quality of water availability downstream  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
The project will increase access to water and improve on-farm water supply through rainwater harvesting cisterns, and 
micro -dams for small -scale irrigation systems and ground water -recharge. This might lead to higher consumption of 
water resources, possibly affecting downstream water quantity and quality.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
In light of increasing water scarcity due to climate -change hazards, the project will place a strong focus on water 
conservation and sustainable water management. The project will build ground water -recharge infrastructure  to ensure 
that underground water is maintained and increased. Tree planting and soil improvement will result in increased water 
infiltration. These activities will offset the potential risks of water abstraction.  Risk of water overuse especially in Upp er 
and Middle  Ouémé will be mitigated through trainings and awareness -raising of smallholder farmers on agricultural 
best practices and agro -ecology/agroforestry techniques. Mitigation measures will shift the risk probability towards 
‘Low’. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 Women implication   
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Medium  Medium  
Description  
Women may not have fair access to benefits resulting from project interventions.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
There is a risk that women will not have fair access to some of the project benefits, such as income from sale of crops, 
nuts and fruits . Women play a major role in agricultural production in Benin, but they often have limited access to land, 
agricultural inputs and micro -finance. As a result, Beninese women are disproportionately vulnerable to climate change 
impacts. The risk of unequal access to project benefits will be mitigated by developing women -oriented training modules 
promoting, for example, counte r-season horticulture,  and supporting women’s groups with access to credit and 
equipment for processing and storage of high -value agriproducts . Women’s  groups will be trained on the processing


---
*Page 112*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
   
and marketing of crops and NTFPs in order to increase their inc ome. In addition, all aspects of the project will be 
designed and implemented in a gender -sensitive manner, for example by disaggregating project indicators by gender 
to ensure that at least 50 % of project beneficiaries will be women and by giving special consideration to women’s voices 
during stakeholder consultations.  
Selected Risk Factor 4  Limited technical an d operational capacity  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description  
Limited technical and operational capacity will reduce the efficiency and effectiveness of the project's implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
FAO experts are specialized on climate -change adaptation, CRA, agroforestry and waterworks; they will actively 
participate in project execution during the first 4 years, while building capacity within the GoB. If expertise is missing 
within FAO, national or international experts will be recruited to assist Executing Agencies and National Implementation 
Agencies or to cover gaps where national expe rtise is not available and to provide technical backstopping.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5  Political instability and weak  decentralization process  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Medium  
Description  
The West African region is increasingly being destabilized by extremist groups that are slowly moving southwards 
from the Sahel. Benin has borders with four countries of which Burkina Faso, Niger and Nigeria are experiencing 
increased extremist activity. The 5 identified project municipalities are not in areas immediately threatened.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
While the project's objective is not directly related to fighting extremist threats, its contribution to improving resilience  
and livelihoods will help reduce the risk of rising feelings of disaffection, which is one way in which extremist groups 
recruit m embers.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 Lack of market demands for agriproducts  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Technical and operational  Medium  Low 
Description  
Demand for certain crops and NTFPs on local markets may not be strong enough to absorb the increased supply.  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
There is a risk that the increased production of crops and other agriproducts  will exceed the existing demand on local  
and regional  markets. In the case of food crops, many farmers will use much of their increased production for their own 
consumption  (similar conclusions supported by SAP project73). Training and equipment for processing and storing 
agriproducts will allow farmers to s tore excess production beyond to harvest season until market prices improve. For 
NTFPs  such as cashew nuts and shea , the financial analysis conducted for SAP project  indicates  that the sale of NTFP 
products will be profitable and that overall demand for th ese products is strong. In addition, consultations  between 
farmers cooperatives and local and buyers of  shea and cashew , through the OCRI platform, will ensure that increased 
supply can be sold on local and regional markets.  A Market analysis, conducted as  part of the project development 
phase, identified key agri -products which will be supported by the project.  
 
 
73 Farmers were interviewed  for SAP project  in March and August 2017 by a team of international and national consultants 
who conducted surveys in the local communities , including in Upper and Middle Ouémé  .


---
*Page 113*
---

E 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
   
Selected Risk Factor 7 Impacts on transhuman  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Low 
Description  
The project could affect transhuman moves across Benin  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
There is a risk that transhuman’s access to land will be altered because of project interventions on reforestation and 
land management.  This risk essentially concerns Zogbodomey, which economy is  based on agriculture and livestock. 
This risk will be mitigated by implementing most project interventions within demonstration plots and existing agriculture 
fields. The reforestation interventions that will take place on degraded river banks will be car efully located in areas that 
are not used as key transhuman corridors.  All aspects of the project will be designed based on consultations with local 
communities, chiefs  and authorities. They will be inclusive of the existing local dynamics, including known moves of 
pastoralist herders within Benin, so to avoid conflict or depriving people from their access to key resources. The 
government of Benin as well as the project’ s municipalities are also implementing social policies that promote shared 
spaces between farmers and herders, create social cohesion and mutual respects. The project will work closely with 
these governmental institutions not to create competitiveness, but  rather emphasise complementarity between OCRI 
farmers and herders in the target project areas. This will be reflected in the local adaptation plans (or revised LDPs) 
support under Output 3.1 of the project.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 8  money laundering and countering the financing of t errorism  
Category  Probability  Impact  
Governance  Low Low 
Description  
Risks of money laundering and co untering  the financing of t errorism  
Mitigation Measure(s)  
FAO includes in the project agreement  signed between FAO and the Government of Benin clauses related to AML/CFT, 
as follows:  
a)The Government shall comply, and shall require all persons and entities engaged in its activities under the Project to 
comply, w ith all internal anti -money laundering, counter -terrorism financing laws, rules, and regulations;  
b) The Government confirms it has obtained sufficient undertakings from all persons and entities involved in its activities 
under the Project that they shall not engage in any prohibited practices; the Government undertakes and confirm that 
it shall comply with the substantive objectives of the GCF’s Policy on Prohibited Practices;  
c) Consistent with numerous United Nations Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, 
the Government and FAO are firmly committed to the international fight against terrorism and, in particular, against the 
financing of terrorism. It is the policy of the Government and FAO to seek to ensure that none of their funds are used, 
directly or indirectly, to provide support to individuals or entities: i) associated with terrorism, as included in the list 
maintained by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to its Resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (20 11); 
or ii) that are the subject of sanctions or other enforcement measures promulgated by the United Nations Security 
Council. This provision must be included in all agreements that may be concluded with third parties for the 
implementation of activities under the Project.  
 
During project implementation FAO, as AE, will ensure close monitoring and supervision through its offices in the 
regional office and HQ in order to ensure that the activities are implemented in full compliance with the signed project 
agreement.


---
*Page 114*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
   
GCF   G. GCF P OLICIES AND STANDARDS  
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)   
Overall, the environmental and social impacts of the project will be positive. The project is expected to improve the 
natural resources and agricultural land upon which farmers work, based on improved, climate -resilient agricultural 
practices and natural r esources management, specifically water management across the basin. Better functioning 
ecosystems will positively affect human health and well -being in the long run. Socially, the project will engage women 
and youth through a Gender Action Plan that ensur es proactive mainstreaming of women into all activities, empowering 
women with agricultural skills and knowledge. Livelihoods are expected to improve, based on increased adaptive 
capacities within the target 5 municipalities . Investments in waterworks, and  agriculture technolog ies, and high -quality 
agricultural inputs used on -farm and off -farm are expected to reduce some of the adverse impacts of climate change 
on agricultural productivity and production in Benin. Furthermore, the project will incorporate s pecial participatory 
training sessions and activities in farmer field schools and similar formats under Component 1 to ensure that farmers 
are able to proactively enhance their livelihoods in ways that would not have occurred in a “without project” scenari o.  
The Project has been classified as moderate risk (Category " B") and it is expected that the project activities will 
trigger the following Environmental and Social Safeguard Standards, namely ESS2 ( Biodiversity Ecosystem and Critical 
Habitats ), ESS3 ( Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture ), ESS5 (Pest and Pesticide Management), ESS7 
(Decent Work ), and ESS8 ( Gender Equity ), and ESS9 (Indigenous Peoples and Cultural Heritage). The main reason 
for this is the inequality in the labour market and presence of landless farmers in the project area who will be included 
in project activities to ensure no -one is left behind, and full inclusiveness of the project.    
 
Overall, the cumulative project environmental and social impacts are expected to be posit ive, and generate series of 
opportunities for beneficiary communities , as the overall objective is to increase climate resiliency of the most vulnerable 
farmers in Benin. The project is expected to improve agricultural land scape and productivity, as well a s the ecosystems 
underpinning rural livelihoods , by improving the farmers' climate -resilient agricultural practices and the natural 
resources management in the targeted areas, specifically water management techniques. The project will take into 
account ine quality in the labour market and the presence of landless farmers in the project area; they will be included 
in project activities.  More specifically, better functioning ecosystems, and greater and more collaborative stakeholder 
engagement and participatio n, will positively affect human health and well -being in the long run.  
 
To comply with the core requirements of these standards and applicable national regulations in Benin, given that not 
all sub -activities (e.g. specific waterworks and CRA technologies, as well as all specific sites) can be identified during/by 
project appraisal, an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) has been prepared along with an 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP) to set forth the basic princ iples and priorities that the OCRI project 
will follow during project implementation once the physical footprints of the project activities have been formulated.   
 
During project implementation stage, once the physical footprints of subproject activities a re known, to ensure that the 
identified social and environmental risks and impacts are properly  addressed in accordance and compliance with the 
FAO Standards and GCF Policies, all project activities will systematically undergo (i) a thorough scre ening, assessment, 
review, and clearance process , and (ii) elaborate a site-specific Environmental and Soc ial Management Plan (ESMP)  
prior to  the physical execution of project activities in each of the selected 5 municipalities . Hence, the elaboration of the 
ESMF has allowed a series of environmental and social risks and impacts to be identified, and an ESMP t o be 
elaborated that includes a comprehensive implementation arrangement scheme to help implement the identified series 
of safeguards mitigation measures.  
 
The implementation arrangements as they pertain specifically to environmental and social safeguards  will be led by the 
Project Coordination Unit ( PMU ), which includ es a solid  environmental and social safeguards compliance  unit, led at 
the central level by a Senior Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer (SESSO) and at local level, a 'duo' of an 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer (ESSO) and a Gender Mainstreaming Officer (GMO) in each of the Local 
PIU (LPIU) . In addition to Safeguards and Gender mainstreaming, the PMU -team  will be the recipient of all project -
related Grievance Redress Mechani sm (GRM) processes at both the central and local levels, as detailed in this ESMF.  
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)   
The full gender assessment and action plan is included as Annex 8. Please refer to this for details.  
The gender assessment reveals that women in the project intervention zone have less access to secured land, fertilizer, 
extension services, capital for investments in income -generating activities and to information and decision -making 
processe s, and therefore are less resilient to climate -change impacts than men. Women bear responsibility for most of


---
*Page 115*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112 
   
the household chores with little assistance from men, have low literacy levels, and face mobility barriers. As a result, 
they have low access to t raining and information.  
Women have smaller plots (often on less fertile and more degraded land) and less access to tools and animal traction 
because family fields and male -owned land are given priority. Moreover, women and their fields are less targeted by 
extension services for assistance on use of fertilizer, improved agriculture techniques  and irrigation technology. As a 
result, women have lower crop yields, less information on adaptation practices and less access to new technologies.  
Women are major actors in post -harvest pro cessing, distribution and sales activities, which are affected by climate -
change events: product quality is declining because of difficulties drying and storing produce. Women's access to clean 
water and fuelwood is becoming increasingly difficult. These a ctivities are underfunded in climate -change adaptation 
and response initiatives and in community development plans.  
Women are involved in collecting Non -Timber Forest Products (NTFP); in the project intervention zone they collect and 
process Shea nuts, Loc ust bean fruits and vegetables, all sources of income and a coping mechanism when other 
crops fail. Although the forestry sector and forest management mechanisms are largely male dominated, some women 
have started tree nurseries. NTFP  are important to wome n to overcome shocks, source fuelwood and food in response 
to climate -change induced crop loss.  
While men opt for migration when drought or floods destroy household livelihoods, women are more limited because 
of their domestic responsibilities, traditiona l roles and gender -based division of labor. When men migrate, women have 
to cope with the post -disaster situation and take care of the household, generating enough income for food and the 
needs of the family. In climate -change -related disaster contexts an increase in gender -based violence has been 
documented. Increased conflicts concerning access to pastures, water and land will increase tensions and could lead 
to higher incidence of Gender Based Violence (GBV). Climate -change effects on crop yields and cli mate -change 
disasters will lead to higher household indebtedness, which may in turn contribute to more household -level tensions 
and an increase in GBV.  
The Gender Action Plan proposes activities and targets for each project component and output, so that th e project 
contributes to empowerment of women and girls through their participation, capacity -building, institutional and 
regulatory systems, gender -sensitive planning and development for improved management of land and forest areas, 
thus contributing to b etter adaptation to climate risks. By its end, the project will have achieved increased resilience, 
health and well -being, food and water security, and improved socio -economic conditions of women and girls through 
technical and financial assistance to gend er-specific activities.  
The proportion of females in the project team will be 30% for field workers and 20% for technicians; the aim is 50% 
participation by women (taking into account that some activities may be 100% female or male). The project will 
speci fically target post -harvest activities and activities in NTFP that are mainly processed by women. Fuel -saving and 
reforestation are other subjects of project intervention and of particular interest of women.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page ) 
As Accredited Entity for the OCRI  project, FAO will ensure that financial management and procurement of goods and 
services using GCF resources adhere s to international standards a nd good practices. This includes financial 
management and procurement performed by MCVDD  (as Executing Entity). An FAO -commissioned micro -
assessment of MCVDD  (which included an assessment of financial management and procurement policies and 
practices) iden tified the ministr ies as “low -risk” partner s in this respect. This includes a low -risk rating specifically for 
procurement actions to be undertaken by MCVDD , which are done in line with the prevailing Public Procurement Law 
of the Government of Benin . To enable effective performance of financial man agement and procurement functions by 
the Executing Entity, the project will hire: (i) a finance officer, procurement officer and administrative officer to work in  
the PMU  throughout the duration of the project; and (ii) administrative/finance officers in e ach of the LPIUs. 
The FAO Technical Capacity Development Team ( TCDT, as co -Executing Entity) will perform a range of supervisory 
and support functions in relation to financial management and procurement performed by MCVDD . These are geared 
toward ensuring all procurement is done in line with agreed standards and practices, and to minimize procurement -
related risk. In addition, the FAO TCDT  will directly manage a small proportion of the project budget to deliver Technical 
Assistance and other such services to the project. Financial management and procurement performed by this  team will 
be guided by relevant FAO rules and regulations, as well as relevant provisions in the Accreditation Master Agreement 
(AMA) signed by FAO and the GCF. These rules and regulations were reviewed and deemed satisfactory by the GCF 
Secretariat and A ccreditation Panel as part of FAO’s accreditation to the GCF.


---
*Page 116*
---

F 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
   
FAO has deployed an Oracle -based Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system , the ‘Global Resources Management 
System’ (GRMS) , which  provides all FAO employees around the world with travel, human resources, procurement and 
finance functionalities. Using GRMS improves the flow of financial information, supports financial monitoring and 
reporting, increases transparency and visibility, and strengthens internal control. FAO maintains a Chart of Accoun ts 
which is used by the whole Organization and that allows for a separation of income and expenditure by donor and 
project and it provides a standardized coding structure that enables data to be recorded, classified and summarized to 
facilitate internal ma nagement and external reporting requirements.  
Direct procurement by FAO is done in accordance with its Manual Section on “Procurement of Goods, Works and 
Services”. To sub -contract the delivery of specific activities using Letters of Agreement, FAO operate s in accordance 
with a specific Manual Section on “Letters of Agreement”. Such services are managed under the FAO Procurement 
Service, which provides policy and operational support to FAO offices and staff undertaking these activities to ensure 
the Organiz ation procures goods, works and services based on “Best Value for Money” principles. To sub -contract 
delivery for agreed results, FAO operates in accordance with its policy that governs the indirect implementation of FAO -
led projects and programmes.   
Finan cial management and procurement by MCVDD  (as Executing Entity) will also be overseen and supervised by 
the FAO -GCF project supervision team. As per the provisions of the FAO Operational Partners Implementation 
Modality (OPIM), the FAO -GCF project supervision team will undertake regular supervisi on missions, and will recruit 
a qualified, internationally recognized auditing firm to perform regular spot checks and audits, to ensure financial 
management and procurement by the PMU and PPMUs are being performed in line with agreed standards and 
practic es. This will be governed by the agreement to be signed between FAO and the Government of Benin  before 
the project becomes operational.  
G.4.  Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information:  The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence.  
☐ With confidential information:  The accredited entity declares that the funding pro posal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including al l annexes:  
• full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclos ure polic y, and  
• redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website .  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.


---
*Page 117*
---

H 
 GREE N CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
   
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting document s. 
 
74 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross -cutting projects.  H. ANNEXES  
H.1. Mandatory a nnexes  
☒ Annex 1  NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided)  
☒ Annex 2 Feasibility study - and a market study , if applicable  
☒ Annex 3 Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ Annex 4 Detailed budget plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 5 Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provide d) 
☒ Annex 6 E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided)  
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS ) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan , Resettlement Policy Framework,  
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc. ) 
☒ Annex 7 Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ Annex 8 Gender assessment and project/programme -level action plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 9 Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)   
☒ Annex 1 0 Procurement plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 1 Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 2 AE fee request (template provided)  
☒ Annex 1 3 Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)   
☒ Annex 1 4 Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and , if applicable , repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable  
☒ Annex 1 5 Evidence of internal approval (template provided)    
☒ Annex 1 6 Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions  
☐ Annex 1 7 Multi -country project/programme information (template provided)  
☐ Annex 1 8 Appraisal, d ue diligence or evaluation report  for proposals based on up -scaling or replicating a pilot 
project  
☐ Annex 19 Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entitie s undertaking projects 
financed by the entity  
☐ Annex 20 First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment  
☐ Annex 21 Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting -projects)74 
☐ Annex X  Other references


---
*Page 118*
---

No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)


---
*Page 119*
---

Environmental and social safeguards report  form  pursuant to par a. 17 of the IDP  
Basic project  or programme information 
Project  or programme title  Ouémé Basin Climate- Resilience Initiative (OCRI) Benin  
Existence of subproject (s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval  No 
Sector (public or private)  Public  
Accredited entity Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category  Category B  
Location – specific location (s) 
of project  or target country 
or location (s) of programme  Copargo, Djougou, Glazoué , Zogbodomey , and Zagnanado in 
Benin.  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, May 18, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language French i s the official language of Benin  and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  English:   
https://www.fao.org/3/cc0195en/cc0195en.pdf   
F
rench:   
https://www.fao.org/3/cc0195fr/cc0195fr.pdf   
Other link(s) FAO disclosure portal:  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
F
AO Benin website: 
https://www.fao.org/benin/ressources/publications/fr/   
N
ational Agricultural Development Fund  (FNDA ) (French): 
apifnda.hopetvbenin.org/storage//uploads/cU1SYwpVYG2U
F072C2d6o95D7O5LaMhkqFWUtxgO.pdf   
Remarks  An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  Wednesday, May 18, 2022  
Language(s) of disclosure  English and French  
Explanation on language French i s the official language of Benin  and the language 
understandable to affected peoples/stakeholders.  
Link to disclosure  English:   
https://www.fao.org/3/cc0195en/cc0195en.pdf


---
*Page 120*
---

French:  
https://www.fao.org/3/cc0195fr/cc0195fr.pdf  
Other link(s) FAO disclosure portal:  
https://www.fao.org/environmental -social -
standards/disclosure -portal/en/   
F
AO Benin website: 
https ://www.fao.org/benin/ressources/publications/fr/  
F
NDA  (French): 
apifnda.hopetvbenin.org/storage//uploads/cU1SYwpVYG2U
F072C2d6o95D7O5LaMhkqFWUtxgO.pdf  
Remarks  An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “ Environmental and Social 
Management Framework ”. 
Environmental and Social Management ( ESMS) (if applicable)  
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan ( RAP ), Resettlement Policy 
Framework ( RPF ), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) , IPP  Framework  (if applicable)  
Description of 
report/disclosure  on accredited 
entity’s website  N/A  
Language(s) of disclosure  N/A  
Explanation on language  N/A  
Link to disclosure  N/A  
Other link(s)  N/A  
Remarks  N/A  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders)  
Date  Wednesday, May 18, 2022  
Place  Representations of  FNDA  in Copargo, Djougou, Glazoué, 
Zogbodomey and Zagnanado . 
F
NDA website:  
apifnda.hopetvbenin.org/storage//uploads/cU1SYwpVYG2U
F072C2d6o95D7O5LaMhkqFWUtxgO.pdf   
Date of Board meeting  in which the FP is intended to be considered  
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting  N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  Sunday, July 17, 2022  
N
ote: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.


---
*Page 121*
---

G
CF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 121 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP187  
Proposal name:  Ouémé  Basin Climate- Resilience Initiative (OCRI) Benin  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Benin 
Project/programme size: Small 
I. Overall assessment of the Secretariat
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following remarks:  
Strengths  Points of caution  
The establishment of the Ouémé Basin 
Climate  Resilience Initiative ( OCRI ) 
platform provides a unique opportunity 
to boost innovative climate resilient investments in local value chains, fostering an enabling environment for micro, small and medium- sized 
enterprises and promoting better access 
to fina nce, and microcredit in particular.  
The partnership with the National Fund 
for Environment and Climate (Fonds National pour l'Environnement et le Climat ) and its strategic role of fostering 
further partnerships and access to finance through the OCRI platform is a 
key strength of the project. 
1. The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum VI,  titled “List of proposed
conditions and recommendations”.
II. Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment
2.1 Project background  
2. The Ouémé  Basin Climate Resilience Initiative (OCRI) Benin project will develop and
scale up adaptive and productive capacity of agro -ecosystems and smallholder farmers in the
upper and middle Ouém é Basin. The initi ative aims to  build resilience for poor and vulnerable
smallholders and to scale up climate resilient agriculture and agroforestry practices in the
Ouémé B asin in Benin, the main food basket of the country.
3. The objectives will be achieved by securing resilience through the following activities:
scaling up climate resilient agriculture and low emission agroforestry practices; building
waterworks to reduce soil erosion and run -off; improving overall land and water management
in 89,680 h ectares;  and reduc ing the vulnerability of 330,000 small -scale farmers to increasing


---
*Page 122*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 122 
 
 
climate disturbances and extreme weather events in the Ouémé Basin. In addition the project is 
estimated to reduc e greenhouse gas emissions by  1,783,633 tonnes of carbon d ioxide 
equivalent ( tCO 2eq) over 20 years as a result of the improvement in farming systems and 
reducing pressures on forest resources across the targeted landscapes.   
4. The project targets the main food basket of the country, the Ouémé Basin , which is also  
Benin’s main economic cornerstone with a very diversi fied agricultural production. Agriculture 
continues to employ more than 60  per cent  of the population in the target area, with nearly 90 
per cent  being smallholder farmers. The main farming systems in th e target area are built 
around millet, cashew, maize and yams as primary cash crops and value chains, but production 
also includes leafy vegetables and other crops and fruits.  
5. The local food systems of the upper and middle Ouémé B asin are very vulnerable to 
climate change with an increasing tendency to intens e and frequen t extreme weather events 
that have a direct impact on the productivity of the food systems , translating into further 
challenges , poverty and food insecurity for the local population. The smallholder farmers are 
forced to change their livelihood strategies to become more dependent on unsustainable  land 
use practices such as slash and burn, and unsustainable and over -harvesting of fuelwood , 
leading to increased pressure on the agro -ecological landscapes that have always sustained food 
production in the area.  
6. Climate change will continue to drive this vicious cycle , with heavy impacts on 
agricultur al production. Estimates suggest that the impact of  climate change could reduce  the 
main crops such as maize and vegetables by around 30 per cent, leaving communities with very 
challenging situations and farming systems on the brink of collapse.  
7. The total project finance needed is USD 35.3 m illion with a request to GCF for grant 
finance of USD 18.5 million ( 52 per cent). The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries 
(Minist ère de l’ Agriculture, de l ’Élevage et de la Pêche, MAEP) through an International Fund for 
Agricultural Development ( IFAD ) project will contribute USD 12.6 million  in the form of grants. 
The Ministry of the Living Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère du Cadre de 
Vie et du Développement Durable, MCVDD ) is providing USD 3 million in kind, supple mented by 
an in- kind contribution of USD 1 million  by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations  (FAO ) and grant support of USD 187,500 from the National Fund for Environment and 
Climate (Fonds National pour l ’Environnement et le Climat, FNEC ). The environmental and 
social safeguards category of the project is B.  
2.2 Component -by-component analysis  
Component 1:  Low carbon, climate resilient crop production enhanced and ecosystem services 
restored in the upper and middle Ouémé ( tota l cost: USD 21.3 million; GCF cost: USD 12 .1 million ). 
8. This component will boost the resilience of the targeted agro -ecosystems to enhance the 
climate -smart solutions for vegetable and fruit production for crops such as maize, cassava, 
cowpeas, chil lies, okra, mango, shea and cashew, and to increase restoration of degraded lands 
through agroforestry as well as improved water management.  
9. Farmer field schools  (FFS)  will enhance access to resilient species and varieties to help 
diversify local farming s ystems while increasing the capacity of climate resilient agricultural 
techniques supported by enh anced access to micro -irrigation facilities and sustainable and 
more diversified agroforestry systems. The FFS will provide communities with the knowledge, 
training and support for increas ing the resilience of local farming systems by introducing 
innovative techniques following the concepts of climate resilient agriculture (e.g. diversifying 
the species mix with species  and varieties that are more tolerant to drought , , and increasing 
conservation farming, rainwater conservation and agroforestry ).


---
*Page 123*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 123 
 
 
Component 2: Climate resilient and gender sensitive value chains, supporting  farmers ’ 
livelihoods in the upper and middle Oué mé (total cost: USD  5.9 million; GCF cost: USD 2.1  
million ).  
10. This component will focus on strengthening the value chains of the key commodities 
produced across the target area , providing communities with the opportunity to drive the 
innovation and ownership of existing products as well as additional ones  to be developed by the 
project. The key value chains are those based on mango, shea, maize  and cashew , but many 
other value ch ains will be promoted through the training provided by the FFS  and the 
subsequent farmer business schools . This will enable communities to continuously identify new 
and more resilient and tolerant crops and their respective markets , and thereby enhance the  
opportunities to boost and diversify livelihoods and  continue to foster an enabling environment 
for climate -smart production and diversification of local food systems.  
11. A key aspect of the component will be support ing access to microfinance. Benin hosts a n 
incredibly  diverse and rich microfinance environment but to date it has been challenging for 
smallholders to access the microfinance n etwork. The project , particularly C omponent 2 , aims 
to secure better access to micro finance and achieve matchmaking between smallholders and the 
microfinance network at the local level. One of the implementing partners , the National 
Agricultural Development Fund (FNDA), will help guarantee access to microfinance because  it is 
part of the microfinance network  at the national level. This structure will play a crucial role in  
boost ing investments in the value chains of climate resilient food systems.  
Component 3: An enabling instit utional and financial environment established to promote and 
upscale low carbon c limate  resilient land and water management in Benin’s basins (total cost: 
USD  6.2 million; GCF cost: USD 3 .3 million) . 
12. The final component will establish a coordination hub to enable and foster innovation, 
investments and knowledge -sharing through the dedicated OCRI  platform , which will also be a 
cornerstone of the exit strategy and will drive the process of scaling up into other areas of the 
country through the platform and lessons learned.  
13. The platform will enable  communities, and private and public sector bodies, as well as 
local financial institutions (L FIs) to support the transformation of local food systems. A s a direct 
access entity to the GCF , FNEC  will play a crucial  strategic role in this component , function ing as 
both a key partner and a brid ge between the platform , to enhance  access to finance in the short, 
medium and long term , and will lead the long -term scaling up of the platform.  
14. Knowledge products and experience gained during the project will help foster future 
investments , and an innovative financial strategy will be developed for the platform to continue 
its existence after the project ends , and so that it can adapt and cater to future challenges while 
scaling up sustainab le innovation and investments.  
Project management (total cost: USD 1.6 million; GCF cost: USD 0.8  million) .  
15. The GCF portion of the project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with  the GCF policy on fees.  
III. Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 Impact potential                                       Scale:  N/A  
16. The project will directly benefit 330 ,000 vulnerable  farming communities (and 
indirectly 5,670,000) in the key food basket of the country , while transforming the local food 
systems and livelihoods in parallel through the restorative landscape activities and


---
*Page 124*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 124 
 
 
strengthening of agroforestry systems  which , together, will contribut e to a mitigation impact of 
1.7 MtCO 2eq over 20 years.  
17. The project will contribute direct solutions and opportunities to transform the local food 
systems,  increasing resilience and reducing the pressure on forest resources a s well as  
sequest ering 1.7 MtCO 2eq in the b asin through reforestation, agroforestry and improved land 
man agement efforts. These efforts will further support diversifying livelihoods and will offer 
opportunities for communities to invest and engage in multiple land uses, cropping systems and 
market opportunities.  
18. The climate rationale for the adaptation inter ventions has been extensively developed 
through gathering data from the national meteorological service (precipitation, temperature, 
evapotranspiration) and the hydrological service (run -off, discharge). The mean annual 
temperature in Benin has increased b y 1˚C since 1995, while annual rainfall has been generally 
decreasing with a shortening of rainfall events.  Observations also show increased frequency of 
climate extremes since 1951, caus ing more frequent droughts and flooding . Future projection 
modelling has been carried out  using data derived from the Coordinated Regional Downscaling 
Experiment (CORDEX) initiative (Region 5: Africa), and Representative Concentration Pathways 
(RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5). The feasibility study used sec ondary literature to compare the future 
projections with historical data  to validate the projections.  
3.2 Paradigm  shift potential                 Scale: N/A  
19. The climate resilient agriculture development for targeted value chains will help foster a 
long -term t ransformation of the local food systems and promote innovation and climate 
resilient livelihoods at the local level. The three components will jointly create access to finance 
for micro, small and medium -sized enterprises ( MSMEs ), cooperatives  and smallhol ders 
through the OCRI platform  not only during the project but continu ing and expand ing after the 
project finishes.  
20. The project will enable  communities to increase  investments in their local food systems, 
while also  foster ing growth, job creation and rural entrepreneurship , and support ing a long -
term transformation of the b asin. Th e objective is to create an innovative environment for start -
ups, new products, opportunities for further and diverse food processing to help furthe r reduce 
food loss and waste at the production and post -harvest stages . It will also provide  further 
opportunities for communities and MSMEs to continue diversifying their income sources.  
21. The two core strategic national funds , FNEC and FNDA , including the  microfinance 
partners and networks , will help pave the way for a significant conversion of local farming 
systems, businesses and value chain development , offering  very strong potential for scaling up 
across the country. In addition, farmers will work thro ugh village savings and l oan associations,  
which will allow them to make additional investments in the value chains, as well as helping 
them to explor e additional business opportunities across their local food systems.    
22. The OCRI platform , with its aim to continually adapt to cater for future demands from 
the target communities , is the backbone of the project and is central to scaling up the activities.  
23. The project will provide  opportunit ies for match ing up communities, private sector, 
MSMEs, LFIs and microfinance to ensure continuity for  innovative agriculture investments and 
solutions that cater to the current and future challenges way beyond the lifet ime of the project . 
The project represents  a unique example for other national basins and neighbo uring countries 
to follow.  
3.3 Sustainable development potential                                   Scale:  N/A


---
*Page 125*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 125 
 
 
24.  The project contributes directly to a significant livelihood diversification that will 
translate into  three key benefits:  an increase in income  due to the diversification of local food 
systems;  strengthened value chains providing access for communities to  improved food security 
and nutrition;  and overall strengthened household incomes.  
25. The project will further help smallholders gain access to fin ance and provides  
opportunities for them to establish their own micro enterprises thereby contributing to rural  
entrep reneurship and job creation not only during the project implementation but beyond the 
lifetime of the project.  
26. Finally,  there is a strong focus on sustainable management of the landscapes with the 
first two components,  strongly focusing on boosting the capacity and investments in resilient 
and agro -ecologically diverse landscapes ; boosting and conserving biodiversity ; and restoring 
degraded areas. This will support local farming systems to continue to develop and elaborate 
more diverse options for in vestments in sustainable harmony with surrounding landscapes and 
food systems.  
3.4 Needs of the recipient                                      Scale:  N/A   
27. The project targets very vulnerable and poor smallholder communities across the 
Ouémé B asin. The needs of the recipient are considered high because the targeted groups are 
highly dependent on subsistence farming for their survival and are currently facing numerous 
hardships from climate change and other current socioeconomic issues.  
28. The project strengthens t heir livelihoods by providing numerous additional 
opportunities for sustainable farming , such as providing  resilience to climate change and 
adaptive solutions through  access to finance, diversification of income generation, job creation 
and fostering innovation and entrep reneurship.  
29. The OCRI platform enables  communities to reinvest in their local food systems and for 
communities to drive and lead these important investments and local partnerships. These 
investments and locally catered solutions speak directly to the needs of the local vulnerable 
populations and their directly identified needs.    
3.5 Country ownership                 Scale: N/A  
30. The project is well aligned with national strategies and policies in the agriculture and 
food security sectors and the Government of Benin (GoB)  will be involved  in the implementation 
of the project with FNEC, as the direct access entity , playing a crucial role in terms of 
implement ing the three components as well as on  the OCRI platform during and b eyond the 
project.  
31. FNEC will receive strategic capacity -building assistance across the three components , 
enabling FNEC to grow in its role as a GCF accredited entity (AE) , in particular focusing on its 
role as  the financ ial mechanism of the OCRI platform  and supporting its overall scalability  and 
future . FNEC will be in a unique position to support scaling up to other basins and continu ing to 
foster innovati ve finance solution s to smallholders through the platform .  
32. The project targets the key ambition of the nationally determined contribution, focusing 
on food and water security through the climate resilient approaches promoted across the three components. The project is also very strategically aligned and consistent with national and 
subnational plans such as the Ouémé  Basin Watershed Master Plan, which  describes  the existing 
scope and opportunities for  irrigation in the basin.


---
*Page 126*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 126 
 
 
3.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                                     Scale: N/A  
33. The project focuses on increasing resilience for communities through more sustainable 
farming systems and access to finance through the O CRI platform enabling them to  transform 
livelihoods and the basin for the long term . Microcredit and long -term financial planning 
through FNEC, FNDA and the OCRI platform will ensure leveraged private sector finance and 
investments will be accessible to local communities .  
34. The combina tion of access to finance organized through FNDA’s stewardship with the 
microcredit network on the ground, the village savings and loan associations and the OCRI 
platform’s strategic position to facilitate matchmak ing between  farmer groups, cooperatives, 
MSMEs and private and public partners is considered very innovative and will continue to drive 
innovation and entrep reneurship across the basin at the same time as offering scalability.  
IV. Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies  
4.1 Environmental and social safeguards  
35. Project background. The project will scale up climate resilient agriculture and 
agroforestry practices, build waterworks to reduce soil erosion and run -off, and overall improve 
land and water management in the five targeted municipalities of Copargo, Djougou, Glazoué, 
Zogbodomey and Zagnanado in the Ouémé Basin. Among the project’s environmental co -
benefits as a result of the project’s interventions comprising of intercropping, agricultural 
diversification, increased tree planting of agroforestry species, improved water recharge, 
protection of water sources, and soil improvements include enhanced resilience and 
productivity of the farms as well as improved ecosystem functions and services and protection 
from climate -related risks like floods and flash floods, among others.  Its social co -benefits 
include improved general community health and well -being as well as enhanced access to 
diversified income generation and livelihood and capacity building activities.  
36. Environmental and social risk category and safeguards instrument. The AE has 
classified the project as moderate risk which is equivalent to GCF’s environmental and social 
(E&S) risk category B, to which the Secretariat confirms and that it is within the AE’s E&S risk 
accreditation level. The AE has submitted an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and will prepare elaborated site- specific Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) prior to the physical execution of the project’s activities in each of the 
selected 5 municipalities. It has likewise conducted a SIA and engaged stakeholders documented 
through a Stakeholders’ Consultation and Participation Report.  
37. Compliance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) Standards. The 
paragraphs below identify the key risks and/or impacts as regards the GCF ESS standards and 
how they are addressed in the proposal:  
38. ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts. The project is itself an environmental and social enhancem ent project and does not 
involve any major infrastructure.  While the project proposes to install hard infrastructures such as for surface water collection works (e.g. mini- dams, weirs, water retention, etc.), large 
dams will not be eligible under the proj ect. The small -scale interventions which are distributed 
over a wide region, are mostly intended to conserve water and soil resources, restore ecosystem 
services, and improve productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers through adoption of 
good farming practices, access to micro -credit, and improvements in the value chain of their 
crops. The activities are expected to have potential limited adverse environmental and/or social 
risks and impacts that are generally site -specific, largely reversible, and can  readily be 
addressed through good management practices and adaptive strategies during implementation.


---
*Page 127*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 127 
 
 
Based on the proposed project interventions, there is a risk that transhumance livelihoods may 
be impacted, and a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) provides a more detailed analyses in relation 
to local communities including plans to safeguard and promote opportunities for participation. 
An ESMF has been prepared to guide the assessment and management of individual activities 
during implementation which will undergo (i) screening, assessment, review, and clearance 
process, (ii) preparation of site -specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), 
and (iii) monitoring of the implementation of these ESMPs.  
39. ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions. The AE h as triggered its Decent Work standard 
(ESS7) for this project. It has likewise noted that “very young workers who must support their 
families outside of school hours have also been observed.” To mitigate this, the AE proposes to 
provide “Occupational Healt h and Safety (OHS) and sensitization training sessions related to 
farming value -chain works.” It also proposes to ensure that “all staff employed on the project 
will be hired consistently with the prevailing labour laws and working hours to which the 
count ry adheres, and with fair pay.” It has also included in its non -eligibility list of activities 
those which may have “Labor and working conditions involving harmful, exploitative, 
involuntary or compulsory forms of labor, forced labor, child labor or signif icant occupational 
health and safety issues.” While the country has ratified all eight (8) fundamental ILO 
conventions, and its laws are aligned with international standards, the project must ensure 
consistent implementation of labor and OSH audit protocol s particularly for contractors of 
project funded civil works.  
40. ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention. Efficiency in the use of water is 
embedded in the project's water conservation activities. The project is not expected to use significant am ount of electricity or energy resources. It is also not expected to generate highly 
polluting wastes. Anticipated waste would be crop husks and trimmings or rejects from small -
scale marketing/aggregation operations and/or postharvest processing operations.  Temporary 
sedimentation of water bodies may occur during construction of small irrigation systems and 
other civil works. There may also be issues regarding contamination of agrochemicals. While 
provision of training on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and  Good Agriculture Practices 
(GAP) practices will be conducted to farmer groups at demonstration sites, the project will recommend bio -pesticides as alternative when pesticides use becomes necessary. Training on 
safe handling of pesticides will also be prov ided and based on The ESMF indicates that 
construction activities would be small scale and environmental impacts would be limited to 
generation of dusts and temporary sedimentation of receiving water bodies. These impacts have 
been addressed in the generic  mitigation measures (Table 16). The site -specific impacts of 
construction will be addressed in the construction ESMP.  
41. ESS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security. Potential issues on community health 
and safety include infrastructure risks, exposure to p esticide hazards, and possible outbreak of 
infectious diseases in the project site communities due to influx of workers or due to changes in 
local ecologies resulting from the project. In terms of infrastructure risks, the project will only 
fund small -scale infrastructure such as irrigation systems. Dams will be small scale and hence 
would not pose significant risks to downstream communities. The use of pesticides will be managed through the FAO/WHO International Code of Conduct on Pesticide Management and 
its accompanying technical guidelines. Waterborne diseases, such as malaria, dengue and 
typhoid fever are reportedly prevalent in the project areas. Small infrastructure such as micro 
dams could enhance breeding grounds for vectors. The project should ensu re monitoring of 
occurrences so that disease outbreaks will not occur and minimize the risk of spreading it in the 
communities.  
42. ESS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. The project rules out any 
government acquisition of private lands or econo mic or physical displacement of people. 
Activities will mostly employ the involvement of communities on a purely voluntary and demand -driven basis. Project activities will use farmer -owned lands. Thus, the project will cause


---
*Page 128*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 128 
 
 
neither physical nor economic d isplacement of people. The project’s non -eligibility list also 
included the following activities as ineligible: i) relocation and/or demolition of any permanent 
houses or business; ii) use of the project as an incentive and/or a tool to support and/or 
impl ement involuntary resettlement of local people and village consolidation; iii) land 
appropriation iv) land acquisition using eminent domain without FAO -mandated consultation 
and agreement of the owner; v) new settlements or expansion of existing settlement s; and ix) 
resources access restriction (e.g., restricted access to farming land) that could not be mitigated and will result in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of ethnic groups and disadvantage peoples. 
The project will also apply the FAO's Voluntary G uidelines on the Responsible Governance of 
Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests (VGGT) as regards discussion on tenure rights and 
equitable access to land and forests in the project.  
43. ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Na tural 
Resources. The project area is replete with natural habitats such as forests, swamps, and other 
fragile ecosystems. There is also a significant presence of wildlife. These habitats are currently being threatened by population pressure, including over grazing and slash -and-burn agriculture. 
The project is expected to positively contribute to the conservation of wildlife and natural 
resources by improving productivity and restoring ecological services. To mitigate the risk in 
terms of potential introduct ion of non -native species of plants and conversion of natural 
habitats, the project will train farmers on environmentally and socially appropriate farming 
practices, promote organic fertilizers, use native species and/or locally developed varieties, use 
registered/certified seeds. The project has further listed the following as deemed non -eligible: 
(x) activities of any kind within natural habitats and existing or proposed protected areas; (xiii) forestry operations, including logging, harvesting or process ing of timber and non- timber 
products (NTFP); (xiv) unsustainable exploitation of natural resources; (xv) introduction of non- native species, unless these are already present in the vicinity or known from similar 
settings to be non -invasive, and harmful to  farmers livelihoods resources; (xvi) significant 
conversion or degradation of natural habitats or where the conservation and/or environmental 
and social gains do not clearly outweigh any potential losses.  
44. GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7. Indigenou s Peoples. The project has 
potential risk to transhumance livelihoods, particularly in terms of their access to lands and 
resources. A social impact assessment has been included to provide more detailed analyses in relation to these affected communities in cluding plans to safeguard and promote opportunities 
for participation. Actions have included the inclusion of Peulh / Fulani representatives in 
consultative meetings, and the development of a costed Vulnerable Groups Development Plan as 
part of the overall environmental and social management plan. As the specific location of 
proposed activities under the project have not yet been determined, a framework approach has 
been adopted. Mitigative actions have been proposed to address specific issues linked to 
pastoralists and vulnerabilities including collaboration with institutions implementing national 
and local social policies to reduce the risk of conflict and increase social cohesion between farmers and herders; inclusion of these risks and appropriate actio ns in the Local Adaptation 
Plans (or revised LDPs); introduction of training modules focusing on conflicts between farmers and herders to be included in the Farmer Field School (FFS) curricula, based on successful use of 
this approach in Niger; ensure appr opriate knowledge exchanges and lessons learnt on this 
topic are promoted with other projects in the region and close monitoring during project 
implementation of risk and impacts of mitigation measures. In line with the GCF Indigenous 
Peoples Policy, the G CF independent Redress Mechanism and the Secretariat’s indigenous 
peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has 
been made.  
45.  ESS 8: Cultural Heritage. The project has ruled out impacts on any physical cultur al 
heritage site or structure and has assessed as less likely any encounter with archaeological 
artefacts during project implementation. Nevertheless, a "Chance -Finds Procedures" has been


---
*Page 129*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 129 
 
 
included in the ESMF in case there would be such encounter during ex cavation works of some 
activities.  
46. Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH) safeguarding. 
The project has triggered AE’s ESS7 (Decent Work) and AE’s ESS 8 (Gender Equality) as part of 
the social risk screening and social mitigation measures to address potential risks and impacts 
on gender -based violence (GBV) and SEAH. The project will take specific protection measures to 
prevent any form of sexual harassment or exploitation at the workplace (including on the way 
to and fr om it) and include GBV and SEAH in the sensitization training on safe, decent rural 
employment and age -appropriate work targeting the most vulnerable. The project will manage 
GBV and SEAH -related grievances through the AE’s GRM system and ensure the system  is 
accessible, inclusive, survivor -centred and gender -responsive with specific procedures for GBV 
and SEAH, including confidential reporting with safe and ethical documenting and follow -up 
actions. The project will also establish GBV pathways and provide timely services and redress to survivors.  
47. Implementation arrangements. The project will have a Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) which will provide overall policy guidance and oversight. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be established at the FAO Repre sentation Office in Cotonou, to be led by a National 
Project Coordinator (NPC). The PCU will be responsible for the day -to-day activities at the 
national level in close coordination with the executing entities. Two Local Project 
Implementation Units (LPIUs) each headed by a Project Technical Director (PTD), which will 
serve as operational arms of the PCU: one for Upper Ouémé and another for Middle Ouéme. 
Each municipality will assign a Project Focal Point for the project. The PCU will have an 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Compliance Unit to be led at the central level by a Senior 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer (SESSO) while at each LPIU there will be an 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer (ESSO) and a Gender Mainstreaming Officer 
(GMO). FAO's Lead Safeguards Advisor will also be engaged to provide long -term or ad hoc 
support.  
48. Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. The stakeholder engagements 
during the project proposal development and the plans for future engagements are  discussed in 
Annex 7 of the Funding Proposal.  There were considerable engagements during the project 
proposal development with various stakeholders, including the central government ministries, local governments, civil society organizations, academia, an d the targeted beneficiary 
communities, including farmers, youth, women, and ethnic minorities living and working in the project areas. The project also provides for plans for further engagements of stakeholders 
during project implementation.  
49. Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). Project will have a GRM that is accessible to all 
relevant stakeholders through written and oral means and allows for resolution of complaints 
first at the project management team levels (i.e., at the PCU and then at the NSC). Only w hen a 
grievance cannot be resolved at the project management team levels, would the complaints be elevated to the AE’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG). Project affected persons may also 
reach out to the judicial system as a last resort.  
4.2 Gender polic y 
50. The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and therefore 
complies with the requirements of the G ender Policy of the GCF . 
51. The gender assessment illustrates the existence of an enabling environment that is 
conducive to the pursuit of ge nder equality and women’s empowerment. Benin has ratified 
international and regional conventions including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’


---
*Page 130*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 130 
 
 
Rights. The Constitution of Benin prohibits discrimination based on race, sex and religion, in a 
bid to ensure equal economic and social rights to men and women. Further , through its 
ministries,  Benin also tries to ensure gender issues are taken into consideration when  prepar ing 
the Strategic Plan in the Development of the Agricultural Sector ; while in the forestry policy, 
efforts to reduce poverty have considered  the specific interests of women, starting with the 
composition of intervention teams and by encouraging the pa rticipation of women in 
organizations. However, despite the existence of a favo urable environment, gender inequality 
remains an issue in the country.  
52. A gender assessment was compiled based on desk reviews and stakeholder 
consultations with various groups including civil society, individual women as well as women’s 
groups. The findings indicate that climate change has differentiated impacts on women and 
men, disproportionally impacting women. The impacts are harder for women owing to the 
existence of restri ctive social norms that prescribe certain roles for women and restrict s the 
level of access to resources and opportunities. Women’s roles and access to resources are 
weaker in relation to land, water, services and technology, while their roles involve acti vities 
within and outside of the home. Within the home women have the greater share of care 
responsibilities,  while outside the home they engage in agriculture and productive activities. 
However, the land s women own and manage are small, less fertile and d egraded ; women also  
have limited access to and use of tools and traction compared with men; within the household, 
labo ur is mobilized to work in men’s plots as a matter of priority. Women’s labo ur is used 
primarily on men’s farms first which leaves limited  time for women to tend to their own plots or 
to undertake other activities. Time constraints to fulfil all prescribed responsibilities is a burden 
to women. Access to inputs and services such as extensions, fertilizers, pesticides and irrigation 
technolog y are also limited to women , which results in lower yields from cultivation. Women’s 
representation in decision -making structures in agriculture, natural resource management and 
climate governance is also limited , affecting their ability to cope and manage  climate -induced 
changes. Decision -making within the home is also constrained : in some cases husbands need to 
give consent for women to be engaged in activities. Access to education, income and resources 
in general is limited for women , thereby limiting their ability to use available services. Post -
harvest activities carried out by women in the sector are also affected by the impacts of climate 
change, because the quality of their product s is affected by the difficulties in accessing  clean 
water, fuelwood, and the drying and storing of produce.  
53. These realities,  however , do not undermine women’s significant contribution and 
knowledge in the sectors. Women engage and contribute significantly in the production of 
crops, in processing, distr ibution and sales of their produce. They are mainly involved in 
collection of non -timber forest products, collection and processing of shea nuts, locust bean 
fruits and vegetables, which are a source of income and a coping mechanism when other crops 
fail. Female -headed households in particular are involved to a large extent in these activities , 
despite the reality that the forestry sector, like agriculture and forest management , are often 
male  dominated.  
54. With climate change and its impacts, such as droughts, the engagements and activities of 
women are significantly affected. The shortage of water for household consumption increases 
women’s time burden as fetching water is considered women’s work . However, women are less 
likely to be formally involved in deci sion -making around water management because water 
rights and participation in water governance are often linked to land rights.  
55. The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement 
of the G ender Policy of the GCF . The gender  action plan contains activities, targets, indicators, 
budget, timelines and gender experts to support with the implementation of the gender action 
plan and to mainstream gender across the project. The activities included in the gender action 
will work tow ards ensuring the empowerment of women and girls, through capacity -building, 
gender sensitive planning and development for improved management of land and forest areas;


---
*Page 131*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 131 
 
 
ensuring women’s participation in the community tree nurseries;  ensuring access to training 
and access to FFS  while also establishing dedicated schools for women; and ensuring women -
led associations have access to microcredit and investments for agriculture. The project will also 
invest in ensuring the gender responsiveness of the institutio nal and financial environment 
while also ensuring th at authorities are sensitiz ed to women’s access to land ; while ensuring 
women have access to decision -making platforms and forums such as those responsible for 
water management. The project will use the D imitra club approach , whereby club members and 
their communities are encouraged to play an active role in development : this approach  is 
deemed a transformative approach that goes beyond the symptoms of gender inequality. 
Through the club the project intend s to address the underlying causes of inequalities such as 
norms, attitudes and behaviours, including the prevention and redress of violence against 
women in the project localities. The AE will conduct a vulnerability assessment which could 
help when refin ing the gender action plan.  
4.3 Risks  
4.3.1.  Overall programme assessment (medium risk)   
56. GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 18.4 million which will be used for producing 
climate resilient crops, supporting water works, strengthening value chain s and developing an 
enabling environment in Benin.  MAEP and FNEC , will provid e grant co -financing of respectively 
USD  12 million and USD  187,500. MCVDD and FAO will provide in -kind contributions worth 
USD  3 million and USD  1million , respectively .  
57. Benin is a least developed country . The GCF proceeds will be used to be invested in 
public goods such as waterway s, land use management and technical assistance. Therefore, the 
AE is requesting full grant support fo r this project. 
4.3.2.  Accredited entity/executing entity’s capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk)  
58. FAO will serve as both AE and EE for the project. The AE has provided fund ing 
amounting to over USD 600  million in for projects on climate change and disaster risk 
management. The AE established its office in Benin in 1977. Since then , it has implemented 
projects in all areas relevant to FAO and funded by other partners , such as the Global 
Environment Facility . 
59. In addition to FAO, there are two co-EEs for this project ; namely  the Government of 
Benin acting through MCVDD and MAEP , and FNEC . The AE carried out a capacity assessment 
for both MCVDD and MAEP. The risk was assessed as moderate for both entities. FNEC is a GCF 
AE. 
4.3.3.  Project -specific execution risks (medium risk)  
60. Management of water infrastructure: A total of USD 8.5million ( approximately 47 per 
cent  of GCF financing) will be invested in water infrastructure (Output 1.1.1) such as micro -
dams, water collection structures, boreholes and irrigated plots. The EE’s ability to procure and 
oversee companies that will construct the infrastructure will be critical in the early stage. After 
that, the available water resources from the project interventions need to be effectively 
man aged.  The project will establish a management committee responsible for administrative 
and technical management , includ ing the collection of water charges. As the specific sites will be 
selected during the implementation period, the details for water charg es, and operation and 
maintenance ( O&M ) cannot  yet to be  provided  for the financing plan . The funding proposal 
state s that the maintenance costs will be mainstreamed into local development plans and


---
*Page 132*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 132 
 
 
supported through public funds during and after the proje ct implementation. Given the lack of 
details on the determination of water charges and governance mechanism s for O&M, the 
decision -making process of allocating water resources needs to be carefully monitored and the 
Government  of Benin ’s financial commitme nt for O&M will be critical for sustainable use of the 
investment . 
61. Impact risk: the project emphasizes the importance of financing, therefore it is going to 
establish village savings and loan associations and enhance farmers’ access to LFIs and 
microcredit institutions. The loans can be used for acquiring  equipment for pr oduction, storage, 
packaging, marketing and export credits. The project impact has been calculated under the 
assumption that the farmers will sustain this investment and not revert to the uns ustainable 
practices for 20 years , in view of the improved access to financial resources (e.g. loans). This 
continued investment is only possible if LFIs and microcredit institutions are willing to provide 
loans with favourable terms for farmers. The AE explained that FNDA will provide OCRI -trained 
farmers with a guaran tee of loans intended to  support value chains for the G overnment. The 
FNDA may also provide interest rate subsid ies for the LFIs. However, the support letter from 
FNDA does not specif y the nature or the amount of support. In addition, the AE has no control  
over support from FNDA. Without concrete support for LFIs and microcredit institutions, 
farmers’ access to the loan s will be limited, and consequently the envisaged impact may not 
fully materialize.  
62. Double counting: the grant co -financing of USD  12millio n via MAEP is from the three  
existing IFAD -financed projects , which have different implementation periods. There is a risk of 
double counting the mitigation impact by both financiers. The AE explained that the current 
mitigation impact separately specifies the amount of emission reduction s financed by 
MAEP/IFAD and GCF using the AE’s tool (E X-ACT). The AE will also be coordinating closely with 
IFAD to avoid double counting.   
63. Economic analysis and project viability: the AE has provide d an economic analysis 
taking account of increased crop yields and social carbon costs of USD  20 a ton as project 
benefits over 30 years. The economic internal rate of return  results ranged between 18  and 21 
per cent  with three different average costs of crops. Apart from improved irrigated lands and 
crop productivity gains, farmers’ technical and marketing capacit ies are major contributors to 
turn ing the project’s net present value from negative to positive. The analysis shows the project 
will only be viable with the capacity -building activities for farmers.   
4.3.4.  GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)   
64. If approv ed, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in terms of 
result area and single propo sal is not material.  
4.3.5.  Compliance risk (medium risk)   
65. Benin is not the subject of any current United Nations Security Council (UNSC) 
resolutions. FAO, as the AE, confirmed that no individual or entity that is listed on any UNSC 
sanctions list, including the UN Consolidated Sanctions list , will be involved in any manner with 
the project or its activities, as a counterparty, implementer, or beneficiary.  
66. FAO explained that it performed a capacity assessment for both MAEP and MCVDD in 
2018. The reports provide an assessment of the m inistries’ financial and operations 
management policies, procedures, systems and internal controls. It assigns the risk level, which 
is moderate for both. It also identifies weaknesses and forms the basis of the Risk Mitigation and 
Assurance Plan, which will be completed prior to FAO entering into any contractual agreement 
with MAEP and MCVDD.


---
*Page 133*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 133 
 
 
67. The capacity assessments for MAEP and MCVDD consist of interviews with the 
ministries’ staff, visits to the m inistries’ offices and a review of documentation. They verif y the 
capacity, procedures and systems in the following areas: (a) registration status; (b) project 
management, organizational structure and staffing; (c) accounting policies and procedures; (d) 
fixed assets and inventories; (e) fi nancial reporting; (f) financial management capacity; and (g) 
monitoring and procurement.  
68. FAO was requested to provide a summary of the above- mentioned capacity 
assessments, particularly as the risk was identified as moderate. However, FAO has advised that , 
whil e it has no objection to sharing the summary of capacity assessment reports, its internal 
procedures require the informed consent of the assessed partner. FAO has subsequently contacted MAEP and MCVDD to provide consent, and ha s committed to shar ing the report 
summaries with GCF as soon as possible.  
69. FAO advised that the project agreement to be signed between FAO and the Government 
of Benin will include anti -money -laundering and countering the financing of terrorism 
(AML/CFT ) clauses, as follows:  
(a) The G overnment shall comply, and shall require all persons and entities engaged in its 
activities under the p roject to comply, with all internal AML/CFT  laws, rules and 
regulations;  
(b) The Government confirms it has obtained sufficient undertakings from all persons and entities involved in its activities under the p roject that they shall not engage in any 
prohibited practices.  The Government undertakes and confirm s that it shall comply w ith 
the substantive objectives of the GCF policy on prohibited practices;  and 
(c) Consistent with numerous UNSC  resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of 
the United Nations , the Government and FAO are firmly committed to the international 
fight a gainst terrorism and, in particular, against the financing of terrorism. It is the 
policy of the Government and FAO to seek to ensure that none of their funds are used, 
directly or indirectly, to provide support to individuals or entities:  
(i) Associated with terrorism, as included in the list maintained by the Security 
Council Committee established pursuant to its r esolutions 1267 (1999) and 
1989 (2011); or  
(ii) That are the subject of sanctions or other enforcement measures promulgated 
by the UNSC . This provision  must be included in all agreements that may be 
concluded with third parties for the implementation of activities under the project. 
70. In addition, all FAO offices implementing projects establish and validate a fraud plan 
annually. Risk management is also es tablished and validated every six months. During project 
implementation, FAO will ensure close monitoring and supervision through its regional office and headquarters in order to ensure that the activities are implemented in full compliance with 
the signed  project agreement. 
71. FAO has previously shared with GCF all necessary and relevant information regarding 
internal controls during the accreditation process, and FAO ha s confirmed that these are 
implemented across all FAO projects. As FNEC, a partner to the OCRI project, is a GCF AE , similar 
information was shared with GCF at the time of its accreditation.  
72. Regarding procurement, FAO has implemented a sanctions B uild -Opera te-Transfer 
(BOT) scheme  with the United Nations International Computing Centre. This BOT is loaded with 
sanctions databases from the United States of America , the European Union (EU) and the United 
Nations, and all vendors are screened against the BOT. An y possible hits (there is a degree of 
accuracy to hits that must be individually assessed) are reviewed by the vendor management


---
*Page 134*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 134 
 
 
team. Should a hit have a high degree of accuracy, it is escalated to the FAO Finance Division for 
review/clearance.  
73. As the sa nctions databases of the U nited States of America , the EU and the United 
Nations  are updated regularly, FAO screens its entire vendor database every few weeks. The 
degree of certainty estimated by the hits from the BOT is a measurement of the risk. Should a 
sanctioned entity/person be discovered or be considered too high a level of risk based on the 
BOT score, it would be blocked as a vendor.  
74. In addition, a k now -your-customer exercise is conducted by FAO before a vendor is 
listed.  Due diligence is performed at the time of any call for tender and when registered, and 
verifications are carried out on names/registrations and bank accounts to ensure all are 
synch roni zed. 
75. FAO advised that all materials or technologies acquired in the fra mework of the project 
are acquired according to the project procurement plan and in full accordance with the FAO 
rules and regulations on procurement. These goods remain FAO assets until the end of the 
project and strictly follow the rules for the use and operation of goods and equipment under the 
control of the project manager  and the FAO property and equipment administrator. These rules 
are automatically detailed to the partners when the equipment is made available to them.  
76. FAO confirmed that it manages r isks on an ex -ante and ex -post basis at project level as 
well as whole portfolio level. The FAO project cycle foresees that each project, at formulation stage, prepares a risk assessment. In addition, all FAO offices implementing projects (including 
Benin)  prepare:  
(a) On a yearly basis, a fraud prevention plan that is reviewed and monitored by FAO 
regional office (in this case, the Regional Office for Africa based in Accra); and  
(b) A risk log with a plan for mitigating actions that is reviewed and updated every s ix 
months. The enterprise risk management unit at FAO headquarters monitors 
compliance with fraud prevention and risk management policies.  
77. The FAO Office of the Inspector General provides oversight of FAO programmes and 
operations through internal audit a nd investigation. The FAO Office of the Inspector General has 
two audit units, the Corporate Audit Unit and the Field Audit Unit, and an Investigative Unit.  
78. The two audit units conduct audits and provide advisory services to senior management 
to ensure th e FAO system of internal control, financial management and use of assets is 
adequate and effective. They also help accomplish organizational objectives through a 
systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, 
control and internal governance processes.  
79. The FAO Office of the Inspector General investigates allegations of fraud and other 
misconduct in the programmes and operations of the Organization. It conducts investigations 
and inspections in compliance with the FAO Guidelines for Internal Administrative 
Investigations. These are based on the Uniform Principles and Guidelines for Investigations 
adopted and endorsed by the Conference of International Investigators, comprising 
professionals from international or ganizations, including organizations of the United Nations 
and International Financial Institutions.  
80. FAO operates its internal controls within a comprehensive policy framework in 
compliance with the five components of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizat ions of the 
Treadway Commission ’s framework  (i.e. control environment, risk assessment, control 
activities, information and communication , and monitoring activities). The FAO framework 
covers all aspects of internal controls, including accountability, risk  management, control 
activities, fraud prevention and detection , and ethical behavio ur.


---
*Page 135*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 135 
 
 
81. FAO confirmed that there will be no planned disbursements or distribution of cash, 
vouchers, commodities, or other items of value directly or indirectly to beneficiari es as part of 
any activities in this project. However, FNEC will provide cash co -financing directly to selected 
beneficiaries and will comply with the clauses indicated in the project agreement.  
82. FNEC has confirmed to FAO that it has an anti -fraud policy th at was implemented 
through the grievance management mechanism document. FNEC has also developed its know -
your -customer  and AML/CFT policies. These documents ensure that FNEC’s beneficiaries are 
not involved in money- laundering or financing of terrorism thanks to the analysis and screening 
carried out by the National Financial Information Processing Unit ( Cellule Nationale de 
Traitement des Informations Financières ). 
83. FAO advised that the project will establish a grievance mechanism at field level to file 
complaints during the project inception phase. Awareness- raising will include the necessary 
information regarding the contacts and the process for filing grievances. The p roject 
management unit (PMU) will be responsible  for addressing incoming grievances regarding 
environmental and social standards. As part of the safeguards for performance monitoring, the 
project coordinator of the PMU will be responsible for documenting and reporting on any 
grievances received and how they were addressed.  
84. Additionally, FNEC has a grievance management mechanism that allows the public to 
submit information about project mismanagement and unintended negative impacts caused by 
project implementation. On the FNEC website, the public can rep ort any incongruities related to 
the project. The Head of the Users ’ Office receives the information and forwards it to the 
Director  General to trigger the appropriate procedure.  
85. Recommended condition : FAO has yet to provide GCF with a summary of the capac ity 
assessments on MAEP and MCVDD (conducted in 2018), and the results of their risk assessment 
on money -laundering, terroris m financing, or prohibited practices (to be conducted at the 
project formation  stage). As such, the O ffice of R isk Management and C ompliance 
(ORMC)/Compliance Team recommends that payments are not  disbursed until the above -
mentioned and any intended control measures are reviewed by ORMC/Compliance Team  and 
determined as acceptable.  
86. Recommended risk rating : The ORMC/Compliance Team has conducted a review of 
the project in accordance with relevant GCF Board -approved policies and does not find any 
material issue or deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information 
for this funding proposal, the ORMC/Compliance Team have determined a risk rating of medium 
and has no objection to this request proceeding to the next steps for processing.  
87. ORMC/Compliance Team would like to remind FAO, as the AE, of its continuing 
obligations and responsibilities with regard to monito ring and reporting any risks for money -
laundering , terroris m financing, or prohibited practices among the intended counterparties, 
EEs, beneficiaries, persons involved, or any of the proposed activities.  
Summary risk assessment and recommendation  
Summary risk assessment  
Overall project/programme  Medium 
Accredited entity / executing entity  capability to implement the 
project/programme  Medium 
Project -specific execution  Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  Low


---
*Page 136*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 136 
 
 
Compliance  Medium 
4.4 Fiduciary  
88. FAO will be the AE for the project and also act as an EE. The other EEs for the project 
will be the Government of Benin  and FNEC .  
89. As the AE, FAO will be responsible for project implementation and administrative 
oversight and technical supervision, corpora te management for GCF intervention, project 
reporting, and project completion and evaluation in accordance with the detailed provisions 
outlined in the GCF policies as well as in the a ccreditation master agreement (AMA) and the 
funded a ctivity agreement. As such, FAO will be responsible for overall management of the 
Project, including ( i) all project evaluation aspects; ( ii) administrative, financial and technical 
supervision throughout implementation of the project; (iii) supervision of effectiv e 
management of funds to achieve the results and objectives; (iv) quality control of p roject 
monitoring and reporting to the GCF; and ( v) project closure and evaluation. To perform the AE 
functions, FAO will set up a dedicated FAO -GCF project task force co mprising relevant staff from 
the FAO Country Office in Benin, the FAO Regional Office for Africa and FAO Headquarters. The project supervision function will remain independent of the EE functions performed by FAO 
Benin. FAO and the Government of Benin will function as the EE s for the GCF proceeds. FNEC, 
which is a legal entity that  operates under the aegis of MCVDD, has agreed to provide co -
financing and will be the EE for the activity it co -finances. MAEP will also be an EE  for the 
activities it co -finance s. Care will be taken that different departments within MCVDD and MAEP 
are involved in project implementation.  
90. FAO as the AE will receive the funds from the GCF at HQ level. MCVDD will be an EE to 
which FAO will transfer funds through the applicable modal ity, which foresees all necessary 
provisions for monitoring and supervision, including regular supervision missions, third -party 
regular spot checks and audits to ensure financial management, procurement and other management requirements are in line with a greed standards and practices. MCVDD as EE has 
been assessed to gauge its handling capacity and a mitigation plan has been agreed upon to tackle shortcomings. MAEP will execute the activit ies it co -finances. FAO, GoB, and FNEC in their 
role as EEs will man age project financial expenditures against budgets and execute payments.  
91. As per the provisions of the FAO Operational Partners Implementation Modality, the 
FAO -GCF project supervision team will undertake regular supervision missions, and will recruit 
a qu alified, internationally recognized auditing firm to perform regular spot checks and audits, 
to ensure financial management and procurement by the PMU and that PPMUs are being 
performed in line with agreed standards and practices. This will be governed by the agreement to be signed between FAO and the Government of Benin before the project becomes operational.  
92. The AE is yet to provide the finalised letters of co -financing and the financial 
management capacities  of the executing entities. These will be condition precedents to FAA 
effectiveness.   
4.5 Results monitoring and reporting  
93. As a cross- cutting initiative, the programme aims at generating both mitigation and 
adaptation benefits. On the mitigation side, the intervention is expected to result in overall 
greenhouse gas  emission reductions of 1,783,633 tCO 2eq over the project  lifet ime period of 2 0 
years . The metrics of the GCF core indicator for mitigation based on greenhouse gas accounting 
methodology and EX -ACT analysis detailed under  annexes  22 and 18 of the funding proposal  
have been provided.


---
*Page 137*
---

 
GCF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 137 
 
 
94. Regarding  adaptation, the programme expects to benefit 330,000  direct and 5,670,000 
indirect beneficiaries. The AE should provide a robust methodology and rationale  for defining 
both direct and indirect beneficiaries within an  annex of the funding proposal.  
95. The theory of change narrative and diagram  have articulated  the requisite elements , 
inclusive of the goal statement of the project and  proposed activities, to show the relevan t 
interlinkages between logic levels  and barriers and risks.  
96. The logical framework incorporates relevant details, including means of verification  and 
reporting on the appropriate  core indicators for both mitigation and adaptation, as well as on 
the respective impact, outcome and programme -level indicators for the targeted results areas as 
per the GCF  performance management framework and r esults  measurement  frameworks. 
97. The implementation timetable and monitoring and evaluation plan have  been 
articulated in annex 5 and annex 11  of the funding proposal, respectively.  
4.6 Legal assessment  
98. The AMA was signed with the AE  on 8 June 2018, and it became effective on 4 October 
2018.  
99. The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
100. The proposed project will be implemented in Benin, a country in which GCF is not 
provided wit h privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be further 
assessed. No draft agreement on privileges and immunities has been dispatched to Beni n at this 
stage.  
101. The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or 
has been provided with appropr iate privileges and immunities.  
4.7 List of proposed conditions (including legal)  
102. In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.


---
*Page 138*
---

G
CF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 138 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP187 
Proposal name:  Ouémé  Basin Climate- Resilience Initiative (OCRI) Benin  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Benin 
Project/programme size: Small 
I. Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel  (based
on the s ubmitted funding proposal dated 14 April 2022 )
1.1 Impact potential    Scale:  N/A 
1. Rain -fed agriculture is the main economic sector in Benin , contributing  50 per cent  of
gross domestic product ;1 70 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture, of which 85
per cent are smallholder farmers  owning less than 2 h a land . The agriculture sector faces a
development problem that is linked to the ongoing deterioration of its agroecosystem  resource s
(
i.e. water, rivers, forests, land, soil, crops, plants/seeds, livestock ), the productivity of
farmers/entrepreneurs (women, youth , men) and sustainability  of the agribusiness value chain s
(
AVCs)  (production, post -production , logistics  (e.g. river transport) , markets, access to finance) ,
a
ll of which impact food security . The  underlying causes of these problems come from a
co
mbination  of human and climate factors : farmers’ unsustainable traditional agriculture
practices (e.g. slash and burn to clear and/or open up new farming areas,  deforestation  due t o
w
ood and coal needs, o pen livestock land grazing, over -extraction  of water, salinization, soil
erosion ),2 exacerbated by climate change, variability and extreme  events (i.e. rising
temperatures, declining trends in precipitation  leading to droughts,  inter -annual intens ification
of precipitation  causing floods , strong winds and changing seasonalit y).3 Most vulnerable are
the municipalities in Upper and Middle Ouémé  (i.e. Copargo, Djougou, Glazoué, Zagnanado and
Zogbodomey) , wh ere 6 million Beninese live; these target municipalities have been neglected
until now and have not yet been the subject of large- scale adaptation interventions .4 At risk  are
t
he population ( of which 50  per cent are women , 61 per cent of whom work in the  agriculture
sector) , the abundant water resources , which have been  exploited or misused , the main
Beninese crops (e.g. maize, shea, cashew, mango) and 7 ,271 km2 land. In times of crop failure,
farmers venture into livestock, fishing, beekeeping, non-timber  forest products and the trad ing
of these alternative products.
2. As per the climatic data analysis combined with population interviews  and in-depth
farmer consultations , the f unding proposal shows  that “the Upper Ouémé Basin, where Copargo
and Djougou are located, is particularly exposed to the late and violent rains, long period of dry
spells and intense droughts, excessive heat, and violent winds. As a result, food crops are
negatively affected, agricultural land siltation is observed in the Ouémé River, leading to floods
downstream, and existing hydraulic networks are damaged. In the transition area (Glazoue),intense droughts, late rains , and excessive heat are the most prominent climate- related hazards
.
1 See funding proposal a nnex 2: OCRI FS Section 1.5.  
2 See funding proposal  section A.21, feasibility study , sections 3  and 4. 
3 See funding proposal  annex 2. 
4 See funding proposal  section B , item 5.


---
*Page 139*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 139 
 
 
These also affect food and cash crop produ ction ( including shea and cashew ), while causing 
damages to existing infrastructures. Finally, in the Middle Ouémé (Zagnanado and 
Zogbodomey), floods, long droughts , and heavy rains are noted as key climate change impacts, 
with negative effects on food crops, land , and water resources. ”5 Even a p rojected  climate under 
a 4.5 ° C scenario  (not the doomsday scenario of 8.5 °C) will exacerbate these conditions and 
adverse ly impact these same agroecosystems, communities, farmers, livelihoods and AVCs . 
3. In general terms, t he proposed  Ouémé Basin Climate -Resilience Initiative ( OCRI ) project 
seeks to increase the resilience of agroecosystems ( i.e., water, land, soil, forests, crops, plants) 
over 95,00 1 ha land, 330,000 direct smallholder farmers , of whom 50 per cent  are women, and 
the AVC infrastructure . This will be done through an i ntegrated set of interventions involving ( i) 
engineering  and bioengineering  measures for the ecosystems (e.g. water resource protection 
measures, use of resilient crops and planting materials)  and capacity -building on climate -
resilient agriculture ( CRA ) for farmers o n the production side ( component 1 );6 (ii) the 
introduction of best practices, technologies , farmer field schools (FFS) and f arm business 
models  and finance  for the farmers and the A VC ( component 2) ; and (iii) institutionaliz ation of 
climate -smart  interventions via mainstreaming in Ouémé  development plans, strengthening  the 
capacity of the National Fund for the Environment and Climate ( FNEC ) to finance climate  
projects, establishing an OCRI platform for scaling up CRA finance and investments and 
disseminating  best practices w ith other municipalities in Benin (component 3).  As highlighted 
in the funding proposal , the innovation of OCRI is the integrated approach to address the above-
mentioned issues and challenges , that is,  the tota lity of the package and not just parts of it.   
4. The funding proposal has included feasibility  studies on the OCRI funding proposal7,  
waterworks8 and markets ;9 these studies clearly establish the relevant baselines by which to 
determine the impacts and subsequently the paradigm shifts  to be delivered under the  
following  three components of OCRI:10  
(a) Project component 1, “Low -carbon , climate -resilient  crop production enhanced,  and 
ecosystem services restored in the Upper and Middle Ouémé ”, is essentially focused on 
enhancing the resilience of the Ouémé  Basin agroecosystems. The targeted vulnerable 
ecosystems include resource s such as w ater, soil, land, river and forests. The vulnerable 
agri culture  sector includes farmers and their crops ( i.e. maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, 
okra, green vegetable s, tomatoes, yam, shea, mango and cashew). The proposed 
adaptation and resilience measures for the ecosystems include  (i) engineering measures 
via the construction of 30 surface water storage structures or rainwater harvesting 
structures ( e.g. s mall earth dams), rehabilitation of 23 old surface water collection 
structures, development o f small irrigated perimeters with full water control over 2, 000  
ha land  (680 ha with OCRI and 1 ,320 ha with  the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD )) and development of 58 water source protection  measures  (river, 
head of streams, artesian  boreholes, etc.) ; and (ii) bioengineering  measures for land 
restoration via the planting of trees along degraded river banks and fields  (5,000 ha 
with OCRI and 4,000 ha with IFAD)  (Glaz oue, Zagnan ado and Zogbodomey with  IFAD ). A 
set of capacity -building activities on  on-farm traditional and innovative practices and 
techniques for low -carbon CRA targeting the farmers will be conducted in parallel; these 
would range from the use of diversified drought -tolerant crop varieties, conservation 
farming, rainwater conservation, micro  dams, agroforestry and improved water 
 
5 See funding proposal  annex 2, section 4.4 , para . 6. 
6 See funding proposal s ection E.  
7 See funding proposal annex 2 on OCRI feasibility study . 
8 See funding proposal annex 17 on waterworks feasibility study . 
9 See funding proposal annex 19 on market study . 
10 See funding proposal annex 17  on waterworks feasibility  and references to the  "Analyse de la vulnérabilité et de 
l'adaptation au changement climatique des communautés et agroécosystèmes aux variations actuelles du climat et 
aux phénomènes météorologiques extrêmes .”


---
*Page 140*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 140 
 
 
management to ecosystem restoration and water -source and riverbank protection. 
Training of facilitators in FFS will also be conducted to sustain these CRA activities 
beyond the project's lifespan ;11 
(b) Component 2 , “Climate -resilient and gender -sensitive value chains, supporting farmers’ 
livelihoods in the Upper and Middle Ouémé” ,12 will focus on enhancing farmers’  and 
cooperatives’ income stream s and incentivizing private sector investments in CRA and 
resilient management techniques. These interventions seek to strengthen  the AVC  
through training of farmers, provision of technologies for post -production process ing of 
crop s and facilitation of access to finance  by the Nation al Fund for Agricultural 
Development (FNDA ), especially through loan guarantees from lenders  (e.g. village 
saving and loans and associations and microfinance institutions ( MFIs )13 via the 
Alafia14).15 The funding proposal  targets high -value crops such as  cashew, maize, shea 
and mango , and will be expanded to other high -value crops such as  cassava, cowpea, 
chillies, okra, green vegetables , tomatoes and yam. One of the  key features  of this 
component is the training  among farmers that will  cent re on marketing and finance for 
farmers and cooperatives and developing networks between farmers and sellers , and 
building the business case for climate -resilient  agriculture and food production using a 
market value chain approach ;16 and  
(c) Component 3 , “An enabling institutional and financial environment established to 
promote and upscale low carbon climate -resilient land and water management in 
Benin’s Basins”,  focus es on the establishment of an enabling institutional and financial 
environm ent to promote and scale up climate -resilient management in the Ouémé  Basin. 
It will mainstream climate in the Ouémé  development master  plan ;17 establish an OCRI  
platform  for dissemination of OCRI success stories/best practices and outreach to 
farmers, markets and investors ; and strengthen the capacity of FNEC to ensure 
continuous support to climate -resilient farming in the Ouémé  Basin ( i.e. de- risking 
farmer financial transactions through a combination of financial advisory and loan 
services among farme rs, along with the provision of FNDA financial guarantees on 
farmer loans by accredited MFIs ). Other initiatives would cover strategy  formulation, 
networking with MFIs for project financing and management  and conduct ing an 
awareness campaign on integrated climate -resilient management  among the relevant 
stakeholders in the  AVC  
1.1.1.  Adaptation impacts   
5. The funding proposal presented details on the climate change, variability and extreme 
events that have been happening in the five targeted municipalities at Middle and Upper Ouémé, and how this has impacted the agroecosystems (i.e. water (surface water, groundwater), crops)  
 
11 See funding proposal s ection A , component 1 . 
12 See funding proposal  section A , component 2 . 
13 See funding proposal a nnex 19 on m arket study, section 3.1 . 
14 A consortium of 43 microcredit institutions operating in Benin.  
15 Eligible activities for a n FNDA -supported loan must be related to the priority sectors promoted by the Territorial 
Agricultural Development Agencies, namely pineapple, cashew nuts, market gardening, corn, rice, cassava, 
soybeans, shea butter, cotton, aquaculture, oil palm trees , fruit trees, meat and milk, and eggs for consumption. The 
FNDA -supported loans can cover the acquisition of equipment and means of production, processing, storage, 
conservation and transport/distribution; the acquisition of specific agricultural inputs; the strengthening of working capital; and the provision of marketing and/or export credits. Source: a nnex 19 on m arket study , section 
3.1.2.  
16 See funding proposal  section A , component 2 , 
17 Schéma Directeur d’Am énagement et de Gestion des Eaux du Bassin de l’Oué mé was adopted by the General 
Directorate of Water in 2013. It  promotes integrated water management in the Ouémé  Basin and constitutes a 
decision- making and planning tool for stakeholders in land, water and ecosystem management until 2025. See 
funding proposal a nnex 2, p ara. 147 .


---
*Page 141*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 141 
 
 
and the key AVC s. Using a combination of scientific observed data and anecdotal evidence and 
testimonies from the Oué mé farmers, the OCRI project has elaborated a clear picture of the 
agriculture baselines (i.e. stability of yields, quality of crop production, post -production , 
commodity and microfinance  markets ). The funding proposal also illustrates  the vulnerability of 
the activities of the Ouémé  farmer (i.e. tilling to harvest ing using traditional practices ), 
livelihoods  (i.e. crops, livestock, trading), AVC s18,19 (i.e. post -production to market of key crops 
like maize, vegetables, shea, cashew and mango), critical agroecosystems (i.e. soil, land, water, 
forests, seeds) and built infrastructure (i.e. irrigation, roads , energy ) and explains  how climate 
change and variability in temperature and precipitation and extreme events such as  floods, 
droughts /dry periods , heatwaves , desertification, strong winds and wildfires has impacted 
these activities , further exacerbated by the c oronavirus disease  2019 (COVID -19) pandemi c.  
6. By and large, the OCRI project measures are ‘ no regrets ’ measures such as (a) the 
restoration of 53 per cent of the total land in Middle and Upper Ouémé (95,001 out of 179,556 
ha), comprising degraded land, forests and agroecosystems (water, soil, seed s, plant material); 
(b) conduct of combined capacity -building measures aimed at instil ling climate -smart 
agricultural knowledge and techniques  in 24,250 farmers ; and (c) the enhancement of 
institutional capacities via mainstreaming climate in the Ouémé development master plan, 
incentivizing private sector  investments and facilitating climate finance in support of these 
climate -smart measures for the agriculture s ector.   
7. Project impact calculations20 provide d a snapshot o f how the OCRI interventions impact 
the farmer communes involved in the AVC s on vegetables, annuals and trees. The project impact 
amounts to a 13 per cent improvement from the USD 5,135 business as usual net present value 
(NPV )/ha to the USD 5,825 project NPV/ha for all areas (Copargo, Djogou, Glazoue, Zagnanado, 
Zogbodomey).21  
8. OCRI complete package impact22 was  calculated using  a very simplified simulation run 
using the Farm Tree applica tion23 on a 1 h a plot of land and using 10  per cent  as a discount rate.  
The model demonstrates that the total combined effects of the OCRI interventions (i.e. cleared 
cropland (CC) + irrigated agriculture (IA)  + technical capacity  (TC24) + marketing capacity25) 
lead to a positive NPV and an internal rate of return (IRR) greater than 30  per cent . However, 
when compared with  other interventions , NPV is negative and IRR is negative, meaning that an 
investment scenario is operating at a loss; under a single project intervention scenario CC ,26 
NPV is negative at –44 ; for a dual project scenario of CC+IA, NPV is –34,176; and under a triple 
project s cenario of CC+IA+TC, NPV is –29,516. The simulation demonstrates that the 
investments of GCF alone in increasing the resilience of vulnerable ecosystem resources and 
built infrastructure are not enough to enable a farmer to break  even on their  own investme nts 
 
18 See funding proposal annex 17, section 2,  on value chains: overall analysis and impact of climate change . 
19 See funding proposal a nnex 3 , economic and financial analysis of OCRI . 
20 See funding proposal annex 3, project impact NPV = NPV ( project scenario) – NPV ( baseline scenario) to assess 
how the proposed project improves the baseline situation for the targeted farmer communes’ agriproducts 
(vegetables, annuals, trees). 
21 See funding propos al annex 3, table 16.  
22 See funding proposal annex 3, table 23 - Summary of the impact of irrigated horticulture on a 1 -ha cropped dryland. 
The right- table provides sensitivity to price and costs fluctuation analysis.  
23 FarmTree® provides services to project and report on the im pact of landscape restoration initiatives, including 
agroforestry. The FarmTree®Tool is a modeling tool that quantifies the production (fruit, wood, etc.) and services (soil conservation, carbon, etc.) provided by agroforestry systems, at the plot, farm, o r landscape level. It can gauge 
a wide range of effects of agroforestry at multiple levels, from farm and landscape to national level. See annex 3, 
FarmTree model introduction. 
24 TC could be training on CSA in FFS.  
25 Marketing capacity  could be training on farm business schools covering marketing, sales , or financing/investments . 
26 CC could be project interventions on building or climate -proofing  built infrastructures  such as irrigation systems or 
micro dams.


---
*Page 142*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 142 
 
 
and generate a decent income without the additional technical interventions on climate -smart 
agriculture  (CSA)  (i.e. training on CSA practices, accessing finance and being part of the AVC s).27 
9. The r isk to adaptat ion impacts  is assessed as low . 
10. The n on-sustainability of farmers ’ behavio ural change to continue practicing CSA 
agriculture could hamper the program me. The presence of farmer cooperatives and Dimitra 
Clubs (see para. 47 below) could address these challenges as they  arise. 
11. Adaptation impact p otential based on the funding proposal package, responses to 
written questions, and discussions during the meeting between the AE and the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) , is assessed as high.  
1.1.2.    Mitigation impact  28  
12. The OCRI project is expected to mitigate 1,783, 633  tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  
(t CO 2 eq) over 20 years and  89,181  t CO 2 eq per annum. The  carbon sequestration  will come 
from three major activities.  The biggest mitigation activity involves  the remediation of 84,000 
ha of degraded river banks and the restoration of  perennial parkland with additional trees using  
agroforestry management and sustainable land and forestry management practices; this is 
expected to sequester emissions of approximately 1,469,260 t CO 2 eq over 20 years . The second 
major mitigation activity concerns  the improved forest  management of 9, 000 h a degraded 
forest land , resulting in a sequestration of  232 ,518 t  CO 2 eq over 20 years . The t hird relates to  
the avoidance of emission s from the enhancement of  agricultural productivity  through the use 
of CRA practices , including the development of small irrigation/trickle systems over 2,000 ha 
land leading to a reduction in emissions of 52,587 t  CO 2 eq, and the discontinuation of mineral 
fertilization resulting in a reduction in emissions of 29,383 t CO 2 eq over 20 years ; however , this  
is offset by the greenhouse gas ( GHG)  emissions emitted from the irrigation system amounting 
to 115  t CO 2 eq. 
13. The r isk to mitigation impact  is assessed as medium . 
14. Accord ing to t he feasibility study , the current and future sources of Benin’s GHG 
emissions  are energy (47.4  per cent), agriculture (45.9 per cent) , waste (5.0  per cent ) and 
industrial processes (1.6 per cent). The small successes of farmers from improved harvests will 
increase economic activities (i.e. increased farm inputs, electricity consumption for food 
processing, dryers, cold storage)  and organ ic waste by-products  along the AVC s; these activities 
will naturally lead to an increase in GHG emissions,  especially if no mitigation measures (e.g. 
integration of renewable or clean energy sources, energy/fuel  efficiency measures) are 
implemented.  
15. Mitig ation  impact potential based on the submitted documents is assessed as  medium to 
high . 
16. Overall impact potential is assessed as medium to high.   
1.2 Paradigm shift potential                          Scale:  N/A 
17. As a caveat, the  independent  TAP finds that the paradigm shift is dependent on the full 
baseline assessment and market studies of  the agriculture sector, the agrifinance subsector, the 
targeted vulnerable farmers and entrepreneurs and the timely delivery and clarity of the 
complete packa ge of credit from MFIs , village saving s and loans and association s and the CSA -
oriented financial services and products from FND A and FNEC . The baselines presented in the 
 
27 See funding proposal annex 3 , section 7  for other simulations demonstrating the positive NPVs and IRR for various 
project baselines and combined interventions (i.e. t ables 24, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31 and 32).  
28 See funding proposal a nnex 18,  EXACT analysis  rationale.


---
*Page 143*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 143 
 
 
funding proposal indicate that the paradigm shift for all agri culture sector stakehol ders  is clear 
and highly replicable , and scalable outside the OCRI project areas.  
18. For component 1, especially regarding hydroagricultural development, the innovations 
for the control and efficient and intelligent use of water, including innovative hydroagricultural 
developments, irrigated perimeters, rainwater storage for adapting agricultural production to 
climate change and the protection of springs or watercourses ,29 have huge paradigm shift 
potential given that the targeted Ouémé  muni cipalities baseline study on waterwork s has 
shown that there are no modern  hydroagricultural technologies  in the Ouémé  project areas.  The 
improvement of water resources will address the water needs of the communities, including 
transhuman ce activities,  thus potentially eliminating , or reducing at best , the stress and physical 
damage to the water resources.  
19.  The CRA techniques to be imparted to the farmers would also lead to long -term 
behavio ural changes that would serve as successful  examples of CRA farming among other 
farmers within Ouémé  and adjacent areas. This shift from traditional agriculture to CRA is the 
paradigm shift .30  
20. For component 2, as  per the e conomic and f inancial analysis ( annex  3), overall farmers’ 
incomes are proje cted to grow as a result of the combined interventions under c omponents 1, 2 
and 3.31 
21. For component 3, the paradigm shift is clear from the mainstreaming of climate in the 
Ouémé  master plan and the introduction of  the OCRI platform.  These two interventions ensure 
the right direction towards  a low -carbon and climate -resilient development  pathway; one via 
development plans  and the other through a market exchange platform for agricrops  and 
products, business opportunities,  financiers an d investors, and lesson learn ed from other 
projects. 
22. If the OCRI project  is carried out  effectively , the s ustainable development finance  and 
financial inclusion  initiatives under component 2, targeting farmers, cooperatives and in 
particular  the private  sector , can bring about an innovative set of financial products and 
services which directly address climate -related risks , issues o f financ ial availability, 
affordability and accessibility , and financial exclusion. The OCRI platform can also act as a 
financi al inclusion mechanism that  target s poor vulnerable farmers and entrepreneurs along 
the climate -sensitive AVC with  no or minimal  banking experience  and match these AVC 
stakeholders  with CSA financiers and investors. With this, the programme aims to  protect such 
farmers and entrepren eurs  from the risk of onerous lending schemes or predatory loans from 
informal sources.   
23. The paradigm shift is also on the OCRI integrated approach of de -risking o f the climate -
sensitive agriculture sector  resources, farmers’ production and post -production activities, and 
most of all, the lending activities on the AVC s.  
24. If the project is done well, the OCRI impacts will trigger Ouémé’s transformation 
towards climat e-resilient development pathways; over a period of 20 years, the project will 
enhanc e the resilience of the agroecosystems, smallholder farmers, business value chains and 
institutions in the agriculture sector.  
25. Risk to paradigm shift  is assessed as low . 
26. What is clear in the project is that climate change has indeed been occurring and will 
further worsen in the years to come and affect  the agroecosystems, the farmers ’ communities 
and livelihoods, and the AVCs  from production to market . The  risk to paradigm shift is the 
 
29 Funding proposal  annex 17 , executive summary. 
30 See funding proposal a nnex 3 , economic and financial analysis , section 1 , table 1 , for a summary of key adaptation 
measures along the tree and crop business value chain s. 
31 See para s. 6 and 7 above   and funding  proposal a nnex 3 for more details.


---
*Page 144*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 144 
 
 
delayed or outright failure of the stakeholders to demonstrate in a timely manner and reap the 
benefits of improved incomes resulting from  the transition towards a CSA practice. The hard 
(e.g. irrigation systems) and soft (e. g. MFI CSA loans and guarantees) interventions will remain 
but newly found skills, knowledge and experience leading to good behavio ural changes among 
farmers could wane and subside easily if the compounded impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic, 
and now the conf lict between the Russian Federation and Ukraine, and more frequent and 
prolonged climate extreme events impact on the AVC s.  
27. In view of the above discussions and balancing the overall impact potential and risks, 
the independent  TAP finds that the paradigm shift potential is  high.  
1.3 Sustainable development potential              Scale: N/A  
28.  Economic co benefits. If done correctly, the OCRI integrative approach will improve and 
transform the grass -root s agriculture -based economy. The combined enhancement of 
agroecosystems, reskilling of traditional farmers on CRA plus the guaranteed loans for CSA 
initiatives will improve the livelihoods along  the AVC. These measures will improve  the 
agriculture sector and contribute to enhanced food se curity.  
29. Gender mainstreaming . The funding proposal  include s a gender action plan, which seek s 
to mainstream gender in OCRI  from project design to implementation. The funding proposal  
also targets vulnerable women given that 50 per cent of the OCRI beneficiaries are women  in 
the AVC.   
30. Environmental co -benefits . The funding proposal  include s a safeguards package in the 
preparation of OCRI and is in  environment al and social safeguards  category  B. Among the 
frameworks prepared are the e nvironmental and social management framework  and the 
stakeholder engagement plan, each of which includes a detailed social assessment outline 
highlighting the importance of and need for sustainable inclusion of v ulnerable groups in the 
project intervention areas, consistent with the applicable standards  and policies of the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) and GCF and the core requirements of  
Benin’s national regulations.32 
31. Sustainable Development  Goals . The OCRI  project can be linked to several Sustainable 
Development Goals ( SDG s), including  No Poverty (SDG 1), Zero Hunger (SDG 2) , Quality 
Education (SDG 4), Gender Equality  (SDG 5) , Clean Water and Sanitation (SDG 6), D ecent Work 
and Economic  Growth (SDG 8),  Industry , Innovation and I nfrastructure (SDG 9), R educe d 
Inequalities (SDG 10) , Sustainable  Cities and Communities (SDG 11), Responsible Consumption  
and Production (SDG 12)  and Partnerships for the Goals (SDG 17) . 
32. Risk to sustainable development  is assessed as low . 
33. The fragmented implementation of the proposed project’s activities and subactivities 
creates  the risk of failing to achieve these SDGs; the weak monitor ing of the  numerous 
smallholder farmer activities may lead to environmental degradation or maladaptation  and the 
risk of leakage from the interventions identified above.  
34. Overall,  based on the above, the sustainable development potential of the project is 
assessed as h igh. 
1.4 Needs of the recipient                           Scale:  N/A  
1.4.1.  Needs of the farmers and entrepreneurs (e.g. traders, buyers).  
 
32 See funding proposal  annex 6 , environmental and social  document for category B.


---
*Page 145*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 145 
 
 
35. Based on the in -depth  stakeholder consultations that ran for four  years  until March 
2022 ,33 the main needs  pertain to the following: immediate and long -term reduction of losses  
and damage in agricrops and business value chain investments (e.g . from a baseline of 90  per 
cent  drop on yields per h ectare , losses on farmer investment in plant material/seeds , and 
reduction in livelihood  incomes in post -production AVCs); and strengthen ing the resilience of 
ecosystem resources (water (river, under ground), land, soil, forests)  versus  climate extreme  
events (i.e. flash floods /riverine floods , droughts , salinization , changing seasons ). Climate 
extreme events further exacerbate the fragile soil and land conditions  from unsustainable 
human activities ( i.e. transhuman ce activities, wi ldfires, loss of forests, unproductive soil and 
overuse of pesticides ). As a consequence, the climate- vulnerable farmers constantly need 
immediate relief measures such as access to resources (i.e. for credit for food in times of cris is, 
for loans, for busi nesses  and new farm technologies, for improving skills and knowledge) and 
protection from transhumance activities that not only damage their crops and plants but also 
compete for scarce water resources .34 The OCRI project (i.e. c omponents 1, 2 and 3) will address 
these  and all being well will lead to increased incomes.  
1.4.2.  Needs of the agroecosystems  
36. As mentioned above, the funding proposal indicated that climate change, variability and 
extreme events are impacting the water resources, land, soil, forest, plants and crops and that 
this will be exacerbated  in the future; the OCRI project will directly address this via engineering 
and bioengineering measures to protect water resources as well as through CRA  practices (e.g. 
no tillage practices, soil fertility  management)35.  
1.4.3.  Needs of the agribusiness value chain  
37. The funding proposal  clearly indicated  how climate exacerbates the issues and 
challenges of a fragmented market for each of the high -value cash crops , a situation that has 
hindered the development of a stable supply and demand value chain locally and 
internationally. The OCRI platform will address this need as it is designed to create a network of 
producers, sellers, traders, buyers, investors and financiers in support of the AVC  from 
production to the end markets. The funding proposal  also presented the high -risk nature of the 
AVC 36 and the need to de -risk the farmers ’ activities and investments or financing transactions 
in this sector; the funding proposal  address es this via the int roduction of FFS and farm business 
schools (FBS) and FNDA guarantee support ( component 2) and the provision of climate finance 
to CSA projects by FNEC ( component 3).  
1.4.4.  Needs of the Benin and Ouémé local government  
38. OCRI supports the intended national determined contribution under the Paris 
Agreement  as published by Benin in June 201737, which highlights the country's emission 
profile and intentions in terms of decarboni zing its economy and investing in climate change 
resilience . The OCRI project helps t o reduce emissions , mainly from agriculture ,38and increase 
resilience in agriculture . As climate is not integrated in t he Ouémé  master  plan , the local 
 
33 See guiding note on changes made in the FAO OCRI funding proposal and annexes following the independent TAP 
assessment in April 2022 . 
34 Funding proposal annex 7 , stakeholder consultations participation and engagement plan. 
35 See funding proposal a nnex 3 , economic and financial analysis , section 1 , table 1 , for the summary of key 
adaptation measures along the tree and crop business value chains.   
36 See funding proposal a nnex 19,  market study, section 2 , value chains: overall analysis and impact of climate change . 
37 See funding proposal, section B.1., para 1.  
38 ~45.9  per cent  of total country emissions. See funding proposal .


---
*Page 146*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 146 
 
 
government has agreed to mainstream climate in the p lan, which will be effected under 
component 3 of the funding proposal . 
39. If done properly, OCRI will squarely address  these needs via a three- pronged integrated 
resilience approach : (a) climate proofing the agro ecosystems  (component 1) ; (b) enhancing 
adaptive capacities of farmer s to carry out CRA and integrating climate -smart  measures along 
the AVCs  (component s 1 and 2); and (c) mainstreaming climate among public and private 
institutions with respect to  finance and investments, policy, plan ning and develop ment  
(component s 2 and 3). 
1.4.5.  Needs of the financial markets  
40. OCRI seeks to de- risk the agricultural activities and the agri cultural  stakeholder 
financial transactions. This would be done through the introduction of CSA  via FFS and FBS , and 
enabling MFIs to provide affordable loans with the financial guarantee from FNDA.  
41. Risk to needs of recipients is assessed as  low. 
42. A weak implementation of the program me may lead to fragmented deliverables that 
could cause delayed  impr ovement in land productivity, water availability, forest growth , crop 
yield s and  harvest  quality combined with  constrained access to markets and slow improvement 
in incomes and livelihoods. These implementation challenges could be due to more extreme 
clima te conditions, the prevalence of more disruptions in the supply chains and market s due to 
local political and peace and security risks, and now compounded by not only the global COVID -
19 pandemic but also the risk of armed conflict between the Russia n Fede ration  and Ukraine  
and the corresponding unintended consequences of the impacts of sanctions on the markets and 
supply chains relevant to  the OCRI project.  
43. Overall, b ased on the above, the needs of the recipient  is assessed as potentially high.  
1.5 Country ownership                Scale:  N/A  
44. OCRI is aligned with Benin’s  nationally determined contributions. It is also aligned with 
national climate change initiatives , namely the  National Adaptation Plan of Action 
(2008) /National Action Programme for Climate Change Adaptation , the National Law on 
Climate Change (2018)  and the Low -carbon and Climate Change  Resilient Development Strategy 
2016 –2025 . In addition, there are links to national development strategies, plans and policies 
(e.g. National Action Plan for Integrated Water Resources Management (2009), Strategic Plan 
for the Development of the Agricultural Sector  (2017) , National Plan for Agricultural 
Investments and Food and Nutritional Security 2017 –2021 and the Ouémé  master plan (2013 )). 
45. The letters of c o-financing and engagement from the key government stakeholders show 
strong ownership of the projects. The Ministry of Living Environment and Sustainable 
Development (MCVDD) (with USD 3 million  sourced from b udget resources) and the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries ( MAEP)  support OCRI with  USD  12,634, 280 through the 
projects of the Framework Program of IFAD Interventions in Rural Areas in Benin (i.e. 
Agriculture Development and Market Access S upport Pro ject, Regional Program for the 
Integration of Agricultur al Markets  and Support Project for the Development  of Market 
Gardening ). The letter from FNEC, an accredited direct access entity , commits USD 187,000 of 
co-financing over the six  years  of the project  but only under c omponent 3.  The FNDA follow -up 
letter dated 20 September 202139 explicitly states that FN DA will assist OCRI farmer 
beneficiaries in accessing loans, ensuring  affordable loans at a rate of 12 per cent  (lower than 
 
39 Available in the funding proposal annex on letters of engagement.


---
*Page 147*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 147 
 
 
the 18 to 24  per cent  market rates) and  de-risking farmer transactions or CRA  production via 
the provi sion of a loan guarantee of up to 50  per cent  on OCRI loans among  MFIs .  
46. Strong multi -stakeholder ownership  is the OCRI project’s strength , capitaliz ing on its 
wide and deep stakeholder engagement. From the government side,40 there are the key line 
ministries MCVDD and  MAEP and the central and local governments  of Copargo, Djougou, 
Glazoué, Zagnanado  and Zagbodomey . From the ground, there are the targeted  beneficiary 
communities and community -based organizations, particularly the most vulnerable groups, civil 
society organizations, academia, individual consultants and indirect contributors, ably 
represented by the traditional a uthorities . Most importantly, there is strong local private sector  
interest , with producers, buyers, traders, financiers and investors along the AVCs . Stakeholder 
consultations started as early as the project formulation phase in April  2017 and ended at a 
virtual  meeting  on 11  April 2021 .41 Strong support is evidenced by statements of engagement 
from the following entities : the Association for the Promotion of Community -Based Savings  
Credit Savings, or P.E.B.Co -BETHE SDA, and Ong  Sia N'Son  Microfinance, Savings and Credits 
Advice (MFI groups) ; Africa Green Corporation (crop buyers); and Association Karite Benin , 
Interprofession Karite Benin , Federacion Nationale de Organisations de Maraichers du Benin 
and Plate Forme Nationale des Organisations Paysannes et du Producteurs Agricoles du Benin  
(cooperatives).42 
47. The project has very strong support among women. As highlighted in th e funding 
proposal , the gender assessment and a ction plan and the feasibility study , women are the most 
climate -vulnerable members of the family and community, with limited opportunities to own 
land and gain access to farm inputs and finance. Y et they contribute most to the agricultural 
production and business value chains. While men can  easily migrate to other work or 
livelihoods, it is the women who  will most likely remain within  the home and communit y to 
ensure day-to-day survival  of their  famil ies; in times of crop failure, women gather non- timber 
forest products  and take  whatever ava ilable measures possible to earn income for food and 
other needs .   
48. One of the unique features of the Ouémé  project is the strong particip ation of the 
Dimitra  Clubs43, a network of community -based organizations  composed of men, women and 
youth that takes  the lead on discussions on gender, social and environment al issues, village 
economies, local development challenges and, more recently , climate. Potential lessons can be 
lear ned from utilizing existing social net works like the D imitra  Club s in ensuring the strong 
understanding, participation and commitment  of the target beneficiaries. The Dimitra group or 
movement ensures that women’s issues and challenges under a changing climate will be heard 
and addressed. The role of women in implementing the OCRI project components ensures the 
project ’s practicability  and sustainability.  
49.  Risk s to country ownership  is assessed as low.  
50. The diversity  of institutional stakeholders coming from the public , development 
agencies, community organizations and the private sector mitigate s the risk to  country 
ownership through the  failure or shortcoming of one or more institutional stakeholders. The 
engagement of farmer associations, cooperatives  and organizations in deliveri ng human 
behavio ural changes among the target farmers and en trepreneurs along the AVC , leading to a 
shift from traditional to CRA/CSA  practices, also ensures the sustainability of such  CSA, FFS and 
 
40 See funding proposal annex 7 on stakeholder engagement plan, t able 1  presenting  main project partners and their 
roles and r esponsibilities . 
41 A separate document (minutes of the consultation meeting) is being prepared and , once finalized internally, will be 
added to th e stakeholder engagement plan  final report to serve its purpose.  
42 See funding pr oposal annex on letters  of engagement . 
43 See The FAO Dimitra Clubs – Community Engagement for Empowerment and Gender Equality , as provided by FAO 
during the FAO -independent TAP meeting on 13 March 2022.


---
*Page 148*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 148 
 
 
FBS initiatives. Letters of engagement from these stakeholders provide a tangible assurance of 
their roles and resource commitments in support of the OCRI project.  
51. Letters from the five  target communes44 are provided to confirm their support to OCRI, 
including through providing land for reforestation activities.  The spread of OCRI beneficiaries in 
the five target areas , covering key agricultur al commodities and crops,  and the engagement of 
farmer cooperat ives and various actors along the business value chains also minimize the risk of  
low participation in the project.  
52. Mindful of the limited risks and in consideration of the above discussions, c ountry 
ownership is high.  
1.6 Efficiency and effectiveness                          Scale:  N/A  
53. Best practice . The overall holistic and integrated approach of OCRI demonstrates the 
effectiveness of the proposed strategic interventions under components 1 , 2 and 3 to de -risk the 
agricultur e sector, its activities along the value chain and , most of all, the financial transactions 
supporting the A VC from production to market . Each component of this funding pro posal  
contributes to strengthen ing the  sustainability of  AVC activities; mitigating t he climate risks, 
losses  and damage  to the critical ecosystems resources needed in agriculture production ; and 
enhancing the farmers ’ capacity to move into CSA  and securing the safety of agricultur al 
financial transactions, with  the latter carried out via facilitating affordable loans (i.e. 12  per cent  
versus 18 to 24  per cent ) and guaranteeing farmer loans among partner MFIs . Component 3 
sustains these initiatives by further introducing CSA -friendly policies, implementing a financial 
mecha nism thro ugh FNEC and setting up a common platform by which to connect with AVC  
market stakeholders. The combined set of interventions effectively enhances the resilience of 
the farmers’ livelihoods  and investments , the critical ecosystem resources and the built hard 
and soft infrastructure s against the compounded impacts of climate change along the A VC. As 
presented in the paras 6 and 7 above this OCRI project approach is expected to bring positive 
results.  
54. Strong coordination . The strategic roles of each of the Government of Benin’s agencies  
as executing e ntity  and direct access entity and with FAO as accredited entity  demonstrates an 
effective implementation approach .45 The role of MAEP role ensure s a strong economic basis of 
CRA by supporting the reali zation of AVCs . That of MCVDD ensures the institutionaliz ation of 
CRA  by arranging the  maintenance of infrastructures and reali zing the legal conditions for 
cooperatives , among others. The role of FNEC ensures a sustainable strong  agrifinancial market 
for CSA activities; the accredited entity  has stated that the FNEC role would be strengthened and 
would continue beyond the OCRI project. It is to be hoped that l essons  learn ed and best 
practices would encourage other MFIs or financia l institutions  in general to support CSA 
initiatives in Benin.  The role of FAO  ensures project leadership and makes  available expertise to 
ensure that lessons learn ed and expertise elsewhere from various similar successful FAO 
projects implemented are inco rporated in project practice . 
55. Active role of Dimitra Club s. Dimitra Club s ensure the sustainability of the OCRI 
project. Dimitra, given its established network with in and out side  Benin, can use its own sphere 
of influence and control to disseminate and advocate OCRI best practices (i.e. CSA farming 
approaches, implementation of FFS and FBS, financial inclusion via MFI loans among vulnerable 
farmers). It can also take the role of an active observer and carry out check s and balance s on the 
proper implementation of the OCRI initiatives. Dimitra is in a unique position to independently 
overse e the proper implementation of the OCRI project , ranging from issues on gender, 
 
44 See funding proposal annex on letters  of engagement . 
45 See funding proposal a nnex 3, section 2.


---
*Page 149*
---

 
GCF/B.33/02/Add.01  
Page 149 
 
 
environment al and social safeguards , and climate mainstreaming within the Ouémé  master  
plan.  
56. Ratio of c o-financing . Total funding is USD 35,314,576 million. The GCF grant 
component is USD 18,453,795 , or 52 .26 per cent  of total project cost. The GCF funding attracted 
addi tional co -financing of USD 16,860,781  million  or equivalent to 47.74  per cent  of the total 
cost ; USD 12,634,280  million  (35.78  per cent ) comes from MAEP (funding received from IFAD  
now government money46), USD 3,000,000 ( 8.5 per cent ) from MCVDD, USD 1,039,001 ( 2.94  per 
cent ) from FAO and USD 187,500 (0.53  per cent ) from FNEC. GCF grant financing is able to 
attract additional  co-financ ing of 0.91x ; with MAEP at .68x, MCVDD at  .16x, FAO at  .06x and 
FNEC  at 0.01x. Such  funding support , be it in cash or in kind , further strengthens the 
commitments of each role of the accredited entity and the executing entity . 
57. The GCF intervention targets the most vulnerable component of the OCRI project. Under 
output 1.1, GCF funds are used to increase the resilience of the hard infrastructures and critical 
ecosystems of the project . Of the total cost for blended funding allocated for o utput 1.1. 
amounting to USD 16,633,276  millio n, 45.03  per cent  comes from GCF funds for build ing water 
harvesting and retention infrastructures  (activity 1.1.1) and  a further 6.12  per cent  for 
strengthen ing degraded river banks and restor ing land with tree  planting  (activity 1.1.2). 
Similarly, under output 1.2, of the  total funding cost of USD 4,472,300  million , 76.5  per cent  
comes from GCF funds and is used for increasing the resilience of (i) vulnerable farmers via 
training  systems under activit ies 1.2.1  (7.36  per cent ) and 1.2.2 ( 26.87  per cent ); and (ii) 
degraded lands  via CRA implementation under activity 1.2.3 ( 31.89  per cent ) and via sourcing 
climate -resilient seeds  and plants  under ac tivity 1.2.4  (10.39  per cent  for), with 25,250 farmers 
enabled  to implement CRA, agroforestry , and sustainable land management over 95 ,000 ha.  
58. Overall, the implementation of the project will increase the mitigation potential of the 
area. The total GHG emissions sequestered is estimated at 1 ,783 633 t  CO 2 eq over 20 years. 
With a total area of 95 ,001 ha, the carbon sequestered per hectare and per year increases from 
2.1 to 3 t  CO 2 eq between the baseline scenario (without project intervention) and the planned 
scenario when the project is implemented. This corresponds to a carbon balance of 0.9 t  CO 2 eq 
sequestered per hectare and per year.  The cost of carbon based on the GCF project cost is USD 
10.35/carbon ton ne; if based on the total project cost, it is USD 19.8/carbon ton ne.  
59. Economic and financial analysis .47  The OCRI project has an estimated economic internal 
rate of return of about 18  per cent . At a 10  per cent  discount rate it has a n et present value of 
USD 69 million and costs per beneficiary of about USD 107. The positive internal rate of return  
and net present value indicates that the OCRI project is a viable one.  
60. The s ocial benefit of avoided carbon emissions is valued at USD 20 /t CO 2 eq.48 
61. Overall , based on the above,  the efficiency and effectiveness of the project is assessed as 
potentially high.  
II. Overall remarks from the in dependent Technical Advisory Panel   
62. Based on the assessment above, the independent TAP recommend s this funding 
proposal for approval by the Board .  
 
46 As clarified by FAO during  FAO -independent TAP meeting on 13 May 2022.  See meeting recording from 11:20 to 
14:00 minutes of Call with GCF/AE/i ndependent TAP for FAO Benin on 13 May 2022.  
47 See funding proposal annex 18 EXACT Analysis.  
48 See footnote 4 7 above.


---
*Page 150*
---

G
CF/B. 33/02/Add.0 1 
Page 150 
Response  from the accredited entity to the i ndependent Technical 
Advisory Panel 's assessment ( FP187 ) 
Proposal name:  Ouémé  Basin Climate- Resilience Initiative (OCRI) Benin  
Accredited entity:  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  (FAO)  
Country/(ies):  Benin 
Project/programme size: Small 
Impact potential  
FAO acknowledges iTAP ’s positive assessment of the  funding proposal against the impact 
potential crite rion . 
Paradigm shift potential  
FAO acknowledges iTAP’s  positive assessment of the funding proposal against the paradigm 
shift  criterion . 
Sustainable development potential  
FAO acknowledges iTAP’s  positive assessment of the funding proposal against the sustainable 
development  criterion . 
Needs of the recipient  
FAO acknowledges iTAP’s  positive assessment of the funding proposal against the needs of 
the recipient criterion . 
Country ownership  
FAO acknowledges iTAP’s  positive assessment of the funding proposal against the country 
ownership  criterion . 
Efficiency and effectiveness  
FAO acknowledges iTAP’s  positive assessment of the funding proposal against the efficiency 
and effectiveness  criterion . 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel  
FAO would like to thank iTAP for the positive assessment of the funding proposal against the 
investment criteria.


---
*Page 151*
---

Ouémé Climate Resilience Initiative  (OCRI)  
Gender Analysis and Action Plan  
Benin 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
November  2021  Gender documentation for FP187


---
*Page 152*
---

2 
 Table of Contents  
Table of Contents  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 2 
List of tables  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 4 
List of acronyms  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 5 
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 7 
1.1 Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 8 
1.2 Organization of the report  ................................ ................................ ............................. 9 
2. Legal and policy framework for promotion of gender equality  ................................ .......... 9 
2.1 International frameworks and conventions on gender equality  ................................ ......9 
2.2 National legal framework for the promotion of gender equality  ................................ .... 10 
2.3 National and climate -related policies  ................................ ................................ ...........  10 
2.5 Sectoral policies  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  11 
Agriculture  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  11 
Water resources  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  12 
Forestry  12 
Social protection  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  12 
3. Overview of the status of women in Benin  ................................ ................................ ..... 13 
3.1 Poverty and demography  ................................ ................................ ............................  13 
3.2 Food security  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  13 
3.3 Voice and re presentation  ................................ ................................ ............................  14 
3.4 Literacy and education  ................................ ................................ ................................  14 
3.5 Access to and control over resources  ................................ ................................ .........  14 
4. Gender issues in the project implementation sites  ................................ .........................  15 
4.1 Crop production  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  15 
4.2 Producer organizations and cooperatives  ................................ ................................ ... 17 
4.3 Livestock and fisheries  ................................ ................................ ................................  17 
4.4 Post -harvest activities  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 18 
4.4 Rural finance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  18 
4.5 Land use and ownership  ................................ ................................ .............................  19 
4.6 Ac cess to training, information and technology  ................................ ...........................  19 
4.7 Value chains  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  21 
Agroforestry  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  23 
4.8 Women’s work bur den and time use  ................................ ................................ ...........  24 
4.9 Local development plans and community -based organizations  ................................ ... 25 
5. Strategies to integrate gender in OCRI  ................................ ................................ .............  30 
6. Gender Action Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  36


---
*Page 153*
---

3 
 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  47 
ANNEXES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  49


---
*Page 154*
---

4 
 List of t ables  
 
Table 1  : Gender -based schooling and adult literacy rat e in project intervention areas  
Table 2  : Access to ICTs  in 2013  
Table 3 : Participation of men and women in rice, maize and cassava value chains  
Table 4 : Source s of energy for cooking  
Table 5 : Households access to drinking water, radio s and motorcycles  
Table 6 : Typical day time use  (in hours and minutes) by women and men  
Table 7 : Time use by  men and women in the project areas  
Table  8 : Barriers to adoption o f climate -resilient practices by district  
Table 9 : Participation of women in councils in 2017 , targets for 2022  and gender 
actions


---
*Page 155*
---

5 
 List of acronyms  
 
AKB : Shea Association of Benin 
AMAB  : Mutual Agricultural In surance of Benin  
APE : State Permanent Extension Officer  
ASF : Financial Services Agenc y 
CC : Climate Change  
CDN  : Intended Nationally Determined Contribution s 
CDP  : Community Development Programme  
CEDAW  : Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women  
CIFOR  : Centre for International Forestry Research’  
CNE  : National Water Council  
CNTRB  : Benin Rice P rocessors ’ Organizations Framework  
CPF : Persons and Family Code  
CPR  : Rural Promotion Centre  
CVA : Added Value Chain  
DGEC  : Environment and Climate General Direct orate  
DHS  : Demographic and Health Survey  
EMICoV  : Integrated Modular Survey of Household Living Conditions  
FAO : Food and Agriculture Organi zation of the United Nations  
FFS : Farmer Field School  
FHH : Female -headed households  
FNDA  : National Fund for Agricultural Development  
FNM  : National M icrofinance  Fund  
FNPEEJ  : National Fund for the Promotion of Entrepreneurship and Youth 
Employment  
FNUAP  : United Nations Population Fund 
FUPRO  : Producers’ Unions Federation  
GBV   Gender -based violence  
GDP : Gross Domestic Produ ct 
HH : Household  
ICT : Information and Communication Technology  
IFAD : international Fund for Agricultural De velopment  
IFDC  : International Fertiliser Development Centre  
INPF  : National Institute for Women’s Development  
INRAB  : National Institute for Agricultural Research of Benin  
INSAE  : National Institute for Statisti cs and Economi c Analysis  
IPCC  : Intergovernmental Pannel on Climate Change  
M : Men 
MAEP  : Minist ry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries  
MCPP  : Microcr edit for the Very Poor  
MTFPAS  : Ministry of Labour, Public Administration and Social Affairs  
NAPA  : National Action Program me for Adaptation  
NGO  : Non-Governmental Organisation  
NR : Natural Resource  
NSA  : Non State Actors  
NTFP  : Non-Timber Forest Products  
OCRI  : Ouémé Climate Resilience Initiative  
OPA  : Agricultural Workers’ Organisation  
PAEF FR : Support Project for Female Entrepreneurship in the Rice Sector  
PAEF -PG : Preparation and Implementation of the Women’s Economic 
Empowerment and Gender Promotion Project


---
*Page 156*
---

6 
 PANA   National Adaptation Action Programme  
PDC  : Municipal Development Plan 
PDNA  : Post-Disaster Needs Assessment  
PFR : Rural Land Plan 
PNIASAN  : National Agricultural Investment Plan for Food and Nutrition 
Security  
PNOPPA  : National Platform of Farmer Organizations and Agricultural 
Producers  
PNPG  : National Policy for the Promotion of Gender  
PSDAN  : Strategic Plan for Food and Nutrition  Development  
PSDSA  : Preparation of the Strategic Plan for  the Development of the 
Agricultural Sector  
PTAA  : Agriculture and Food Technolog y Program me 
RGPH  : General Census of Population and Habitat  
ROI : Return on Investment  
SAGE  : Water Management and Water Management Plans  
SCRP  : Growth and Poverty Reduction Strat egy 
SDAGE  : Water Development and Management Master Plan  
SDG  : Sustainable Development Goals  
SHARP  : Self-evaluation and Holistic Assessment of Climate Resilience of 
Farmers and Pastoralists  
SONEB  : National Water Society of Benin 
SVGF  : Village Land Management Section  
TFP : Technical and Financial Partners  
TUS : Time -Use Survey  
UNCED  : United Nations Conference on Environment and Development  
UNFCC  : United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
UNICEF  : United Nations Children’s Fund  
VA : Added Value  
VSLA  : Village Savings and Loan Association  
WFP : World Food Programme  
XOF : Currency of the Financial C ommun ity of Africa


---
*Page 157*
---

7 
 1. Introduction  
The proposed Ouémé Basin Climate Resilience Initiative (OCRI) project aims to reduce 
farmers ’’ vulnerability to the impacts of climate change and extreme weather events in the 
Ouémé Basin  through an integrated approach that will enable a transition towards low -
emissions agriculture while fostering sustainable and climate -resilient agro -ecosystems and 
rural communities. By introducing hard and soft climate -resilient measures in the Upper and 
Middle Ouémé areas, the project will develop and scale up the adaptive and productive 
capacity of ag ro-ecosystems and of smallholder farmers, women and men, in selected rural 
communities in the Upper and Middle Ouémé River Basin. The project will also contribute to 
reducing vulnerability bottlenecks and promoting climate -resilient value chains and climat e 
change adaptation mainstreaming in local and regional development plans.  
Benin ’s’ economy is highly reliant on agriculture, which contributes 40  percent to GDP and 
over 80  percent to export earnings. The adverse impacts of climate change heavily affect the 
agricultural sector, hitting hardest the poorest and the most vulnerable groups and individuals 
in communities that depend on agriculture and natural resources. In the project areas in Upper 
and Middle Ouémé, rural communities experience high levels of  poverty and food insecurity, 
which are exacerbated by climate change.  
Women and men experience the impacts of climate change and extreme weather events 
differently due existing social norms that shape women and men ’s roles, relations and access 
to resour ces and opportunities. Women are particularly disadvantaged due to their weaker 
access to and control over land, water, services and technology, and the heavy workload they 
shoulder inside and outside the household. Women are also under -represented in deci sion‐
making in agriculture, natural resource management and climate governance, which in turns 
affects their ability to manage climate threats and develop their adaptive capacity.  
In the project area, women have smaller plots usually characterized by less fertile and more 
degraded land. They also have less access to small tools and animal traction because family 
fields and male -owned plots are prioritized. Moreover, women have little access to extension 
services that can support them with advice on use of f ertilizers, pesticides and irrigation 
technology. As a result, yields in women ’s fields are lower.1  
Nonetheless, women are involved in the production of crops and play a key role in processing, 
distribution and sales activities. The post -harvest activities carried out by women are often 
affected by the impacts of climate change with regards to the qualit y of the product and/or 
difficulties in access to clean water, fuel wood, and the drying and storing of produce.  
Women are involved in forestry, mainly in collection of non -timber forest products (NTFP) and, 
in the project intervention area, in the collec tion and processing of shea nuts, locust bean fruits 
and vegetables, which are a source of income and a coping mechanism when other crops fail, 
particularly for female -headed households (FHH). Even if the forestry sector and forest 
management are often mal e-dominated, some women have started tree nurseries thanks to 
different development initiatives.  
Floods or droughts affect the availability of water for the household (HH) and exacerbate 
women ’s time burden as fetching water is considered women ’s responsi bility. However, 
 
1 Source  : MAEP, Réalisations campagne 2015 -2016


---
*Page 158*
---

8 
 women are less likely to be formally involved in decision -making around water management 
as water rights and participation in water governance are often linked to land rights.  
The combination of lower yields and income and climate -induced  disasters can lead to higher 
indebtedness ’ of households, which in turn can contribute to more tensions within the 
household and increase instances of gender -based violence (GBV) as amply documented in 
the aftermath of disasters and crises. The district d evelopment plans of the project intervention 
areas highlight barriers to women ’s participation and increased conflicts around access to 
pastures, water and land, which could also lead to a higher incidence of GBV.  
This gender assessment provides an overvie w of the gender context in Benin, and in the 
project areas, with a focus on gender issues that are relevant for the proposed project. 
Specifically, this assessment aims to inform the project design to ensure that key gender 
considerations are effectively m ainstreamed throughout the project proposal, and that 
opportunities for gender -responsive and transformative results are identified.  
The analysis highlights  key barriers that were identified by the team through the technical 
studies. These included: (i)  limited institutional, regulatory and governance capacities to 
address climate change impacts in the Ouémé  watershed; (ii)  limited access to climate -
resilient technologies and practices by smallholder farmers, especially  women, to cope with 
extreme rainfal l and floods and pressure on water sources during droughts; (iii)  social and 
cultural norms and gender inequalities that affect women ’s economic and decision -making 
capacities; and (iv)  limited institutional capacity to plan and implement climate -change 
measures.  
 
1.1 Methodology  
The assessment is based on desk review of relevant literature on gender, agriculture and 
climate change in Benin and reports by different national and local institutions as well as by 
international organizations and NGOs. Primary data was collected in the field through focus 
group discussions, consultations and interviews with a variety of stakeholders, including 
representatives from relevant technical departments of counterpart ministries, civil society 
organizations, and other projects operating in the area. In addition, women ’s views on various 
issues were collected through focus groups and discussions with authorities.  
 
A total of 157 stakeholders in Glazoué were interviewed, out of whom  77 were women. The 
list of interv iewed participants is attached to this report.  
 
Consultations with key stakeholders were guided by a questionnaire, which included the 
following guiding questions: How are men and women impacted by climate change in the 
project area? What are the roles of men and women in the project area ’s social and cultural 
norms (in and outside households)? What are the power dynamics between men and women? 
What impact does gender have on land use, access to land, access to inputs and access to 
finance? What are the bar riers that prevent women from implementing climate resilient 
activities? How can the project address the barriers and consider gender in the design of the 
activities?  
 
Women groups  (active in processing of cassava, maize, shea; and active in vegetable 
production) , and members of national farmers organisation, focal points of the ATDA’s, 
municipalities, representatives of the women council (municipality and national level) were


---
*Page 159*
---

9 
 involved in the consultations at national and municipality level . Representatives of women’s 
groups and professional organisations were also present at the stakeholder consultation 
meetings . 
 
1.2 Organization of the report  
The report is intended as a ‘living document ’ whereby the assessment data and Action Plan 
may be updated periodically based on new information obtained during the inception and 
implementation phases. It is expected that the project ’s monitoring system and the mid -term 
evaluation will consider progress and gaps in the implementation of the Action Plan and 
provide feedback to further adjust and refine it. The gender expert assigned to the project will 
be responsible for a review of this document on an annual basis.  
Following this introduction, the report is organized into six major sections:  
• The first section provides an overview of the legal and policy framework for the 
promotion of gender equality in Benin.  
• The second section presents a general overview of t he status of women and gender 
equality in the country.  
• The third section consists of a gender analysis in the context of the project.  
• The fourth section identifies major gender constraints and opportunities for the project.  
• The final section lays out the  strategy and action plan, which proposes specific 
strategies/actions to advance women ’s empowerment and promote gender 
transformative action as part of the project.  
 
2. Legal  and policy  framework for promotion of gender equality  
 
This section describes the legal and policy framework for the advancement of  women ’s rights 
and gender equality in the country . The OCRI Gender Action Plan  is aligned with this 
framework and support the country ’s efforts to promot e and mainstream  gender considerations 
in policies and development initiatives .  
 
2.1 International frameworks and conventions on gender equality  
Benin has acceded  and ratified numerous international and regional conventions including:  
• The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) ratified in 1992;  
• The African Charter on Human and Peoples ’ Rights, ratified in 1986 , which in Article  8 
advocates for the protection of the family and the rights of women and men and child;  
• The Additional Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples ’ Rights on the 
Rights of Women , ratified in 2003 ; 
• The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development , which commits States to  “reforms to 
give women the same rights to economic resources, as well as access to land 
ownership and control and other forms of ownership, financial services, inheritance and 
natural resources ” (SDG  5);


---
*Page 160*
---

10 
 • The Paris Declaration on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in 2015, followed by COP20 in L ima (2014) and the G8 Action Plan for Gender 
Equality of 2017 which aims to (i)  ensure the participation of women in COP s; and 
(ii) develop gender -sensitive climate policies and implement gender -sensitive 
adaptation and capacity -building actions.  
 
2.2 National legal framework for the promotion of gender equality  
The 1990 Constitution of Benin prohibits discrimination based on race, sex and religion, and 
grants men and women equal economic and social rights as citizens. Article  26 establishes 
the general principle of equality between men and women, and Article  6 proclaims the equality 
of Beninese citizens of both sexes .2  
In 2006 , Benin adopted the 2006 –2011 Strategic Guidelines for Development that promote , 
among other things, gender equality, wo men’s empowerment and improved social protection.  
In October 2007 , Benin ratified the Law on Rural Land Tenure, which explicitly guarantees the 
right of women to inherit their ascendants  or spouses ’ rural land.  
In March 2009 , the Government of Benin adopted a National Policy for Promoting Gender 
Equality,3 which aims to achieve by 2025 equality and equity between the sexes with a view 
towards sustainable human development. In January 2012, a law on the prevention and 
punishme nt of violence against women was also enacted.  
Furthermore, Benin Alafia 2025, Benin ’s long -term strategic vision, promotes gender equality 
through the following strategic axes: education and training of women; economic 
empowerment of women; promotion of w omen ’s health; improvement and respect of the legal 
and social status of women and the enhancement of cultures and traditions that favo ur the 
development of women; management of calamities and major environmental phenomena.  
 
2.3 National and climate -related  policies  
Benin plans to integrate gender and rights -based approaches  in the implementation of the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)  and related strategies.  
• The National Adaptation Program me of Action (NAPA) includes  measures to protect 
children under five and pregnant women against malaria in areas most vulnerable to 
climate change in order to contribute to the reduction of morbidity and mortality related 
to malaria, the first climate -related disease (PANA, 2 008). The evaluation report of 
NAPA  1 indicates  that gender has been taken into account in all activities  but that the 
introduction of innovative techniques and practices requires extra support, despite the 
know -how already present  at the level of extensio n services and local government 
councils . 
• The first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement sets as 
one of its objectives to “improv e the performance of Beninese agriculture for it to ensure 
sustainable food and nutrition sovereignty, contribute to the economic and social 
development of the Beninese men and women and achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), in particular SDGs  1, 2, 12, and 13 ” as well as promot e 
 
2 CEDAW (2002), p. 7.  
3 OECD (2014), Gender, Institutions and Development Database . http://stats.oecd.org .


---
*Page 161*
---

11 
 knowledg e-building and knowledge -sharing on climate change through gender -
sensitive awareness -raising, risk management and policy development.  
• Low Carbon and Resilient Development Strategy for Climate Change  (2016 –2025). 
The s ub-programmes include:  
1. The a doption of adaptation options aimed at strengthening the resilience of 
agros ylvopastoral production systems , improving and sustaining ecosystem 
services on which production systems are based , and pay ing particular 
attention to vulnerable groups, especially women a nd children.  
2. The reduction of  current and future vulnerabilit ies of the most vulnerable groups 
of women who depend on water resources a ffected by climate change . 
3. Sub-program me for drilling, reservoir construction, supply of drinking water and 
community man agement of infrastructures : This sub -program me not only 
focus es on the planning and implementation of the works to ensure adequate 
coverage for the local populations concerned (including the most vulnerable 
groups represented by women and children), but al so on the involvement of 
women in the project , including in the realization of the works.  
 
2.5 Sectoral policies  
Agriculture  
The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP) takes gender into account in the 
preparation of the Strategic Plan for the Development of the Agricultural Sector (PSDSA). The 
overall objective stemming from the vision of the PSDSA is “to improv e the performance of 
Beninese agriculture for it to ensure sustainable food and nutritional sovereignty, contribute to 
the economic and social development of Benin , and achieve the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) ”. 
This objective is broken down into t hree specific targets , namely: (i)  contribute to growth and 
food and nutritional sovereignty through efficient production and sustainable management of 
farms managed by both men and women and by women and young people; (ii)  ensure the 
competitiveness and access of agricultural and agrifood products, including those produced 
by women and vulnerable groups through the promotion of agricultural value chains; and 
(iii) build  the resilience of vulnerable populations, including family farms ( plant, animal and 
fish). The National Agricultural Investment Plan for Food and Nutrition Security (PNIASAN) 
includes actions aimed at improving the conditions of women and their access to resources , 
with a specific component o n promoting gender in the agr icultural sector.  
Additionally, the  agricultural sector has a gender mainstreaming manual  that revolve s around 
the following objectives: (i)  strengthen the institutionalization of gender at all levels for better 
management; gender mainstreaming  in policies , program mes and projects in the agricultural 
sector; (ii)  empower women to reduce their level of poverty; (iii)  strengthen the capacity of civil 
society organizations and other private actors in the agricultural sector to promote gender ; and 
(iv) manage t he process of gender mainstreaming in the agricultural sector in Benin.  
Finally, the Policy for the Advancement of Women in the Agricultural and Rural Sector (2001), 
aims to “contribute to the improvement of the living conditions of rural people by giving women 
and men equal opportunities so that all participate in the same way in Benin ’s development 
process ”.


---
*Page 162*
---

12 
 Water resources  
Two main documents, the Water Code and the National Water Policy, were analyzed for th e 
purpose of assessing gender mainstrea ming in water policies.  
In the Water Code, no special emphasis is placed on gender , but the document highlights the 
equity and participation of all social strata.  Article  5 of the Code promotes the sustainable 
management and equitable sharing of water. To this end, the State and public authorities, each 
in their respective areas of competence, will ensure that users have equitable access to the 
available water resource s. Article  8, on public participation and information, recommends that 
the Minis ter in charge of water ensure s the establishment of consultation frameworks to 
implement participatory  water management at all levels: national, basin, local authorities and 
village communities.  
The basic principle of the  National Water Policy is that “water must be managed in a holistic 
way, taking into account all its uses and functions, in the interests of efficiency, equity and 
transparency ”. Among the three objectives of the policy, the first is to ensure equitable access 
to water. As for the creation of institutions for better management of water resources in Benin, 
no emphasis is placed on gender in terms of their functioning and composition.  
 
Forest ry 
The overall objective of the National Forest ry Policy is the conservation and rational, integrated 
and sustainable management of forests, wildlife and other natural resources in order to 
contribute to the reduction of poverty . The policy promotes and prioritiz es gender  in its 
implementation. The State, through the CPR  (Rural Promotion Centre ) and its commitment to 
social equity, ensures that forestry -related program mes and projects take into account the 
specific interests of women, starting with the composition of intervention teams and by 
encouraging the participation of women in organizations representing the beneficiaries.  
 
Social protection  
In the CPRS, Benin has made social protection one of the six priority areas for interventions 
during the period 2011 –2015. The Social Protection Policy, developed by the Inter-Ministerial  
Social Protection Committee with the support of the United Nations Children ’s Fund (UNICEF), 
was adopted in 2014 by the Council of Ministers.  This holistic policy has the vision of “making 
Benin, by 2025, a nation of solidarity and social well -being that protects people, especially the 
most vulnerable social strata, against economic risks. ” 
In the area of  social protection, non-governmental organiza tions (NGOs) have created a 
national multistakeholder network for social protection and implemented concrete actions 
focused on: (i)  the right to women ’s financial empowerment; (ii)  the right to promote the 
decision -making power of women in decentralized a nd national bodies; and (iii) the 
institutionalization of gender through the designa tion and nomination of gender focal points.


---
*Page 163*
---

13 
 3. Overview  of the status of women  in Benin  
3.1 Poverty  and demography  
Women represent 51.2  percent  of the total population , against 48.8  percent  of men. At the 
national level, 22  percent  of households are headed by women. The proportion of woman -
headed households is more important in the south of the country than in the north. In Cotonou, 
the proportio n is 31  percent  (AGVSA).  
From the socio -cultural point of view, women heads of households are not easily accepted by 
society, especially in rural areas. In addition, the higher the level of education in the area, the 
more female -headed household there are. This is the case of the Littoral, Atlantic, Ouémé , 
Collines, Mono, Couffo and Zou  regions . In these departments, more than 20  percent  of 
households are headed by women.  
According to the RGPH  4 (General Census of P opulation and H abitat  4), there is a greater 
disparity in  income in rural areas  between women and men . The Integrated Modular Survey of 
Household Living Conditions (EMICoV 2011) highlights  that in 2011, wom en heads of 
households in Benin were  more affected by non -monetary poverty (39.9  percent  against 
28.2 percent  for male -headed households) than by income poverty (27.6  percent  versus 
38.0 percent  for male -headed households) . 
 
3.2 Food security  
In Benin, 11  percent  of households are food insec ure (1  percent  severe, 11  percent  moderate). 
These households have a deficiency in food consumption or cannot meet their minimum food 
needs. Food insecurity mostly affects households in rural areas (15  percent ) rather than those 
in urban areas other than Cotonou (8  percent ). 
Households wi th moderate/severe food insecurity (11  percent  of the population) are often the 
poorest. About 74  percent  of food -insecure households belong to the poorest (48  percent ) and 
poor (26  percent ) quintiles of surveyed population (AGVSA). More than half (56  percent) of 
households with limited food security belong to poorest or poorest households.  
The national survey on Global Analysis of Vulnerability and Food Security (AGVSA) highlighted 
that very little disparity exists between female -headed and male -headed hou seholds in terms 
of food security as well as expenses  on food . Also, there is no difference between the 
proportion of men (23  percent ) and women (24  percent ) with poor/limited food consumption . 
This lack of disparity between households headed by men and wo men as measured by these 
indicators is true in urban and rural areas. Only the wealth index showed significant differences 
between households headed by men and women, and this difference has been observed only 
in rural areas.  
According to the 2012 Demograp hic and Health Survey ( DHS ), 70 percent  of women decide 
for themselves how to use their earnings and in 18  percent  of cases , decisions are jointly made 
by the couple.  
The woman ’s knowledge of dietary diversity and a healthy diet is important for the nutritional 
security of family members. In terms of the impact of an incomplete diet on health, women of 
reproductive age and children under five will be the most affected. Socio -cultural constraints 
on the distribution of meals and certain food taboos affect children and women. Women are 
also more affected by the fact that they spend more hours o n work every  day. Among others,


---
*Page 164*
---

14 
 domestic tasks include the collection of water and wood; i n households that use wood as main 
source of energy for cooking, the majority of women (74  percent ) are responsible for collect ing 
and transport ing wood (AGVSA, 2013).  Tasks requiring a lot of effort s are often divided 
between women and girls.  
 
3.3 Voice and representation  
In Benin , society  is generally patriarchal. Decision -making rests with men in households, local 
and institutional bodies.  
The presence of women in the local councils (commune) is very limited and in the project 
areas,  it is only in the Council of Glazoué  that 9  out of 256 councilors (3,5 percent ) are women .4 
In the other councils (Copargo, Djougou, Zangnanado and Zogbodomey) , women are not 
represented  at all .  
Traditional law, reinforced by the interpretation of the  texts  by some of the local religions, gives  
women and youth little access to voice and decision -making . Even decisions about women are 
made by men, which results in women ’s interests not being taken into account in community 
development. For example, in the Ouémé Basin, a woman ’s participation in  cultural, political 
or economic activity is subject to the authorization of the husband.  The segregation of women 
in the domestic sphere and their lack of autonomy explain s their low participation in decision -
making bodies as well as their relative lack of opportunities to strengthen their knowledge about 
climate change adaptation strategies.  
 
3.4 Literacy and education  
One of the most relevant causes of poverty in Benin is i lliteracy, which affects 67.4  percent  of 
the total population. Overall, i lliteracy affects 78.1 percent  of women compared to 44  percent  
of men. The proportion of illiterate women is particularly high among older women (87  percent  
in the 45–49 age group ), those living in rural areas (85  percent ) and those living in the poorest 
households (94  percent ) (INSAE, 2002). In rural areas 68  percent  of the rural population is 
literate  with onl y 20 percent  of women  being literate (INSAE, 2012).  
Thanks to  policy efforts in the education sector, school statistics show that girls are massively 
more enrolled than boys in primary schools (118.7  percent  in 2013). However, girls fail to 
complete school  because of barriers such as pregnancy, early marriage and parental poverty. 
As a result, child -related educational and learning burdens weigh more heavily on women than 
men, and their incomes are relatively lower than men ’s. 
 
3.5 Access to and control o ver resources  
The inequality between men and women is particularly strong in the context of  access to and 
control over natural resources, especially land.  
In Benin, two tenure systems coexist within statutory  law and customary law. The majority of 
land is still managed under customary law and/or religious law. Customary law consists of a 
set of traditional rules determining the position of people  with regard to the allocation, 
management and exploitation of land and related resources  (water, pasture , forests , etc. ). 
 
4 Source: Development Plan 2018 –2022 , Dassa Zoumey .


---
*Page 165*
---

15 
 While t here are different  modalities  to access land , they all presents challenges for women:  
• access by occupation, which tends to disappear  (women have no right to access by 
occupation in the project areas ); 
• heritage, which  women continue to be excluded from in some parts of Benin ; 
• purchase, which is difficult  especially for women who often do not have an  income ; 
• gift by some  men who allow th eir child daughter or their wives to access part of their 
real estate heritage.  
 
In general, w omen gain access to land by purchase, inheritance, alliance and gift; men by 
patrilineal inheritance and purchase. Seventy -three  percent  of available areas occupied by 
men belong s to them while only 54  percent  of the land used by women actually belongs  to 
them. In fact, 53  percent  of women own at least one plot of land versus 78  percent  of men.  In 
the project areas, women rely mainly on the willingness of men to provide  them with  land for 
their personal use (Rapport MCA ).5 
Although women have ac cess to land  through inheritance , especially in the Upper Basin, they 
have no control over it because they are expected to leave their families and live in the family 
of the husband . In addition, their rights over these lands are precarious , and they have little 
financial means to acquire land tittle where a land market exists.  
Moreover,  the control of resources is generally the responsibility of men as heads of 
households. The factors influencing this situation include : the weight of traditi on, the low levels 
of education of women  and lack of knowledge of their rights , traditional reproductive 
responsibilities  of women and girls , non-registration of marriages and the many divorces.  
 
4. Gender issues in the project implementation sites 
A number of gender gaps in access and control of land, water, inputs for agriculture, 
knowledge, financial capital, participation in decision making processes, workload and 
education contribute to women’s higher vulnerability to climate change and need to be  taken 
into consideration when designing and implementing the activities of OCRI. This section of the 
document highlights the most important ones that the project will address through its Action 
Plan.  
 
4.1 Crop production  
In Benin, all social groups are in volved in crop production.  In the cropping systems , men, 
women and youth have different roles. To maxim ize the use of family labour , family  members 
participate in different ways in work ing in the family fields. In households, women are involved 
in sowing, maintenance operations and harvesting. Women do not plough for cultural and 
social reasons. As for men, they are more involved in soil preparation, making ridges, yam 
mounds and ploughing the lowlands. S ome crops are managed by men from land preparation 
until harvesting (yam) ; for most other crops , men prepare the land, women assist with planting, 
weeding, harvesting and men mostly are responsible for treatments with pesticides.  
 
5 Rapport final sur l’accès  des femmes à la terre, MCA -Bénin, “Projet Accès au Foncier” 2008, 105 pages .


---
*Page 166*
---

16 
 If a family owns animals for plowing  and weeding, women are less involved in weeding ; but all 
other weeding work that cannot be mechaniz ed is done by women . However, all  decisions 
concerning types of crops, techniques to be used, organization of the work, management of 
the resources, etc. are the prerogatives of the hea d of the household, who is usually a man.  
Women on their own plots can decide which crop and which varieties they will plant but this 
decision is influenced by choices made on the family plots and takes into account women ’s 
access to fertilizer, pesticides, technical assistance and water. Children are involved in all of 
the activities  following gender ed patterns of distribution of roles . 
The cultivation  of cash crops is largely dominated by men (70  percent ), while women prioritize 
food crops for family consumption . However,  women also contribute to cash crops through the 
provision of labo ur. Only 17  percent  of the cereal plots and 11  percent  of root and tuber  plots  
are managed by women . Twenty -seven  percent  of the area under legume  cultivation and 
31 percent  of the area under vegetable are managed by women . 
For most crops, the yields achieved by women are lower than those of men. The pressure on 
land is high and land degradation and loss of soil fertility is  one of the problems faced by 
women and men. Climate change is affecting production due to unequal distribution of rainfall, 
floods, drought, strong winds causing lodging, especially of maize. There is a lack of seeds 
adapted to new production conditions, a critical lack of water management facilities and of 
technical know -how.  
As head of household, the man i s also in charge of the field , holds the ownership title or lease 
and ensures the organization and the management of the plot. The few women who are ow ners 
of land or farmers in their own right are heirs, widows or urban women who invest in agriculture.  
In Copargo and Djougou , there is a high demand for vegetables  and relatively less need for 
women to be mobile since  buyers come and collect the produce  or the crops can be processed 
and stored and sold by women  during lean seasons.  However, in Glazoué, market gardening 
is not developed  and its  promotion could contribute to food and nutritional security  of 
households.  
In Glazoué, w omen are involved in the production of rice, maize and soja. Cooperatives have 
been established and women are producing, processing and trading  rice. In general, however, 
men control the income and the expenditures at the household level. The cultivation of rice 
has been affected by climate change and women have adapted  by starting the planting season 
some weeks earlier.  
Women are disadvantaged due to the quality of the land (generally depleted) and less access 
to inputs.  In gardening, the reason for lower yields  is the difficult access  to pesticides and lack 
of funds to invest in irrigation infrastructure: women hold one-third of harvested areas of 
vegetable gardens and one-third of the production except for onion cultivation (23  percent ) 
(Statistics  from MAEP 2015 –2016  campaign data ). The constraints of arduous agricultural 
work and low investment in mechanization also increases women ’s work in their husbands ’ 
fields at the expense of time spent on their own income generating activities.  
Cotton farming is the most important cash crop  in Benin , followed by cashew . Despite women ’s 
strong involvement in almost all farming operation s, only 5  percent  of the area under cotton 
provides  a direct income to women ( from the sale of cotton ). Furthermore, w omen and children 
face health risks while working  in cotton fields whe re pesticides are being applied . Some 
women and men  also use the pesticides destined for cotton on other food crops (vegetable 
gardening), which expos es them  and their fami lies to high levels of toxic residues.  In Glazoué,


---
*Page 167*
---

17 
 cotton has lost importance and men are also producing rice in  the lowlands, previously used 
by women for cultivation.  
For the vast majority,  women ’s status on the farms is as “family  labour” dedicated to providing 
the bulk of the labor force. Recent gender statistical surveys have estimated the contribution 
of women to the labor force between 50 and 6  0percent . 
In addition, poor access to land and other resources (inputs, credit, technical, e quipment, time) 
necessarily limits the performance of women with regard to yields as well as value addition . 
 
4.2 Producer organizations and cooperatives  
The weak representation of women in farmer organizations is justified discursively by men with 
reference to women ’s limited engagement measured in terms of the total surface cultivated by 
women, and the average plot size. Women hold only 2  percent  in decision -making posts in 
farmer organizations where large -scale producers are represented. On the ot her hand, women 
formed a National Association of Beninese F emale Farmers , and are present in the decision 
making processes for the entire agricultural sector. FUPRO (F ederation of Producers’ Unions ) 
has set up their women ’s council (also member of the National P latform of Farmer  
Organi zations and Agricultural Producers (PNOPPA).  
In Glazoué , women have organized strong cooperatives, however , more elderly women are 
active as younger women are not authorized participation by their husband. The most 
succes sful organi zation is the Union of Women Parboiled Rice Processors. The cooperative is 
registered and holds regular meetings, it is technically supported by PAEF FR (Support P roject 
for Female Entrepreneurship in the Rice Sector) in the six municipalities of the Collines 
Department. Other organi zations are the Union of Rice P roducers of Glazoué and the Benin 
National Rice P rocessors Organizations Framework  (CNTRB). Overall , the repres entation of 
women is 52  percent  and 48  percent  men.  
 
4.3 Livestock and fisheries  
The situation of women in the livestock  sector  varie s among ethnic groups. For the P eulhs of 
northern Benin, management of the herd is the responsibility of men. The herd (sheep, goats 
and cattle) belongs to the head of the household. Women can benefit from the milk and own 
sheep and goats. The Fulani woman will process the milk  (cheese a nd butter)  and market it . 
The women have  full control over the income from the sale of dairy products; women use  these 
resources for the purchase of food and for personal needs.  
Men are responsible for grazing, migration (t ranshumance ), watering, milking , breeding , 
stock ing hay for feeding  during the dry season and for the sales of a nimals. These activities 
are reserved for adults and young boys whose level of involvement is around 60  percent  and 
35 percent , respectively. In some ethnic groups, women are the main man agers of small 
livestock  (sheep, goats, chicken, and ducks ). 
Fishing is largely dominated by men , but women play a dominant role in the processing and 
marketing of fish.


---
*Page 168*
---

18 
 4.4 Post-harvest activities  
Women are often responsible for storage of food stocks for the family and, depending on the 
crop they manage , processing and marketing. In Benin, post -harvest activities  have been 
underfunded and harvest management is often based on traditional know -how and 
technologies.  
Several institutions, including the Agricultural and Food Technology Program me (PTAA) work 
in support of th e sector. Since 1992, the PTAA has been one of the national research 
program mes of the National Institute for Agricultural  Research of Benin (INRAB). The PTAA ’s 
mission is to: (i)  adapt agricultural technologies and develop new ones to increase yields; 
(ii) ensure the conservation of soil and improve farmers’ working conditions; (iii)  adapt, and if 
necessary design, technologies storage and conservation of food products (adapted to agro -
ecological zones) with a view to reducing post -harvest losses caused by damage by 
microorganisms, insects and rodents; and (i v) adapt the existing techn ologies and develop 
new ones for the processing of food products.  
 
4.4 Rural  finance  
Agricultural credit and loans are contingent on owning land, thus women are disadvantaged 
by their lack of access to land . However, a national policy for the advancement of wo men in 
agricultural and rural areas aims to address this issue, widening the criteria for loan 
applications and encouraging medium and long -term loans. In general, w omen are much more 
likely to obtain microcredit than bank loans, compared to men6. Accordi ng to the most recent 
Social Indicators Yearb ook, women had access to 26  percent  of bank loans but obtained 
60 percent  of available microcredit, compared to men, who had access to 74  percent  of bank 
loans but obtained 40  percent  of microcredit.  
Systems of access to credit organized by “tontine ” groups are very numerous in Benin and 
allow a large number of women to access the capital needed to expand their enterprises and 
the working capital for income -generating activities. By de veloping tontines, women ’s 
organizations have been able to circumvent structural barriers to access finance through 
formal institutional channels, such as banks, which often require collaterals such as land titles. 
Furthermore, they have developed a system  of active solidarity, which could be further 
supported . 
Several initiatives have been put in place to develop  microfinance and  promote  youth and 
women ’s employment, including the creation of a ministerial department in 2006, the launching 
of a presidentia l Microcredit Program me for the Very Poor (PMCPP) in 2007, and the allocation 
of a substantial budget in 2008 aimed at supporting women who comprise the majority of 
workers in the trade and the informal economy. There are also women -specific credit 
institu tions such as the National Microfinance Fund (FNM) and the National Fund for the 
Promotion of Entr epreneurship and Youth Employment (FNPEEJ).  
Funding of the agricultural sector is provided through public funds and private funds. Public 
funds are constitute d by resources of the national budget and external resources provided by  
Technical and Financial Partners (TFP). Private funds relate to investments made directly by 
or through the non -state actors (NSAs) such as the agricultural workers’ organizations (OPA), 
NGOs and the private sector.  
 
6 CEDAW (2012), p. 22 .


---
*Page 169*
---

19 
 The evaluation report on the implementa tion of the Strategic Plan for Agricultural Sector 
Recovery  (PSRSA,  2011 –2014) , analy sing the funding over 4 -year implementation of the 
PSRSA mention s: (i) the creation of 50 new financial services agencies (ASF) with a total 
capital of XOF 1.5 billion hel d at 33.52  percent  by women ; (ii) the granting of about 
XOF 11.96  billion  of seasonal loan  for you th going  into agriculture ; (iii) the implementation of 
appropriations by various projects of the APRM and the National Microfinance Fund (FNM) for 
producers, (iv)  the creation of the Mutual Agricultural Insurance of Benin (AMAB)7; and (v)  the 
creation of the National Fund for Agricultura l Development (FNDA) created by decree in 
January 2014.  
The report concludes that the financing of the agricultural sector has stalled because of the 
constraint of high risk associated with  agricultural activit ies for microfinance structures.  
 
4.5 Land use and ownership  
Women have less access to land , which reduces their capacity to adapt to the impacts of 
climate change . In fact, land tenure security is a key factor influencing  decisions about 
investing in soil protection and improvement measures.  
Land ownership also drives decisions  to invest in tree crops8 and in soil restoration through 
agro-forestry and cover crops. Water rights and forest ownership are interlinked to land 
ownership , and f or women to be involved in building resilience and climate adapt ation, more 
access to secure land, water and forest w ould be an important motivating and enabling factor.  
The implementation of the land policy is already decentralized and muc h of the work to register 
and provide land titles is done at district level. In 2013, 49 Rural Land Tenure Plans  (PFR) 
were elaborated in Atacora -Donga (Copargo and Djougou) and 49 Village Land Management 
Section  (SVGF) trained and equipped to improve the implementation of the land policy. The 
district development plans of the five districts where the project will operate have specific 
strategic actions on securing land tenure for women and youth. The project could raise 
awareness of  authorities at the district level to facilitate secure access to land for female and 
youth participants.  
 
4.6 Access to training , information and technology  
Traditions and the burden of care and household work  often limit women ’s availability  and 
mobility , which affect s their participation in meetings and trainings . 
Local leaders (men and women) and participants might  be asked to transfer the t echnical 
information  provided during trainings to their wives but t his transfer of information, if at all done,  
causes a loss of efficiency and often results in errors . In Glazoué, women ’s freedom  to attend 
meetings  and trainings and to participate in cooperatives is restricted by gender norms . 
Women’s participation is controlled , and has to be authorized by men . Having female trainers 
and extension officers will be key to engaging women in the project sites.  
 
7 It should be noted that the Mutual Agricultural Insurance of Benin (AMAB) is functional but is experiencing 
difficulties due to low membership by farmers . 
8 In Copargo and Djougou, women who are given land by their husband are not allowed to plant trees o r to 
make major investments on the land .


---
*Page 170*
---

20 
 Illiteracy also constitutes an additional obstacle to access to trainings. The table below, which 
documents education level s in the project sites, indicates that there are slight differences in 
access to education  for youth (girls and boys) . Adult literacy levels are low  with the lowest 
levels in Donga and the highest in Collines.   
 
 
Table 1 : Gender -based schooling and adult literacy rat e in project intervention areas  
 Gross enrolment 
ratio by gender  Adult literacy 
(15 years and older)  Adult literacy in 
French (15  years 
and older)  Female  Male  
Copargo  86.42% 97.70%   
Djougou  98.19% 108.82%   
Donga  85.1% 87.2% 30.9% 29.7% 
Collines (Dassa 
Zoumé)  59%  44.5% 43.6 % 
Zangnanado  102.09% 132.22%   
Zogbodomey  83.05% 99.36%   
Zou 108.4% 112.1% 40.8% 39.8% 
Source:  SSGI/DDP/MEMP  Statistical Yearbook  and RGPH 2013  
 
There are often  additional  language barriers for women when French is used during trainings, 
in technical leaflets  and in radio and television messages.  
Additionally, men prefer that women receive training and extension services by female 
extension workers ; however , the national extension services are male -dominated. According 
to FAO (2018), women represented 11  percent of MAEP’s extension services staff in 2015 
(State Permanent Extension Officers [ APE]/Rural Development Technical Officers ). Due to 
their workload and r esponsibilities in the household , women are difficult to reach and extension 
staff will often report low  attendance of women  without making further efforts  to reach out to 
them  Female extension officers are more sensitive to women ’s needs and are more likely to 
create opportunities for women.  
The fact that women (including female youth) are less connected to the Internet (14 .4 percent 
of men compared to 6 .4 percent of women) and make less use of computers (10 .9 percent of  
men and 6 .8 percent of wom en) needs to be taken into account when promoting 
communicatio n and information technologies  (apps for crop protection, weather information).  
The a ccess to the Internet through mobile phone connections  has improved between 2013 
and 2018  because of the penetration of mobile money services  and apps for health services . 
 
Table  2: Access to ICTs in 2013  
 % HH 
with 
computer  % HH with access 
to mobile phone 
(one active GSM 
line) % HH with 
connection 
to the 
Internet  % HH with 
Internet 
connection 
through 
mobile phone  HH 
possessing 
a radio  
Benin  4.6 27 2.5 2.5 63.1 
Rural  1.4 31.2 0.8 2.4 59.2 
Donga  2.2 26.8 1.3 2.8 69.6 
Collines (Dassa 
Zoumé)  1.9 30.3 0.9 1.3 61.8 
Zou 2.1 31.2 1 2.3 62.6


---
*Page 171*
---

21 
 Source : RGPH 2013  
 
Taking into account  higher illiteracy rates of women  and time constraints  and socio -cultural 
barriers , the project should use communication tools that facilitate access of  women at their 
own time and in the vernaculars women are comfortable with. Radio program mes and videos 
make information available to all groups.  
 
When the project will formulate its communication strategy ( Component 3, Output 3.1) and 
identif y the differe nt knowledge products , it will provide details on the content and the targeted 
audience. The gender expert will contribute to the identification of a minimum of 30% of 
communication topics that present the case for women ’s participation  in technical, 
organ isational and institutional domains . A communication strategy including newsletters and 
events will be designed for the platform ( Component 3), which will also provide an online portal 
where knowledge products such as training material developed under Comp onent 1 & 2, and 
data demonstrating the benefits of project’s interventions, will be uploaded. A long -term 
strategy will be designed to ensure the platform’s continuation beyond the project, especially 
to continue ICRM efforts in the Oueme Basin. The Dimit ra Clubs will provide content for radio 
programs featuring  their exchanges on success stories and challenges. These lived 
experiences documented by the Dimitra Clubs should be a source of information and content 
for the communication team.  
 
As part of the communication strategy , communication channels will be identified in 
consultation with the communities and stakeholders  where  women will be able to express their 
needs  and concerns . The gender specialist will be assisting the communication team in how 
to best address any  specific gender -based constraints  (e.g. social and cultural norms 
preventing women’s access and voice, mobility and time constraints etc.).  
 
4.7 Value chains  
The crops most affected by climate change and selected for inter ventions on c limate resilience 
include  maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, green vegetable, tomatoes, yam, shea, mango 
and cashew . Farming practices and responsibilities of women and men  in these crops and 
their value chains  differ . 
Of the total surface cultivated by women, the largest share is cultivated with cereals , with 
39 percent for maize , followed by 29  percent  for legumes, 13  percent  for root and tuber crops 
and 7  percent  for fruits/vegetables. Men cultivate mainly cereals (53  percent ), with mostl y 
maize (43 percent ) and  sorghum (6  percent ); tuber and root crops (24  percent ), with mostly 
cassava (12 percent ) and yam  (11 percent ); pulses  (17 percent ), with mostly peanuts 
(6 percent ), soya (6  percent ) and cowpeas (4  percent ); and vegetables (3  percent  of surface 
cultivated by men).  
Women are not involved in yam cultivation . As for maize, sorghum , rice  and cowpeas , women 
are involved in planting, weeding and harvesting in their husbands ’ fields , and are in charge of 
the post-harvest (processing, storage and hedging) and trade activities. In their own fields , 
women cultivate cowpeas, maize,  rice ( Glazoué)  and vegetables , where they perform all tasks 
(except land preparation for which they  would hire l abourers – or their husbands would do on 
their behalf, as is the case in Glazoué) . 
Women cultivate a variety of crops and use a higher number of varieties , taking  into account 
cooking preferences. Because of knowledge on the variety of crops and their perf ormance in 
their fields, women are able to contribute relevant know -how in adaptation and resilience in the 
context of nutrition security.  
When compared with  crops where men use inputs (pesticides, fertilizers ) the yields obtained 
by women are lower : vegetables (tomato  and pili pili) and cereals (rice and maize ). Women 
obtain  higher yields than men in cassava  (but with little  difference) , soja, peanuts, voandzou,


---
*Page 172*
---

22 
 sesame (goussi) and gombo.  These higher yields could be explained by the fact that women 
have specialized in the crops and master the technical aspects or are specifically targeted by 
projects and receive inputs (seeds, fertilizer, and technical  assistance).  
The yield gap  (between m en and women)  is, per 1  000 kg, 192 kg for rice,  107 kg for maize , 
with women hav ing a slightly higher yield gap in cassava , 30 kg. In these value chains , women 
make up an  important part of the family labo ur and dominate  the processing and marketing 
activities.  
As for  cassava  (14 percent  of total planted surface and 10 percent of the total surface planted  
by women ), women and men have equal yields. 
In most of the value chains , women add value through post -harvest processing and storage 
and hedging activities . Post-harvest activities in m aize, rice and cassava value chains create 
many job opportunities.  
However, p rocessing and storage  are also affected by climate change : flooding , increased  and 
unpredictable  days of rain or cloudy  weather make  drying and  storing  cereals, tubers and root 
crops difficult. Marketing poorly dried grains or processed food can increase health risks for 
consumers.  Traditional processing is vulnerable to climate change and investments will be 
needed to improve storage and processing methods.  
 
Table 3: Participation of men and women in rice, maize and cassava value chains  
 Production  Processing  Distribution  Retail sales  
Rice  
Labour 
 
 
%VA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Income  
 12 000 
producers , of 
which  7 000 are 
women (58%)  Majority are women  Majority are women ; total number estimated 
at 10  000 women  
35% on average 
of the total value 
created  15–20% on average 
of the total value 
created  45–50% 
Marketing of rice is a paying business in all 
regions. Highest ben efits are found with 
wholesalers from the south , who sell 
imported rice, local rice . Wholesalers have 
highest benefits in south, cent re and 
northeastern regions  
80% of the family 
labour is done by 
women. The 
income from the 
activity is used to 
pay the family 
labour    
Maize  
Labour 
 
 
 
 
 
 Production and 
yields obtained 
by women are 
largely lower 
than those of 
men; women are 
mainly on small 
surfaces (less 
than 0 .5 ha) Majority are women  Collectors and retailers are women ; 
wholesalers are majority women but men 
are also involved  
% VA VCA 
local market 
grain   
 
14%  
 
 Collector  
 
29% Wholesale  
 
23%  
 
35% 
% VA VCA 
maize  
improved 
flour 3.1% 85.2% 6.5% 5.2% –


---
*Page 173*
---

23 
  Production  Processing  Distribution  Retail sales  
Income 
XOF/kg 
VA VCA 
improved 
flour 9 247 19 15 – 
Income 
XOF/kg 
VA VCA 
maize local 
market grain  9 – 19 15 23 
Cassava  
Labo ur Family labo ur 
represents the 
major part of the 
labour; 70% are 
women  
Estimated 
500 000 
producers  85% family labo ur, some paid labo ur is sourced  for processing 
activities (out -of-school youth)  
Estimated total of 700  000 women  
Source: VCA analysis reports for eice, maize and cassava  
 
Women tend to be  in value chains that are not prioritized by  the government (cowpeas, 
peanuts, soja and vegetables).  Government priority crops receive investments ( National 
Agriculture Investment Plan [NAIP ]) although the value chain nodes where women are active 
(post -harvest processing, storage and marketing) rece ive less attention and investments, 
negatively influencing women ’s opportunities within the context of the NAIP.  
 
Agroforestry  
Forestry resources are an important part of the livelihood strategies of rural populations and 
provide alternative incomes during lean seasons. In river basins , forests are of great 
importance in protectin g soils and regulatin g hydrology as well as reducin g and stopping the 
impact of desertification.9 
Women use NTFPs, process the products and sell them on the markets. In the project 
intervention areas  of Copargo and Djougou, women collect shea nuts to produce shea butter, 
néré fruits to produce a condiment , and baobab fruits to produce powder from leaves  and 
flowers  and juice and oil from seeds  (PAGEFCOM, AfDB Evaluation Report 2005).  
In Zangnanado and Zogbodomey , the local government promotes planting of indigenous tree 
species and assisted women groups to start tree nurseries. Women are using important 
quantities of wood energy for cooking and collect or buy from male and youths involved in 
charcoal production.  The problem of deforestation is very important in Glazoué and contributes 
to aggravatin g climate change impacts and to the silting of the Ouémé  River . 
FHH are often involved in NTFP trade to complement income and overcome shocks , and, as 
documented in the coping strategies , charcoal production and fuel wood sale provid e income 
for men to cope with crop losses. Planting trees  through agroforestry  is a way to increase the 
availability of NTFP s, which can be collected, processed, and sold by women. The strategy 
would not only contribute to increas ing income, thereby enablin g access to more resilient 
 
9Direction générale des forêts et des ressources naturelles, 2012 . Politique forestière au Bénin.


---
*Page 174*
---

24 
 source of energy and reducing unsustainable activities like charcoal production, but would also 
restore land in the Ouémé Basin, thereby reducing climate -change vulnerabilities.  
 
Table 5  provides information on access to energy s ource s for cooking . 
 
Table 4: Source s of energy for cooking  
Zone  Proportion of HH with 
fuel wood saving 
stoves  Wood Gas Charcoal  
Benin  10.7% 56.1% 5% 28.7% 
Rural  5% 76.7% 1.2% 11.1% 
Donga  7.2% 67.1% 0.8% 22.1% 
Collines  8% 68.1% 0.6% 22.7% 
Zou 5.5% 68.3% 1.2% 21.4% 
Source: RGHP 2013  
 
 
4.8 Women’s work burden and  time use  
Women play an important role in f ood and nutrition security for the household and investing to 
build their adaptive capacities  will strengthen food and nutrition security. The project should 
take into account  women ’s specific needs and constraints , for example in terms of availability 
of time to attend e xtension  activities . Climate -resilient practices and new technologies will not 
benefit women and men equally , unless specific  measures are taken to address existing gaps 
in access to information , technology and training and productive resources and finance . 
However, these need to be supported by  initiatives to promote  social change  and 
transformation of discriminatory norms .Women have activities  and time uses which are  
influenced by climate change. For example, during interviews  in the field , men mentioned that 
if the rainy season sta rts, the planting is carried out  by women , but if a dry spell arrives , women 
will be asked to replant . More rains also mean more weeds and more work for women and 
youths who are responsible for these  activities. Both will increase the time women have to 
spend on the husbands ’ fields  instead of their own fields and gardens . 
Women are scarcely engaged in water -management activities while water scarcity affects 
mostly women in terms of time needed to stand in a queue  to fetch tap or borehole water . 
Water scarcity could also result in the increase in water price , which would affect the poorer. 
Water resources management should take into acco unt women ’s roles and time invested in 
fetching water and firewood.  
 
Table 5: Households ’ access to drinking water, radio s and motorcycle s 
Zone  From 
SONE
B From 
borehole/villag
e pump  From 
cister
n From 
non-
protecte
d well  From 
river/mars
h Proportio
n of HH 
with 
motorcycl
e Proportio
n of HH 
with radio  
Benin  28.5 29.5 5.2 15 7.3 45.5% 63.1% 
Rural  8.3 43.9 7.1 15.9 1.7 42.7% 59.2% 
Donga  8.8 23.9 0.4 28.4 13.2 53.8% 69.6% 
Colline
s 11.2 63.9 0.3 5.4 6.7 46.7% 61.8% 
Zou 22.5 30.9 23.6 6.9 7.2 42.6% 62.6% 
Source: RGHP 2013


---
*Page 175*
---

25 
 The next table provides details of daytime use by women and men in the project areas.  
 
Table  6: Typical day time use (in hours and minutes) by women and men  
Activity  Benin  Donga  Collines  Zou 
 Women  Men Women  Men Women  Men Women  Men 
Market  
activities  2:23 3:55 2:10 4:12 2:39 3:45 2:28 3:18 
Economic non 
market  
activities  0:27 0:06 0:28 0:04 0:27 0:08 0:19 0:08 
Domestic  3:40 0:41 3:38 0:22 3:29 0:47 3:57 1:02 
Social  1:25 1:53 1:29 1:54 1:17 1:37 1:19 1:37 
Leisure  0:53 1:29 0:35 1:21 0:57 1:35 0:53 1:30 
Mobility  0:47 1:10 0:49 1:12 0:51 1:08 0:51 1:09 
Study  1:08 1:28 1:23 1:12 1:24 1:52 1:11 1:48 
Physical10 13:00  13:01  13:17  13:28  12:46  12:56  12:58  13:19  
Communication  0:01 0:02 0:0 0:02 0:01 0:01 0:0 0:02 
Others  0:03 0:02 0:0 0:01 0:01 0:01 0:0 0:0 
Source:  EMICoV 2015  
 
Men spend more time on economic activities than women. Tradition ally men provide the 
income for the family and women take care of the domestic task s. Women often have to cope 
with the direct effects of shocks on households  as men migrate in search for paid labo ur. 
In the three regions  where the project will be implemented , women spend over 3 .5 hours  doing 
domestic work , and in the Zou region , they spend almost 4  hours on domestic activities; men 
in the Zou contribute most to the domestic chores. In the Donga region , men contribute less  
than 10  percent of their time  to domestic chores.  
Women  also have less time than men for social and leisure activities. In the Zou region , the 
difference is almost 2  hours  and in the two other regions  (Donga and Collines) , at least one 
hour difference a day. 
 
Table  7: Time use by  men and women in the project areas  
 Benin  Donga  Collines  Zou 
 Women  Male  W M W M W M 
Market, non -market 
and domestic 
activities  6:30 4:02 6:16 4:38 6:35 4 6:04 4:28 
Domestic activities 
alone  3:40 0:41 3:38 0:22 3:29 0:47 3:57 1:02 
Social activities , 
including leisure  2:18 2:39 2:04 3:11 2:14 3:12 1:12 3:07 
Source: TUS 2015  
 
4.9 Local development plans and community -based organizations  
 
The district development plans provide information on barriers to adoption o f climate -resilient 
practices for men and women. The main barriers are summarized in the table below  by district . 
 
 
10 Includes: sleep, toilet ries and clothing, rest, meals and other care .


---
*Page 176*
---

26 
 Table  8: Barriers to adoption o f climate -resilient practices by district  
All districts  1. Conflicts related to transhumance is a threat to community development; the need for 
water points for livestock and  pastures  must be addressed ; there is also risk for 
gender -based violence.  
2. Low literacy levels in the adult population limit options for extension and informati on 
on technology for adaptation.  
3. Low participation in decision -making processes of women  due to the socio -cultural 
setting affects interests , and needs of women are not being taken int o account in 
development actions.  
4. Dependence of the districts on financial assistance through FADEC, TFP for 
strengthening climate -change resilience ; 
5. Lack of agriculture insurance system: credits taken on crop production cannot be 
reimbursed and indebtedne ss of households creates tensions at the household level  
(risk of GBV)  and contributes to pover ty (vicious circle of poverty) . 
6. Extreme events impact women more , as shown in figures from the agency for disaster 
management .11 
 Institutional  Men Women  
Copargo  - Although there 
is an important 
number of 
women groups 
in Copargo and 
Djougou on 
which the district 
can built to 
strengthen 
participation, 
there is no 
institutional 
platform for 
dialogue 
between the 
district planning 
group and 
women  - Quick gain strat egy of men 
and youth leading to 
reduced forest cover 
through production of 
charcoal as a strategy for 
income -generation  
 
- Yam is men ’s main crop 
and it is affected by climate 
change , which means loss 
of income for men; 
extension efforts  on the 
cultivation of yam  are 
fewer than in government 
priority crops (maize, rice, 
cassava, vegetables)  
 
- Men expect incentives to 
contribute to community 
development and there is 
overall poor mobiliza tion - Time constraints for women: 
higher incidence of malaria 
because of rains over a longer 
period of time, which burdens 
women  in their  caregiver s’ role  
- Women have more difficulties in 
collecting water for the 
household because of pollution 
of water sources by flash floods  
- Conflicts around water sources  
affects women in charge of HH 
water supplies  
- Socio -cultural barriers  and 
traditional gender roles  lead to 
women’s  under -represent ation  
in decision -making and 
marginalization in the public 
space  
- Women d o prosper in income -
generating activities and invest 
in these activities but are 
confronted with lack of 
management skills and 
technical assistance in their 
areas of work  
- Women work mainly in value 
chains that are not organized 
and suffer from deficiencies  and 
lack of quality market 
information.  
Djougou  - Women have less access to 
extension  due to social cultural 
barriers,  
- Women have less access to 
land and to opportunities in 
irrigation schemes for vegetable 
cultivation  
- Traditional attitude s determine  
women ’s subordination  to men  
and lack of  decision -making 
power  
- Lack of long -term training and 
access to technical staff  and 
extension   
- Women have no control over 
waste water evacuated on the 
vegetable gardens , which  
 
11 Still waiting for data but was told that % women is higher


---
*Page 177*
---

27 
 exposes th ey th emselves  and 
consumers to  health risks  
 
Glazoué  - Lack of training 
opportunities f or 
women on 
processing and 
post-harvest 
technology and 
good practices  
 
- Not enough 
water points for 
drinking water  
 
- Not enough 
water points in 
vegetable 
gardens  
 - Use of traditional and 
religious leaders in politics 
(with negative effect on 
applying development 
measures that are not 
popular b ut beneficial for 
the community such as in 
the context of climate 
resilience on soil , forest 
and land protection that 
need adherence of all 
community members but 
where politics will play a 
negative role)  - Access to secured land and 
poor management of forest an d 
land resources , which affects 
women as they often get land 
that is degraded  
- Time constraints for women 
because w ells dry up early , 
which makes tasks as collection 
of water more time -consuming  
- Time constraint for women due 
to wells drying up or in case of 
flooding that pollutes water , 
which makes water collection for 
cooking problematic  
- Change in rainfall pattern affects 
women ’s planning  of rice 
cultivation  
- More frequent food insecurity  
- Socio -cultural barriers for 
women: l imited access of 
women to land (heritage, rent, 
hiring , all have restrictions to 
women ) 
- Low level of awareness of 
women on the negative effects 
of illiteracy  
- Women are under -represented 
in decision -making processes  
- Socio -cultural burdens ; no 
access to secured land titles, no 
inheritance of land, women lack 
technical skills and assistance in 
livestock development where 
they are more important than 
men and could invest in  small 
livestock as savings to cope with 
climate change  
Zangnanado  - Land use and 
conflict 
management 
require the 
establishment of  
Municipal 
Property 
Management 
Committee 
(CoGeF) and 
Village Land 
Management 
Sections  
(SVGF), in 
accordance with 
the 
requiremen ts of 
Decree No. 
2015 -017 of 29 
January 2015   
 
  - Women’s t ime due to their 
caregiver s’ role and higher 
incidence of diseases due to 
floods and poor waste 
management  
- School  flooding s cause children 
to be at home , which will 
constraint women ’s mobility  and 
time 
- Later planting or replanting 
because of rain fall pattern will 
influence women ’s own planting 
and add extra time burden for 
women  
- Socio cultural norms whereby 
women less represented in 
decision -making process  
- Low levels of participation of 
women , youths, handicapped 
persons and minorities in 
decision -making processes and 
in local development  
- Poor access to basic services in 
the district , which influences 
women ’s health  as well because 
of lack of money to pay for the 
services . Increased malaria,


---
*Page 178*
---

28 
 respiratory diseases, diarrh oea 
with risk for increase s in 
maternal and infant death  are 
common and  especially during 
periods of floods the health 
services are unable to cope with 
the victims . Women and yo uth 
have less access to decision -
making positions but the district 
provides the example of G IZ-
funded ProSol project that has 
44% as female beneficiaries 
who have a higher performance 
(women on average have 
worked on 0.88  ha while men 
only worked on 0.56  ha) and the 
differential performance shows 
women ’s eagerness to assist in 
soil restoration despite the 
troubled secure access to land  
Zogbodomey   - Use of bushfires as way of 
clearing land and 
renewing pastures , with 
negative effect on soil  
 
 - Violent conflicts between 
farmers and livestock keepers , 
affecting women and children  
and risk for increase in GBV  
- More migration of men due to 
floods , putting the burden of 
food insecurity on women  
- Poor management of land 
tenure  
- Poor yields in cultivation of 
carrots , lettuce, pili  pili, onions , 
beans and leaf vegetables due 
to pests and lack of technical 
assistance  
- Poor access to fertilizer and 
other in puts 
- Youth migrat ion causes lack of 
field workers , which increases 
burden on women and children  
- Women in Zogbodomey feel 
marginalized in district planning , 
and there is no real budget 
representativeness for women.  
- Women feel inferior to men in 
economic, s ocial and political 
aspects. Men are always given 
priorities in the decisions , and in 
general , men will take the 
decisions for the women 
(without women ’s know ledge ). 
Social roles in Zogbodomey 
dictate that women should be 
submi ssive  to their husband s 
and solely in charge of  
reproductive work . Also, issues 
are reported around c hildren 
victims of slavery and abuse, 
violence against women and 
girls and early forced marria ge 
of girls, elderly being left 
abandoned and living in social 
exclusion  
 
The organiz ed development and participation of women and youth in decision -making  
processes is included  among the issues  in local deve lopment plans (Agenda 2018 –2022 ). The


---
*Page 179*
---

29 
 following table presents the representation of women in the district councils , the target for 2022  
and the gender actions  in the Community Development Programme (CDP ). 
 
Table 9: Participation of women in councils in 2017 , targets for 2022  and gender actions  
District  Situation in 2017and target for 2022  Extracts from Commun ity Development 
Plan  
Zogbodomey  No wom an in the council  
Youth (under 40  years) represents 18%  
 
No specific target for 2022 except for 
improving local governance and 
performance of the local administration with 
a special attention on gender  
  
One of the strategic interventions in the 
plan is on economic capacity -building for 
entrepreneurs , especially women and 
youth , also in the artisan s subsector  
Zangnanado  No wom an in the council  
 
The target for 2022 is that there will be a t 
least 2 women in the council  and that in 
terms of decision -making processes , the 
district will improve participation; there 
should be at least 4  women in village 
councils/ arrondissement  A number of strategic interventions are 
formulated in a non -gender specific way  
One aspect specifically mentioning women 
is the establish ment of  tenure contracts 
that provide secure access to land that 
needs to be restored to women producers 
who do not own land  
 
The district plan has a number of practical 
activities oriented to women; strengthen 
the capacity of 100 women on aspects of 
nutrition;  
Train and provide resilience equipment to 
women : wood -saving stoves and 
renewable energy  
 
A strategic issue for women that is taken up 
in the district plan is facilitation of access to 
credit with a target of reaching women 50% 
of the population  in need of credit (R.1.3)  
Copargo  Zero women in the council,  
Zero women in village management 
positions  
By 2022 , there should be 10% of women 
participating in district meetings  
 The target is set mostly in terms of 
improving participation of women in 
consultation and decision -making  
 
The plan mentions activities to organize 
women in order to ensure their  participation 
and presence in decision -making (A.3.8.3)  
Another activity aims at promoting 
recruitment  of women in decentralized 
services in the government and district 
council services (A.3.8.4)  
Djougou  No wom an in the district council  
 
No specific target set for 2022 on women ’s 
participation , but there are actions to be 
taken to strengthen the capacity of women 
to participate in political decision -making  
 
Another action targets men to facilitate 
participation of women in politics  There are no specific actions other than the 
two mentioned as targets.  
 
There is specific mention of the need to 
support literacy centres and a statement on 
the participation of women in 2017 (350 
women on a total of 847 participants) . 
Glazoué 2018 –
2022  In 2009 there were 9 women councillors 
over 256 (3,5%)  
  
No target has been set for 2022  In the list of projects , there is one on 
women and vulnerable persons that aims 
to: improve the socio -economic status of 
women and other vulnerable groups with 
following results : (i) better and easier 
access to credit; (ii)  women ’s better 
represent ation  in decision -making and 
(iii) better  living conditions for vulnerable 
groups


---
*Page 180*
---

30 
 Female Community -Based Organisations were subject to an inventory by the Ministry in 
charge of social affairs (MTFPAS) and it s division on the promotion of women and gender and 
senior citizens in July 2017. In the project areas,  the groups that are functional were 69 in 
Djougou ( Copargo and Djougou  districts ), 9 in Zangnanado and 6 in Zogbodomey  at the time 
of the field missions conducted for this assessment . In Glazoué, 38 groups are functional . 
The total membership for groups in Djougou was indicated as consisting of 1 495 women 
members. The groups in Djougou exist since 2010, 19 were started between 2010 and 2015 
and one group was established  after 2015. Most of the groups had their main activity in 
agroprocessing (29); 23 worked  in agriculture and gardening ; 4 were wor king in the livestock 
sector (poultry, pigs) ; 10 were savings and traditional tontines ; and  4 groups were active in 
storage and hedging of cereal and legume crops.  
The processing activities of the groups were mostly on multiple processing activities but th e 
specialized groups worked on soya  (10 groups); peanut oil and cakes  (8), shea (5), cassava 
(3), locust bean (2) and cashew (1).  
The groups in Zanganado worked in  processing (1 for soya , 4 for cassava and 5 for other 
products); 3 were in gardening, 4 had activities in agriculture, 2 groups were in production and 
marketin g. In Zogbodomey 4 groups worked in  cassava processing and 2 in peanut oil and 
cakes.  
There are no details on the membership of the groups in Gl azoué but most of the groups have 
activities in the sales and production of cassava, soya, rice, pineapple or are specialised in 
processing of rice (7 groups), processing of cassava, peanuts, soya.  
 
5. Strategies to integrate gender in OCRI  
In order to cre ate transformational change, the project considers women not as victims of  
climate change or beneficiaries  of the project, but as key contributors and equal actors in 
project activities and climate change adaptation efforts. As seen in the assessment, women 
are highly resilient, knowledgeable and are implementing a wide range of adaptive practices 
in their productive and livel ihood activities and strategies and in the household . By recognizing 
and valuing their skills and capacities  and promoting their roles , the project aims to enge nder 
a process of social change and provide a platform to empower women and increase their 
influence at different levels and their participation in climate action and governance.  
This proposal, which a ddress gender dimensions within the project design and implementation, 
identifies and integrates interventions to provide gender -responsive and transfo rmative results  
through the Dimitra Clubs approach combined with farmer fiel d schools and other activities, 
particularly in upper Ouémé  where traditional social norms make it more difficult for women to 
participate in project and community activities.  
The gender -responsive approach recognizes and takes into account the particular needs, 
priorities, and realities of diverse groups of men and women , including the specific constraints 
they may face,  and adequately addresses these in the design and implementation of the 
activities, resulting in equitable sharing of benefits .  
The Dimitra Clubs approach is a transformative approach that goes b eyond the symptoms of 
gender inequality. It tackles the underlying causes of inequalities (norms, attitudes, 
behaviours ) and generates positive  change in areas of (i) awareness, consciousness and 
confidence, (ii) values, norms and practices and in (iii)  policies, laws and institutions.


---
*Page 181*
---

31 
 Woman headed households are not easily integrated in and accepted by society, especially in 
rural areas.  According to the EMICoV  survey (  2011) , women heads of households in Benin 
are more affected by non -monetary poverty . The sp ecific gender -based constraints of wom en 
headed households ( e.g. access to productive resources, services, time burden and limited 
participation in organisations and community initiative s) will be  taken into ac count in the project  
by proactively promoting their participation in FFS and in  the Dimitra Clubs. The Dimitra  Club 
approach is an inclusive approach where all members of the community  (including local 
institutions  and leaders ) are involved in community dialogues  on a voluntary basis . Women  
head s of households are able to  participate  in the Dimitra Clubs  and express their specific 
needs and interests , as evidence from other projects shows . The project will monitor the 
participati on of women heads of household  in the D imitra  Clubs, FFS and FBS  and take 
measures to encourage their participation, as needed . 
The project will also contribute to the prevention of forms of GBV in its intervention zone s 
throug h the Dimitra Clubs  approach.  As the analysis has indicated, a ll district s (see table 8) 
have highlighted  the risk of increase s of cases of GBV due to the impacts of climate change 
and the  lack of an agriculture insurance system12.  
The Dimitra Clubs  through  inclusive social dialogue promotes  discussions around 
discriminatory and harmful norms and customs and the formulation and implementation of 
agreed actions to reduce or overcome their negative impacts on the well -being of the 
community  and their members . The Dimitra Clubs  have proven to have a positive impact on 
changing norms and customs that are root causes of forms of GBV (such as early marriage, 
forms of psychological violence, food taboos, excessive workload for women and girls) , with 
communities taking  actions to prevent and address these.  In partnership with other actors 
(Social promotion centres, NGOs) the Dimitra Clubs will also undertake prevention activities 
(awareness -raising, community dialogues) and provide advice to victims .  
In Benin, several institutional actors are active in the prevention of GBV. State actors such as 
Social Promotion Centres (CPS) at the level of municipalities are the front -line service for 
grievance and  provision of  help to victims. Several  international  NGOs and CSOs also engage 
in prevention and the response to GBV.  Prevention is mainly done through mass awareness 
raising activities, community dialogues, group discussions, media campaigns, artistic activities 
(cinema, theatre , graffiti, slam, puppetry,  etc.), trainings and peer education (peer -to-peer), 
radio/TV  broadcasts, advocacy actions, public debates, etc.  The targets of these actions are 
the entire  community, women, men, girls and boys, religious and traditional leaders,artisans, 
teachers, opinio n leaders, local authorities, students, etc.  
The grievance and redress mechanism in  Benin is organized as a digital platform for 
denouncing GBV  - www.stop -vbgbenin.org which allows any victim or witness to report a case 
of GBV without having to go to a social promotion centre. There also an option to send a 
message to  “green telephone numbers” or an email to : denonce@stop -vbgbenin.org. Social 
 
12 When credits taken for crop production cannot be reimbursed and indebtedness of households increase, 
contributing to poverty, tensions also materialize at the household level which contribute to  rising domestic and 
GBV.


---
*Page 182*
---

32 
 promot ion centres and police services are  the proximity institutions handling t he 
reporting  of GBV .13 
Specific attention will be paid to the integration of gender in all capacity development activities. 
The gender expert (BLN 1.2.1.2) will mainstream gender in e ach of th e training modules. The 
gender expert will train master trainers on gender analysis, gender transformati ve approaches  
and gender -responsive climate resilient agriculture. The master trainers will be informed on 
and provided basic training on the Dimitra C lubs approach as they will be working with FFS in 
the communities where the Dimitra C lubs will be established.  
The Training of Master Trainers includes also basic finance and business matters . The gender 
expert w ill work together with the external experts on financial and business matters to adapt 
the content and design and deliver  specific training modules for women that respond to  
women’s specific needs in financial / business and farm management. The gender exp ert will 
also participate in the training of master trainers to provide technical support on gender issues.  
The gender expert will accompany the creation of the network/association of the Master 
Trainers and support  the women selected as OCRI  facilitators (see activity 1.2.2) . The  creation 
of a network/association to operate as technical business advisors will secure the future scale 
up and sustainability of the project . 
At least 40  percent  of the facilitators will be women. As facilitators will work in the ir 
municipalities and the trainings will be conducted in the area, the mobility constraint for women 
will be  overcome. As a result, it is expected that more  women will apply and shall be 
encouraged to become facilitator.  
The Master Trainers will conduct  the trainings of facilitators (ToFs) .  
First, a training curriculum will be developed based on the key priorities of the Ouémé Basin. 
The gender expert  will mainstream gender in the training curriculum and develop specific 
modules on gender equality in ac cess to productive assets, access to services, gender -
responsive services and value chain upgrading. The gender experts (national and 
internationa l) and gender focal points (GFP)14 will participate in the validation workshop, which 
will also involve  the technical experts and FFS Master Trainers.  
The thematic areas covered will include: FFS methodology, climate -resilient agriculture (CRA) 
for maize, cassava, cowpea, chillies, okra, g reen vegetable, tomatoes, yam; agro -forestry with 
shea, mango and cashew; sustainable land management (with focus on river banks); and 
construction and maintenance of small waterworks . For each theme , the gender aspects to be 
mastered by the facilitators  will be highlighted . 
 
13 The mechanism for supporting victims of GBV includes three main components that revolve around the 
identification of the case, the reception and consultation with victims and the provision of care. Several services are 
available  to victims: (i) medical care, including consultation, examinations, treatment, issuance of a medical 
certificate, follow -up, etc. This support is provided by health facilities and by specialised NGOs; (ii) psychological 
support extended by social promotio n centres and NGOs; (iii) legal and judicial support, including complaints, 
security, prosecution, repression, etc, offered at the level of the Commissariats, Courts; and (iv) social support also 
by social promotion centres and NGOs, including emergency ac commodation, family or social reintegration, socio -
professional reintegration, etc.  
14 GFP FAO Benin, GFPs from the Ministries (MAEP, MCVDD and MASMF) and GFPs in the ATDA’s, in the 
municipalities.  .


---
*Page 183*
---

33 
 Furthermore, b oth the content and the organis ation of FFS and FBS will take into account 
women’s specific constraints.  
The gender expert will work together with the external experts on financial and business 
matters to adapt and provide  specific training modules for women related to women’s specific 
needs in financial / business and farm management. The gender expert will participate in the 
training of Master trainers to provide technical support on gender issues.  
Gender -responsive servi ces and amenities of FBS will include: services and trainings will be 
adjusted to the time availability of women; if internet and mobile phone services are used (input 
supply, financial services) there will be attention to the social and cultural constrain ts women 
face when using phones a nd internet; when safety during mobility is an issue there will be 
measures taken to reduce the distance and the exposure to risks.  
To maximize synergies and impact, the Dimitra  Clubs will be informed on the services and 
amenities of FBS and will address at the community and district level the gender constraints 
and put in place the actions needed to overcome them in order to guarantee equal benefits 
and access for men and women.  
 
The project will integrate objectives and indicators disaggregated by gender. The gender 
dimension must be cross -cutting throughout all the a reas of intervention and should not only 
incorporate actions that will favour women. The results, indicators and activities should , 
therefore , already be pre -defined in the logical framework  to ensure that actions are included 
in the annual work  plans.  
The project will ensure that the stipulated institutional provisions take gender into account, 
enable implementation of strategies, and measure t he proposed gender integration . 
The project design will take into consideration the following gender implications:  
• Women ’s role as primary homestead and resource manager s; 
• Gender differentials in experiences and impacts of climate change  on women and 
men;  
• Analysis of gender division of labour (e.g. gender ‐differentiated roles, responsibilities, 
and needs);  women ’s time burden;  
• Women ’s access to and control over natural  resources and the goods and services 
that they  provide;  
• Women ’s access to  services, information, technology;  
• Women ’s voice and decision -making power  and collective action;  
• Women ’s knowledge and adaptation strategies;  
• Assessment of gender mainstreaming in national and local development plans in 
relevant sectors ; 
• Financing and budgeting for gender -related initiatives;  
• Monitoring and reporting for continuous improvement;  
• Systematic c ollection of sex - and age -disaggregated data and gender data;  
The project implementation will take into consideration the following:  
• Division of labour on farm, off  farm and within the household;  
• Involvement of a gender specialist as part of  the project;


---
*Page 184*
---

34 
 • Awareness -raising and capacity -development of counterparts and all project 
stakeholders ; 
• Development of gender -responsive soft and hard climate -resilient technologies 
supported by gender -sensitive  strategies and approaches for dissemination and 
uptake;  
• Development of gender -responsive value chains based on in-depth gender analyses ; 
• Approaches to incentivize and promote women ’s meaningful participation in all 
project activities;  
• Promotion of female exten sion officers  and trainers;  
• Promotion of gender -responsive regulatory frameworks and institutional capacity -
building;  
• Implementation of gender -transformative approaches to support social and behavio ur 
change . 
In monitoring and reporting , the project will collect  sex- and age -disaggregated  baseline 
data that will be monitored throughout implementation and evaluation.  
Qualitative assessments will also be periodically conducted on the gender ‐specific benefits  
that can be directly associated to the project. This will be incorporated in the annual Project  
Impleme ntation Report, Mid ‐Term Report, and Terminal Evaluation.  
Quantitative i ndicators for the achievement  of project objectives in relation to gender equality 
will include  among others : 
• Number of women and men as beneficiaries;  
• Number of female and male ‐headed households as beneficiaries;  
• Change in livelihoods of rural, targeted populations : 
o Female and male engagement in agricultural livelihoods ; 
o Women and men engaged in alternative income -generating activities;  
o Purchasing capacity and production of food for household consumption and 
income -generation  by women . 
• Time saved due to climate -resilience projects;  
• Business development support, targeting rural women entrepreneur groups;  
• Number of women and men engaged in agricultural processing ; 
• Number of men and women participating in natural resource management ; 
• Number of men and women participating in water user groups ; 
• Number of women and men in farmer groups, farmer cooperatives or farmer 
associations;  
• Number of women and men in leadership positions . 
 
Qualitative indicators:  
• Role of men and women in agricultural livelihoods ; 
• Opportunities for men and women to generate additional income ; 
• Time‐saved by women as a result of the reduction of labour hours required for 
agricultural and  water -management practices;  
• Contribution to better self‐esteem and standing  of women in households  and 
communit ies;


---
*Page 185*
---

35 
 • Expanded involvement in public and project decision ‐making as a result of initiation of 
women to  actively participate in income -generating activities;  
• Engagement in training activities  (e.g. FFS)  in agriculture, agroforestry, water 
management, leadership, entrepreneurship ; 
• Effective awareness on climate change adaptation approaches increas ed among 
men and  women;  
• Perception of women  and men on their vulnerability to climate change ;


---
*Page 186*
---

6. Gender Action Plan  
All baseline information and data will be collected during the gender analysis undertaken with the vulnerability assessment during the project inception 
phase  
Results  Activities  Indicators and Targets  Timeline  Responsibilities  Budget  
 
Impact Statement:  
 
Increased resilience, health and well -being, food and water security, and improved socio -economic conditions of women and girls through gender mainstreaming and technical and 
financial assistance to gender -specific activities  
 
Outcome: Empowerment of women  and girls, through their participation, capacity building, institutional and regulatory systems and gender sensitive planning  and development for 
improved management of land and forest areas contributing to emission reduction for better adaptation to clim ate risks.  
 
Component 1:  Low carbon climate resilient Crop production enhanced and Ecosystem services restored in the Upper and Middle Ouéme  
OUTPUT  1.1:  Waterworks and tree 
plantations  to protect riverbanks and 
secure water access   
 1.1.2  Strengthen degraded river banks 
and restore land with tree (target of 5,000 
ha plus  4,000 ha with MAEP cofinancing)  
 
1.1.2.2  Set up 5 community tree nurseries 
and provide technical support to produce 
high-quality seedlings   
 
 
N° and % of women 
participating in the community 
tree nurseries : At least 70% of 
women in the community tree 
nurseries.   
 
Y1Q2 - Y6Q2    
OUTPUT 1.2:  25, 250  farmers 
capacitated to implement climate 
resilient agriculture , agro -forestry and 
sustainable land management over 
95,000 ha ) Under climate change conditions, agricultural productivity in the Ouémé Basin could decline by 25%. Under this Output, select ed facilitators 
and farmers will be trained on CRA and agroforestry, to restore soil fertility, retain moisture, provide shade; irrigated agr iculture and counter -
season horticulture will be implemented, supported by the schemes set up under output 1.1. Agrofor estry will not only stabilise soil, especially 
along the riverbanks, and improve water retention – thereby reducing risks of flood in the Middle and Lower Ouémé – but it will also support 
new income streams for the beneficiary communities. Indeed, high -value, climate resilient tree species – like shea and cashew trees – will 
be planted along the Ouémé River and on fields, as well as other indigenous species, to improve crop productivity and support  sustained 
income – to be valued under Component 2 of the pr oject.


---
*Page 187*
---

37 
 Result 1:  
Effective and increased adoption of 
climate resilient practices by women  
 1.2.1 Train  15 FFS Master Trainers, 
(women and men ) 
 
 
 
 
1.2.2.  Training of 250 Facilitators (at 
least 40% women)  
 
 
• Develop training curriculum and 
modules on gender -sensitive 
CRA; agro -forestry; sustainable 
land management and 
construction and maintenance of 
small water works with specific 
modules on gend er  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Build the capacity of all trainers, 
women and men  (MT and 
facilitators) , on gender -
responsive and participatory 
approaches to capacity 
development and community 
engagement including , the 
Dimitra Clubs’ approach  
 
 
 
1.2.3 . Implement CRA, including 
agroforestry, to enhance agricultural 
productivity under climate change. 
and reduce emissions  
 
 
Provide training to additional farmers  -No and % of women MT  
trained out of total  
Target:  At least 30% women 
Master Trainers trained  
 
-No and % of women MT  
trained out of the total  
Target:  At least 40% of  
trainers trained per 
municipality are women  
 
-No. of modules (out of total) 
that integrate gender 
considerations  
Target:  100% of the Train ing 
curriculum integrates women’s 
perspectives and gender 
considerations in all modules  
-No. of gender modules part of 
the training curriculum  
Target:  minimum o ne gender 
module produced on basic 
gender concepts  
 
-No. of trainers (by sex) 
trained on gend er-responsive 
and participatory approaches  
Target: 100% of trainers 
trained on gender -responsive 
and participatory approaches  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Q1 Y1 -Q2Y1 
 
 
 
 
Q3Y1- Q4Y2 
 
 
 
 
 
Q1Y1-Q2Y1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q2Y1-Q4Y2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q4Y1 – Q2Y6  
 
 
 Executing Agency  
FFS specialist 
and tra iners   
 
 
Gender specialist  
Dimitra  Clubs  
Specialist  
 
 
 
 
Gender specialist  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dimitra Clubs 
specialist  
 21,600  
 
 
 
 
150,400  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
225,600


---
*Page 188*
---

38 
 in Glazoué, Djougou, Zagnando and 
Zogbodomey (MAEP USD 
1,269,200)  
 
 
Set up 650 FFS and training 
beneficiaries in areas not covered by 
MEAP; or beyond the MAEP project 
period. Each FFS will include 20 
training sessions and involve 25 
farmers (at least 40% women)  
 
 
Dimitra Clubs in the three 
districts  Glazoué, Copargo and 
Djougou and Donga region 
including to work on the 
dissemination replication of FFS 
good practices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 No and % of women farmers 
(out of total number of farmers 
trained)  
Target: At least 50% of 16,250 
farmers (25 farmers per FFS) 
trained are women  
 
-No of women receiving 
starter kits, inputs and 
labour -saving tools  
Target:  At least 50% of 
16,250 farmers benefiting 
from inputs, starter kits and 
tools are women  
 
 
-No and % of women FFS out 
of total  
-No and % of women FBS out 
of total  
Target: At least  20 FFS and 6 
FBS per municipality 
dedicated to women  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-No of Dimitra Clubs per 
district established and 
functioning  
Target:  204 Dimitra Clubs (3 
per 68 villages) e stablished  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Y2Q2 -Y6Q2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q2 – Y5 Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q1 – Y6Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q3Y1 – Y2 Q4  Executing Agency  
 
Gender focal point 
MCVDD  
 
Ministry involved 
in land and water 
rights and 
property rights  
 
Land and water 
legal services  
(national , 
communal and 
regional levels  
 
Gender specialist  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dimitra Clubs 
specialist


---
*Page 189*
---

39 
  
Component 2:   Climate -resilient and gender -sensitive value chains, supporting farmers’ livelihoods in the Upper and Middle Ouémé  
Output 2.1:   Farmers and cooperatives’ 
income stream diversified, enhanced, 
and secured in the face of climate 
change   As productivity improves under Component 1, and new, high -value products become available for sale, farmers and small entrepreneurs 
(agribusinesses) will be capacitated to develop new income streams, and sell their processed, packaged products on the local  and regional 
market, at best possible price. An innovative App will also be used to ensure climate -resilient farm plans that are cost -effective, profitable, 
while responding to the impacts of climate change. As a result, private income will increase, enab ling re -investment in project activities.  
Result 2:  
Women and women -led agribusinesses 
and cooperatives have better access to 
markets and are economically 
empowered through climate -resilient 
livelihoods and income streams   
 
2.1.1   Increase income of 5,000 
farmers through training on business 
and marketing techniques and 
equipment using FOA  farm 
business schools methodology  
 
 
 
• Train 5,000  farmers organized 
into agribusinesses and 
cooperatives  
 
 
Provide at least 15 small processing/ 
packaging/ storing units to 
cooperatives   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.2 Improve access to micro -credit 
and investments for agriculture  
 
 
Organise  5 training sessions for 
each FBS and improve a ccess to 
financial services   
 
  
-No. of  farmers  (sex and age 
disaggregated) trained on 
business and marketing 
techniques  
Target:  At least 30% of trained 
farmers are women  
 
 
 
 
-No. and % of women -led 
cooperatives and 
agribusinesses (out of total) 
trained  
Target:  At least 33% of 
cooperatives and 
agribusinesses are women -led   
 
-No. and % of women -led 
cooperatives and 
agribusinesses (out of total) 
having access to processing, 
storage and labelling 
equipment  
Target : At least 33% out of 
100 cooperatives receiving 
processing, storage and 
labelling equipment are 
women -led 
   
Y2Q1 – Y5 Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q1 – Y5 Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q1 -Y5Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Executing Agency,  
Gender focal point 
MCVDD , 
National farmers 
organization,  
National extension 
service;  
District gender focal 
point , 
Agripro focuss, 
National research 
and UAC  
 
Gender specialist  
  
36,000


---
*Page 190*
---

40 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.3  Train facilitators  and 
national/local climate change 
experts on the use of  
assessment and/or monitoring 
Instruments for Resilience   
 
• Train 10 facilitators ( 2 persons 
selected  in each municipality ;  
 
 
 
-No. and % of women farmers 
(out of total) trained on 
financial management and 
business plan development  
Target:  At least 50% of 
farmers trained are women  
 
-No. of women (out of total 
trained) who have a business 
plan 
Target:  At least 70% of 
women trained have a 
business plan  
 
-No. of women trained having 
improved access to credit to 
invest in CRA  
Target:  At least 70% of 
women trained have improved 
access to credit and invest in 
CRA  
 
-No. of women members of 
cooperatives whose income 
has increased  
Target:  All women members 
of cooperatives have better 
incomes as a result of 
trainings, access to c redit and 
equipment  
 
- No. of women who perceive 
themselves as being 
empowered through 
participation in the project  
Target:  All women members 
of cooperatives feel  
 
 
 
Y2Q1 -Y5Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
86,400


---
*Page 191*
---

41 
 educated young) to use 
FarmTree App, and equip them 
with smartphone and App  
 
 
 
 empowered  (assessment 
through self evaluation of 
Dimitra clubs)  
 
- No. of facilitators equipp ed 
with the TreeFarm App  
 
 
 
-No. of facilitators (by sex and 
age) in each municipality that 
are trained and equipped with 
smartphone and App  
Target:  At least 45% of the 
facilitators are women and 
50% of the women are youth  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q3 
 
 
Output 2.2:    Private sector 
incentivized to invest in  low carbon  
climate resilient agriculture and 
resilient management techniques in 
Ouémé Basin  This Output aims to boost private and public sector investments in OCRI activity – to secure long -term funding for climate -resilient 
management in the Upper and Middle Ouémé, thereby reducing climate change vulnerability – by demo nstrating the significant 
environmental and economic impacts of CRA, creating an exchange platform for farmers and sellers to discuss market opportunit ies and 
demands, and setting up the basis for the first agri -PPP in the Ouémé Basin.  
Result 3:  
Women and women -led 
agribusinesses and cooperatives 
trade is boosted  2.2.2  Liaise with the GoB and 
municipal authorities to provide 
support to the forums and to facilitate 
trade agreements between farmers 
and buyers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Women and women -led 
cooperatives and 
agribusinesses are invited to 
showcase their practices and 
products at the biannual 
municipal fora  
 
 -No. of women and women -led 
cooperatives and 
agribusinesses (out of total) 
invited to participate in the 
municipal forum  
Target: At least 50% of 
participating individual farmers 
and 
cooperatives/agribusinesses 
are women or women -led  
 
-No. of women and women -led 
cooperatives and 
agribusinesses that have 
access to enhance business 
opportunity as a result of their 
participation to the fora  
Target:  At least 50% of Y1A4, 
Y4Q2&4, 
Y5Q2&4, 
Y6Q2  National farmers 
organization, 
national women 
farmers 
organization;  
Women council;  
Chamber of 
agriculture,  
District and 
municipal gender 
focal points ,  
Executing agency  
 
Gender specialist  
  
43,200


---
*Page 192*
---

42 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
; 
 
 participating women and 
women -led cooperatives and 
agribusiness have access  to 
business opportunities  
  
 
 
 
Component 3:  An enabling institutional and financial environment established to promote and upscale climate -resilient management in Benin’s Basins   
Output 3.1:  OCRI project 
institutionalised through a multi -
stakeholder platform, regulatory 
frameworks and capacity building  There is currently no coordination mechanism that allows concerted efforts to sustainably manage Benin’s basins, taking 
into account climate c hange -related risks. Moreover, there is no platform where producers and sellers, institutions from 
the public and private sectors interested in climate -resilient agriculture and agroforestry, can meet, exchange ideas, and 
promote innovations for climate -resilient agriculture and agroforestry. The OCRI multi -stakeholder platform will thus be 
established to connect all relevant stakeholders engaged, or willing to invest in CRA in the Ouémé Basin. The platform 
design will include a financial and communication strategy to ensure sustained activity, and the dissemination of 
knowledge products to support long -term ICRM in the Ouémé Basin, and beyond. The project’s M&E will also take place 
via the platform, and inform future investments in project’s interventions, as per Component 2.  
 
Result 4:  
The enabling institutional and financial 
environment established is gender -
responsive  3.1.1  Establish and activate  the OCRI 
platform ensuring adequate and 
meaningful participation of women 
and women’s organizations at local 
and national level  
 
• Raise awareness on the  
importance of a gender 
responsive institutional and 
financial environment  -No. of women and women’s 
organizations participants (out 
of total)  
Target:  50% of the 
participants are women   
 
-No. and type of awareness 
raising activities conducted  
Target: All participants are 
aware of the importance of 
gender equality and women’s 
roles in climate -resilient 
agriculture and agroforestry  
 
-Participation of gender focal 
point Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries,  
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q1 -Y6Q4  Ministry of 
Agriculture 
Gender focal 
point  
Oxfam -Quebec  
WILDAF Bénin  
 
Gender specialist


---
*Page 193*
---

43 
 Ministry of Environment ; and 
MASMF representative  in all 
project implementation aspects  
Target:  100% involvement  
 
 3.1.2 Implement regional and local 
climate -resilient development plans in 
the Oueme Basin to ensure long -term 
investment  
 
 
• Ensure that gender concerns 
are integrated in the review and  
implementation of the 
strengthened Ouémé Master 
Plan   
 
 
 
 
 
Target:  Gender is fully 
mainstreamed in the Master 
Plan 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Y2A3 – Y2Q4  District gend er 
focal point and 
Ministry of 
Agriculture 
gender focal 
point , 
Natio nal women 
farmers 
organisations 
district member s 180,000  
Output 3.2:  Strengthened FNEC’s 
capacity to ensure continuous support 
to climate -resilient farming in the 
Oueme Basin   
 
 3.2.2 Strengthen FNEC’s capacity to 
design, select, implement and 
monitor climate change -related 
projects ensuring financial access for 
both women and men  
 
 
 
• Training on gender -responsive 
budgeting will be provided to 
FNEC’s members to guarantee 
the use of funds will take into 
account women -specific needs 
and priorities.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-No. of FNECs members 
trained on gender responsive 
budgeting  
Target: At least 90% of the 
members of FNEC able to 
budget for women specific 
outcomes, outputs and actions    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2A1 -Y6Q4 4 days training 
with main trainer 
is the project 
gender expert + 
Ministry of 
Agriculture focal 
point (+ 1 day 
preparation and 
introduction 
participants to a 
gender analysis 
of climate change 
and resilience)  
 
Costs workshop 
(venue, meals, 
housing, travel) * 
35 participants  24,000


---
*Page 194*
---

44 
 Output 3. 3:  Awareness of ICRM in 
basins’ benefits raised among farmers 
and public and private institutions  There is limited knowledge in Benin of how to sustainably manage basin areas, while providing socio -economic benefits from upstream to 
downstream communities, and reducing climate ch ange vulnerability. A lack of understanding of the environmental and socio -economic 
benefits of ICRM – which mixes waterworks with CRA and resilient land management adapted to upstream and middle basin areas – impairs 
investments opportunities from farmers , public and private institutions, in project interventions. Under this Output, and based on the 
communication strategy of the OCRI platform, all training material, knowledge products and M&E data from project implementati on will be 
shared within and beyon d the 5 target municipalities. This will support the upscale of OCRI in new areas. Moreover, innovative adaptation 
practices will be encouraged to further enhance the climate -resilience of farmers, and attract private sector investments in climate -resilient 
agriculture.  
Result 5:  
Gender equality is recognized as key to 
ICRM of basin areas  3.3.1 Organize knowledge 
dissemination events and products 
on OCRI including gender 
mainstreaming  
 
• Ensure that gender is 
mainstreamed in knowledge 
dissemination events and that 
gender -focused products are 
produced  
 
 
 
• Ensure equal participation of 
women in farmer field visits  
 
 
 
• Train radio broadcasters to 
integrate gender in the 
dissemination of climate change 
related information and 
disseminate them via the 
Dimitra Clubs   
 
 
 
 
• Promote the production and 
dissemination of Dimitra Club 
produced good practices and 
experiences on gender -
responsive climate -related 
information   
 
 
 
 
-No. of dissemination events 
that have a session on gender  
Target:  All dissemination 
events have at least one 
session on gender  
 
-No. of farmers (by sex and 
age) who join farmer field visits  
Target:  At least 50% of 
farmers are women  
 
-No. of radio mes sages 
integrating gender 
disseminated  
Target:  All broadcasts include 
at least one message on 
gender -responsive climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation  
 
-No. of gender -responsive 
radio messages produced by 
the Dimitra Clubs disseminated 
via national and local radio  
Target:  All Dimitra Club radio 
messages that are gender - 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q3 – Y2Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
Y2Q4 - Y3Q4 
 
 
 
Y2A4,Y3Q4,Y4
Q4,Y5Q4, Y6Q4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y2A4,Y3Q4,Y4
Q4,Y5Q4, Y6Q4  
 
 
 
 
 Executing 
agency,  
gender focal 
points at all levels  
 
Gender specialist  
 
Communication 
specialist  
 
M&R specialist  121,600


---
*Page 195*
---

45 
  
 
 
 
• Develop and package 
knowledge products on the 
projects, according to the needs 
of each targeted group  
 
  responsive all broadcast on 
national and local radio  
 
-No. of knowledge products 
focusi ng on gender (out of 
total)  
Target:  At least 30% of 
knowledge product focus on 
gender  
 
-No of knowledge products 
(out of total) are responsive to 
women’s needs  
Target:  At least 50% of 
knowledge product are 
responsive to women’s needs  
  
 
 
Y2A4,Y3Q4,Y4
Q4,Y5Q4, Y6Q4  
 
 3.3.2 Organise  OCRI Annual 
Symposium  
• Promote equal participation and 
representation of women in  
OCRI Annual Symposium   
 
-No. of female agri - 
businesses, entrepreneur, and 
cooperatives (out of total) 
participating  
Target: At least 50% 
participants are women   
 
Y2A4,Y3Q4,Y4
Q4,Y5Q4, Y6Q4  
  7,200  
Project Management  Strengthen the technical and institutional capacities of the project team on the gender dimension  
Result 5:  
The technical and institutional capacities 
of the Project team on the gender 
dimension are increased  Recruit a n international  gender expert and a 
national gender specialist   
 
 
Gender analysis is carried out as part of the 
vulnerability assessments and the action 
plan revised  
 Target:  A gender specialist 
recruited as soon as possible, 
at project inception  
 
 
 
 
Target:  Gender analysis 
conducted and Action Plan 
revised (if needed)  
 
 Y1 
 
Y1 and Y2  
 
 
 
 
At project 
inception  
 
 
 
 International 
gender specialist 
+ National gender 
specialist  
 
 
 
 
Gender specialist  
 
 
 
 
 180,000


---
*Page 196*
---

46 
 Strengthen the capacities of the Project 
team and stak eholders (government 
authorities) on the gender concept and the 
gender dimension in development projects 
(including facilitation skills to engage 
women, youth, and elderly)  
 
Ensure a gender -responsive M&R system  
   
• Systematically collect, analyze and 
use SADD  
• Document lesson learned and good 
practices  
 
 
Develop gender -responsive annual 
workplans and budget  - Number of persons (by sex) 
trained on the gender -sensitive 
approaches and gender -
responsive ICRM  
Target:  All team members 
complete a gender training   
 
 
 
Target : Gender is fully 
integrated in the M&R system  
Target: Gender lessons are 
disseminated and used for 
continuous improvement  
 
 
 
Target: Gender activities and 
outputs are integrated in the 
annual workplans and budget 
is ensured for their 
implementation   Q2 - Year 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y1A1 – Y6Q4  Gender specialist 
and all team 
members  
 
    TOTAL                1,076,000


---
*Page 197*
---

References  
 
Aloïs, R.  2014 . Analyse du cycle hydrologique en climat soudanien au Bénin : Vers une 
modélisation couplée des processus latéraux et verticaux . Thèse de doctorat à l ’Université de 
Grenoble . 
Biao, E.I.  2017. Assessing the Impacts of Climate Change on River Discharge Dynamics in 
Ouémé  River Basin (Benin,  West Africa) . 
Ouémé DGEC . Première contribution déterminée au niveau national du Bénin au titre de 
l’Accord de Paris . 
Direction générale des forêts et des ressources naturelles . 2012 . Politique forestière au 
Bénin . 
DPFGTA . 2017. Projet d ’autonomisation économique des femmes et promotion du genre 
(PAEF -PG). Répertoires des groupements féminins opérationnels au Bénin . 
Essou, G. & Brissette, F.  2013 . Climate Change Impacts on the Ouémé River, Benin, West 
Africa . 
Etene,  G. 2015, Extrêmes hydro -pluviométriques et dégradation des terr es autour du fleuve 
l’Ouémé à Bonou au Bénin . 
FAO . 2013 . Gender and Climate Change Research in Agriculture and Food Security for Rural 
Development.  Training Manual.  
FAO.  2017. Évaluation de la situation du genre dans le secteur de l’agriculture, du 
développement rural et dans la mise en œuvre du PNIA au Bénin.  
FAO . 2018 . National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods. Country Gender 
Assessment Series . 
FAO , IFAD & World Bank . 2009 . Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook.  Washington , DC. 
Foundohoun , J. & Tchedji , O. 2016 . Rapport de l ’étude d ’intégration du genre dans le 
Programme LGCP Bénin . 
Houinsa , D. 2008 . Femmes du Bénin au cœur de la dynamique du changement social . 
INSAE . 2011 . Rapport de l ’Enquête modulaire intégrée sur les conditions de vie des ménages . 
INSAE . 2013 . Recensement général de la population et de l ’habitat . 
IPCC.  2014 . Livelihoods and poverty. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and 
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . 
Iwikotan,  A., Mama V. J., Biaou C. F., Chabi A., Oloukoi J. & Taiwo N.  2013 . Impact de 
l’exploitation des bas -fonds dans l ’amélioration des conditions de vie des femmes du centre 
du Bénin . In: Bulletin de la recherche agronomique du Bénin – Numéro special  1: Exploitation 
et aménagement des bas -fonds du centre du Bénin . 
MDAEP.  2014 . Modélisation des impacts économiques des changements climatiques par 
secteur de développement  : Intégration du genre dans la modélisation de l ’évaluation des 
impacts du climat par secteur de développement . 
MEPN.  2008. Convention Cadre des Nations Unies sur les changements climatiq ues: 
Programme d’action national d’adaptation aux changements climatiques du Bénin.


---
*Page 198*
---

48 
 Ogounwale , E. 2006 . Changement climatique dans le Bénin méridionale et central: 
Indicateurs, scenarios et perspectives de la sécurité alimentaire.  Thèse de doctorat unique de 
l’Université d ’Abomey -Calavi . 
Sabaï,  K. et al.  2014, Perceptions locales de la manifestation des changements climatiques 
et mesures d ’adaptation dans la gestion de la fertilité des sols dans la Commune de Banikoara 
au Nord -Bénin . 
Vissoh, P.,  Tossou, R.,  Dedehouanou, H.,  Guibert, H.,  Codjia, O.,  Vodouhe, S. 
& Agbossou, E.  2012 . Perceptions et stratégies d ’adaptation aux changements climatiques: 
le cas des communes d ’Adjohoun et de Dangbo au Sud -Est Bénin . 
WFP.  2014. Rapport de l’Analyse globale de vulnérabilité de la sécurité alimentaire au Bénin.  
World Bank,  United Nations  & The Republic of Benin.  2011. Inondations au Bénin: Rapport 
d’évaluation  des besoins post -catastrophes.


---
*Page 199*
---

49 
 ANNEXES  
 
Annex 1:  Analyse SWOT liée au secteur d ’activité s des femmes dans la zone d ’intervention 
du projet  
 
Forces  Faiblesses  Opportunités  Menaces  
Existence 
d’associations 
dynamiques des 
femmes dans 
quelques localités 
de la zone du 
projet  
 
 
Forte implication 
des femmes dans 
les activités de 
gestion de l ’eau et 
du sol  
 
Forte implication 
des femmes dans 
l’économie 
alimentaire de la 
zone 
d’intervention du 
projet  
 
 
 
 
Forte capacité de 
mobilisation et 
d’animation 
communautaire 
des organisations 
de femmes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Érosion et perte de la 
fertilité des sols, faible 
productivité des systèmes 
de production agricole  
Faible accès à la terre 
fertile  
 
Accroissement de la 
pénibilité pour les 
femmes du fait de la non 
disponibilité de l ’eau en 
période de sécheresse  
 
Absence d ’organisations 
de femmes structurées et 
dynamiques dans 
certaines localités de la 
zone du projet  
 
Faible représentativité 
des femmes dans les 
instances de prise de 
décision  
 
 
L’économie de la zone du 
projet fortement basée 
sur une agriculture de 
subsistance qui réduit la 
productivité du travail des 
femmes en période de 
sécheresse  
 
Accès limité des femmes 
aux technologies 
d’informations , ce qui 
limite leur accès aux 
informations d ’alerte 
précoce . 
 
Manque de moyens 
financier des femmes 
pour se procu rer les 
foyers améliorés pour 
une faible émission de 
GES ainsi que les intrants 
pour améliorer la 
production agricole  Intégration au niveau 
national du  genre 
dans les politiques 
en matière de 
changement 
climatique , 
notamment 
l’environnement, 
l’eau, agriculture  
 
Forte implication de 
la femme dans 
l’approche GIRE  
 
Existence du plan 
d’action genre au 
niveau du Ministère 
du cadre de vie 
(environnement et 
développement 
durable)  
 
Existence de 
programmes de 
développement dans 
la zone du projet 
ciblant les femmes et 
les jeunes  
 
Existence des PDC 
prenant en compte la 
dimension genre  
 
Dimension de genre 
incluse dans le CDN 
et PANA  
 
Meilleure capacité 
d’entrepren ariat et 
de promotion des 
filières durables  Environnement 
social ; poids de la 
tradition, de la 
culture et des 
coutumes  
 
Manque de 
moyens pour la 
mise en œuvre 
des politiques 
nationales 
élaborées sur le 
genre  
 
Variabilité et 
changement 
climatique 
(pluviométrie 
perturbée, 
inondations, etc.)


---
*Page 200*
---

50 
 Forces  Faiblesses  Opportunités  Menaces  
 
Faible équipement des 
associations de femmes 
pour une transformation 
en quantité des produits 
agricoles  
 
Manque d ’opportunités 
des femmes  pour 
renforcer leurs 
connaissances 
techniques dans les 
stratégies d ’adaptation au 
changement climatique  
 
Faible capacité de 
maîtrise de l ’eau par les 
femmes pendant la 
saison pluvieuse  
 
Difficulté d ’accès des 
femmes et des jeunes 
aux ressources financiers  
pour l ’approvisionnement 
des intrants agricoles  
 
Faible productivité des 
femmes (mara îchages , 
riz) en période de 
sécheresse , ce qui 
engendre le manque de 
moyen financier pour 
garantir une sécurité 
alimentaire des ménages  
 
 
 
Annex 2 : 
Table 1 Economic feasibility study : Gross margin for all crops  
Crops  Result without 
project 
(XOF/ha)  Result with 
project 
(XOF/ha)  Increase in 
Result ( XOF/ha)  Percentage  
Cassava  73 000 183 000 110 000 250%  
Yam 173 000 363 000 190 000 209%  
Okra  51 650 141 150 89 500 273%  
Rice 50 075 98 183 48 108 196%  
Chili pepper  25 750 153 075 127 325 594%  
Maize  145 500 239 250 93 750 164%


---
*Page 201*
---

51 
 In conclusion, the project can change chil i pepper into a highly profitable product. The expected 
financial return of the project is high, with the same labo ur force. Income will be, for cassava, 
yam and maize, for 185  working days at XOF 2 773/day. For okra and chil i pepper , for 
282 working days, it is estimated at XOF 2 654/day.


---
*Page 202*
---

Annex 3 : Details of consultation missions and meetings  
 
 
Date  Region/district  Institution  People consult ed 
  Nom  Description   
23/11 -
26/11/2017  Cotonou  ONG Benin Environment and 
Education Society (BEES)  - Œuvre pour l ’implication des groupes 
vulnérables (jeunes, femmes) à la 
réalisation du PDC  
- Les associations des femmes pour faciliter 
leur intégration dans les activités de la 
mairie  
- Inclusion du genre dans les politiques 
nationales et locales dans la vallée de 
l’Ouémé  
- Création d ’une plateforme multi -acteurs en 
cours au niveau de la zone deltaïque  DJONDA Maximien  
Institut National de la Promotion de la 
Femme  
 - Orientations vers les points focaux genre 
du Ministère de l ’agriculture,  du Ministère 
du cadre de vie, du FNEC  
- Les rapports d ’études menées par L ’INPF 
sur le genre en lien avec la gestion de 
l’environnement, la gestion de l ’eau, la 
gestion du climat  TOSSOU Didas 
(INPF)  
Agence Nationale de la Protection 
Civile (ANPC)  - Existence d ’une plateforme de réduction 
des risques liés aux CC  
- Opportunité du projet pour faire fonctionner 
cette plateforme qui prend en compte tous 
les ministères  
- Inexistence d ’une approche genre dans la 
gestion des catastrophes  
- Protection civile beaucoup plus large que 
la protection sociale  DAGOU Aristide  
MAEP/PAPVIRE -ABC: Projet d ’appui 
à la production vivrière  et de 
renforcement de la résilience dans 
l’Alibori, le Borgou et les Collines 
(PAPVIRE -ABC)  - Le projet œuvre pour la mise à disposition 
des femmes des terres aménagées, offre 
une formation sur les itinéraires 
climatiques pour une meilleure production 
durable, appuie les coopératives féminines  DIMOND Elie  
Direction Générale de l ’Eau Information sur les infrastructures  : ELEGBEDE Bernard


---
*Page 203*
---

53 
 - barrage de Vossa (Ouèssè) pour régler le 
problème d ’inondation  
- barrage de Bétérou dans le bassin supérieur 
pour le st ockage d ’eau potable  
- barrage de Togo -bis (Kétou)  
- Deux petites PMH dans le nord pour éviter 
les problèmes d ’inondation  
- Retenir que la basse et la moyenne vallée 
ont une limite hydrologique  
Porto Novo  Directeur de la Planification et de la 
Gestion de l ’Eau, et Enseignant à 
l’Institut National d l ’Eau (INE)  - Processus d ’élaboration du Schéma 
Directeur  d’Aménagement et de Gestion 
des Eaux de l ’Ouémé (SDAGE -Ouémé)  
- Préoccupations liées aux SDAGES et à 
l’investissement agro écosystémique pour 
renforcer la résilience des populations et 
des agroécosystèmes face au changement 
climatique  Dr. 
ELEGBEDE MANOU 
Bernadin  
Akpo Missété  Cercle International pour la Promotion 
de la Création (CIPCRE -Bénin)  - Les aspects genres et protection sociale:  
l’ONG mène plusieurs activités liées au 
genre, à la protection et à la gouvernance 
environnementale dans les communes de 
Bonou, Adjohoun et Dang bo dans basse 
vallée de l ’Ouémé  
- Bonnes pratiques: la création  des 
Association de Promotion du Genre au 
niveau communal  M. ASSOGBA Thierry  
Zagnanado  Mairie de Zagnando  - Position géographique (située entre les 
bras du fleuve Zou et l ’Ouémé) de la 
commune est menacée par les extrêmes 
hydrohydrologiques, la déforestation et 
une dégradation avancée des terres  
- Plan de Développement Communal et les 
rapports sur les études de faisabilités 
existantes en lien avec le projet  Mr. MISSEGBETCHE 
Symphorien  
Zogbodomé  Mairie, Centre de 
Professionnalisation Agricole (GIZ et 
Africa Rice)  - Actions liées au genre en rapport avec les 
changements climatiques, l ’existence des 
femmes pépiniéristes de palmiers et de 
Tecks dans la commune. Elles sont 
également dans des g roupements de Maire M. TOWEDJE 
Z. David ; secrétaire 
générale Mme 
ADJASSOHO M. 
Rosalie, et M. SAHO


---
*Page 204*
---

54 
 transformation du soja et du manioc et 
Plan de Développement Communal (PDC) 
de Zogbodomey  Bienvenu ; et le 
charge de  
planification M. 
TOWEDJE  
Dassa Zoumé  Arrondissement Loulé, bas -fonds 
aménagés  - bas-fonds aménagés pour la riziculture: 
échangé avec les producteurs d ’une 
famille (7 personnes)   
Djougou  Mairie  Répercussions des changements climatiques 
sur les  populations et la grande vulnérabilité de 
sa commune ; taux de couverture en eau 
également très faible et décourageant le 
maraîchage qui est l ’activité principale des 
femmes du milieu  M. OUOROU Z. 
Housséni et le 
Directeur du 
Personnel M. 
SANKAMO 
Assamanou  
Copargo  Mairie, bas -fonds aménagés à 
Katabem  paysage de la source de 
Ouémé  Priorités du PDC et existence d ’une 
association des femmes cadres de la 
commune qui vise le renforcement du rôle des 
femmes  Mme YERIMA 
Rabiatou,  le chef 
service technique 
(CST) M. ASSAN 
Moudachirou , et le 
chef 
d’arrondissemen t 
(CA) M.  WALI Imorou  
27-30/12/2017  Zagnanado  Village Bamé  
Membres de l ’équipe de la mairie  - Il ressort de cet entretien que les 
agriculteurs sont confrontés à des 
problèmes de sécheresse, retard des 
pluies, manque de retenue d ’eau, non 
maîtrise de l ’eau, manque d ’équipements 
agricoles comme les tracteurs, les 
motopompes, les motoculteurs ; faible 
productivité des sols et les conséquences 
sont la perte de récolte et le faible 
rendement de la productivité ; groupements 
de femmes également recensés  
- Femmes parcourent longues distances 
pour se procurer des tubercules de manioc 
à transformer  M. HOUNSOU Alain, 
le SG et  
douze (12) personnes 
au total dans le 
village de Bamè  
 Zogbodomey   - Existence des pairs éducat eurs et 
secouristes formés par le Projet d ’Urgence 
de Gestion Environnemental en Milieu 
Urbain (PUGEMU) qui veille à la Secrétaire Générale 
(SG),  Madame 
ADJASSOHO M. 
Rosalie, le Point


---
*Page 205*
---

55 
 sensibilisation des communautés sur les 
comportements à avoir afin d ’éviter les 
maladies hydriques en période 
d’inondation plateforme co mmunale 
chargée de la réduction du risque des 
catastrophes  
- Les groupements de femmes en général 
regroupent 10 à 25 femmes et s ’adonnent 
à la transformation de manioc, de l ’huile de 
palme, de soja, du riz, au maraichage, et à 
la mais femmes ont souligné qu ’elles 
jouent d ’abord le rôle d ’ouvrières pour 
leurs maris avant de s ’occuper de leurs 
propres productions  
- Face aux CC les producteurs font la 
culture des variétés à cycle court (2  mois) 
pour subvenir aux besoins de leurs 
familles  Focal de réduction 
des risques de 
catastrophes et  
d’adaptation aux 
changements 
climatiques, M. Kouin 
Emmanuel ; le chargé 
des services  
domaniales et 
environnementales, 
M. YEHO Constantin  
15-17/07/2020  DDAEP 
Collines 
Glazoué   -   
   -   
   -   
 Dassa Zoumé  Le projet d ’appui à la gestion durable 
des terres  
PANA -Energie  
PANA -Biomasse  
Projet d ’appui au développement 
agricole des Collines (PADAC)  
COFORMO  
PAGEFCOM  
Groupements de femmes, jeunes, 
producteurs et élus locaux de 
l’arrondissement de Loulè  - Les autorités ont mis en place un comité 
genre pour veiller au suivi des activités 
liées au genre prévues dans le PDC  
- La CA de Pahouignan a fait savoir que les 
femmes sont plus impliquées dans la 
production d e riz et le maraichage, et elles 
se mettent en association avec les 
hommes pour la riziculture.  
- Les difficultés que rencontrent les 
populations en lien avec les CC sont 
l’impraticabilité des voies en période 
d’inondation, la non maîtrise de l ’eau et la 
non disponibilité des tubercules de manioc. 
Face à la non disponibilité du manioc, les 
femmes s ’approvisionnent en gari dans les M. FAGNON Nicaise 
et ses  collaborateurs 
tels que le SG M. 
GBADI André, le 
chargé de 
planification et du 
genre, M.  OGOUDJE 
Honoré et ses 
collaborateurs 
AZANLI Noélie et 
AHOKPOSSI Oscar, 
le chargé  de 
l’environnement M. 
AGBANI Sylvain, le 
Chef 
d’Arrondissement


---
*Page 206*
---

56 
 communes environnantes pour le 
commerce et elles n ’en transforment plus  
- Les femmes suggèrent en plus des 
réalisations de retenues d ’eau prévues par 
le projet, la construction de forage pour la 
transformation du riz  
- Les femmes sont disposées à faire des 
pépinières s ’il y a disponibilité d ’eau. Elles 
sollicitent les équipements de 
transformation du riz tel que les étuveuses , 
les airs de séchage et les foyers améliorés  (CA) de Pahouignan  
Madame 
KOUKPONOU 
Justine  
Atelier de 
concertation  : 
mars 2018   Les parties prenantes du projet  - Le mécanisme de diffusion des 
informations qui doit tenir compte du genre 
et du fait  qu’il y a des femmes 
analphabètes  
- Des informations ciblées en fonction du 
genre (à l ’endroit des femmes , par 
exemple ayant un rôle spécifique dans les 
chaînes de valeurs)  30 participants 
provenant des 
structures parties 
prenantes  
Atelier de 
concertation : 
juin 2018   Les parties prenantes du projet  Présentation des études techniques, faisabilité, 
analyse genre, analyse socio -économique, 
analyses techniques agriculture, hydrologie, 
foresterie, etc. 42 participants  
28-30/09/2018   Mairie de Zogbo domey  
Mairie de Copargo  
Comité des peuhls et éleveurs  
Périmètre irrigué pour le mara îchage  Peuples autochtones et problématiques des 
jeunes et du genre  Adjassato Rosalie  
Bio Yérima (peuhl)  
Abdoulaiye Seïbou 
(peuhl)  
Assan Mamamou 
(peuhl)  
Assan Moutamala 
(peuhl)  
Adjasotto Rosalie 
(SG mairie de 
Zogbodomey  
15/07/20 20 Dassa -
Zoumey  Direction départementale de 
l’agriculture, de l ’élevage et la pêche  • Les aléas climatiques dans la 
commune (comment ils se manifestent 
et leur degré de sévérité sur les 
couches vulnérables)  BONI Paul , Directeur 
et ses collaborateurs:  
VIDJOGNI COSSI  
ALLOGNI 
STEPHANE


---
*Page 207*
---

57 
 • Inventaire des ressources productives 
(leur état actuel , difficultés pour les 
couches vulnérables, etc.)  
• Effets des aléas sur les ressources  
• Perceptions des femmes sur les 
manifestations du changement 
climatique et les impacts sur les 
ressources  
• Perception des différents femmes et 
jeunes sur les effets du CC  
• Rôles de la femme dans l ’agriculture et 
les difficultés rencontrées ou inégalité 
de genre  
• Accessibilité aux ressources (sol; eau; 
intrants; main d ’œuvre; accès au 
financement; etc.) par les différents 
groupes socio -culturels  
• Comment les femmes et les couches 
vulnérables vivent les réalités du CC en 
lien avec leurs rôles dans l ’agriculture?  
• CVA: quels sont les cultures les plus 
importantes au niveau du ménage et 
quelles sont les chaînes de valeurs 
dans lesquelles les femmes ont un 
avantage (prennent assez de valeur 
ajoutée)? Analyse SWOT liée au 
secteur d ’activité des femmes dans la 
zone d ’intervention du projet  
• Y a-t-il des projets en cours des 
initiatives qui ont des activités envers 
les femmes: si oui , pourriez -vous nous 
fournir la liste et l ’objectif du projet ainsi 
que la durée du projet et l ’agence 
d’exécution  BODJRENOU 
SYLVIE


---
*Page 208*
---

58 
 • Les structures d ’appuis intervenant 
dans la commune (étatique et société 
civile)  
• Les organisations de  producteurs et 
leurs faitières (UNIRIZ; groupement de 
femmes sur le maraichage , maïs; 
manioc , les femmes pépiniéristes , 
autres à identifier sur le terrain)  
 
16/07/2020 GLAZOUE  PAEFFR  : Projet d ’appui à 
l’entreprenariat féminin au sein de la 
filière riz. Le projet appuie les femmes 
pour le leadership féminin et 
l’autonomisation économique des 
femmes  • Les aléas climatiques dans la 
commune (comment ils se manifestent 
et leur degré de sévérité sur les 
couches vulnérables)  
• Au niveau de Glazoué , est-il possible 
d’avoir d ’informations sur les groupes 
d’intérêt économique, associations et 
coopératives des femmes avec les 
principales activités qui sont 
fonctionne lles? 
• En terme de changement climatique , y 
a-t-il à votre niveau une analyse 
différencié hommes/femmes et autres 
groupes vulnérables des impacts et 
effets du changement climatiques ? 
• Quels sont les domaines , selon vous , 
dans lesquelles la participation des 
femmes est encore trop bas?  
• Action du projet en faveur des femmes  
• Changement obtenu suite aux apports 
du projet  
• Les organisations de producteurs et 
leurs faitières (UNIRIZ; groupement de 
femmes sur le maraichage , maïs , 
manioc , les femmes pépiniéristes , 
autres à identifier sur le terrain)  AZAGNANDJI 
ESTHER  experte 
genre  ; d’OLIVEIRA 
LIONEL , 
coordonnateur du 
projet et  ZOLIKPO 
SYLVANUS , expert 
en organisation et 
entreprenariat


---
*Page 209*
---

59 
 • Perceptions des femmes sur les 
manifestations du changement 
climatique et les impacts sur les 
ressources  
• Perception des différents femmes et 
jeunes sur les effets du CC  
• Rôles de la femme dans l ’agriculture et 
les difficulté s rencontrées ou inégalité 
de genre  
• Accessibilité aux ressources (sol , eau, 
intrants , main d ’œuvre , accès au 
financement; etc.) par les différents 
groupes socio -culturels  
• Comment les femmes et les couches 
vulnérables vivent les réalités du CC en 
lien avec leurs rôles dans l ’agriculture?  
• CVA: quels sont les cultures les plus 
importantes au niveau du ménage et 
quelles sont les chaînes de valeurs 
dans lesquelles les femmes ont  un 
avantage (prennent assez de valeur 
ajoutée)?  
 
16/07/20 20 GLAZOUE  Mairie • Quels sont , dans le plan de 
développement de la commune et la 
zone de Glazoué , les actions 
spécifiques envers les femmes et les 
plus vulnérables?  
• Quels sont les domaines selon vous 
dans lesquelles la participation des 
femmes est encore trop bas?  
• Quel mécanisme est en place pour la 
promotion des couches vulnérables?  
• Quelle est la représentativité des 
femmes au sein du conseil communal?  ALLOUKOUTOU 
OLIVIER, Secrétaire 
général et ses chefs 
services:  
BLALOGOE YACINE  
HOUEHOU MARTIN  
AYITCHEDEHOU 
JEAN  
BADOU ERIC  
OLABODE JOHN


---
*Page 210*
---

60 
 • En terme de changement climatique , y 
a-t-il à votre niveau une analyse 
différencié hommes/femmes et autres 
groupes vulnérables des impa cts et 
effets du changement climatiques ? 
• Les aléas climatiques dans la 
commune (comment ils se manifestent 
et leur degré de sévérité sur les 
couches vulnérables)  
• Au niveau de Glazoué , est-il possible 
d’avoir d ’informations sur les groupes 
d’intérêt économi que, associations et 
coopératives des femmes avec les 
principales activités qui sont 
fonctionnelles ? 
• Y a-t-il des projets en cours , des 
initiatives qui ont des activités envers 
les femmes: si oui pourriez -vous nous 
fournir la liste et l ’objectif du projet ainsi 
que la durée du projet et l ’agence 
d’exécution  
• Les structures d ’appuis intervenant 
dans la commune (étatique et société 
civile)  
• Les organisations de producteurs et 
leurs faitières (UNIRIZ; groupement de 
femmes sur le maraichage , maïs , 
manioc , les femmes pépiniéristes , 
autres à identifier sur le terrain)  
17/07/ 2020 GLAZOUE 
(HOUALA)  Groupement LIWADJOU  • Fonctionnement du groupement  
• Difficultés  
• Besoins  
• Les aléas climatiques dans la 
commune (comment ils se manifestent Président: TCHOBO 
LAZARE  
+8 membres du 
groupement présents 
( liste de présence)


---
*Page 211*
---

61 
 et leur degré de sévérité sur les 
couches vulnérables)  
• Partenaires d ’appuis  
• Les aléas climatiques dans la 
commune (comment ils se manifestent 
et leur degré de sévérité sur les 
couches vulnérables)  
• Inventaire des ressources productives 
(leur état actuel; difficultés pour les 
couches vulnérables, etc.)  
• Effets des aléas sur les ressources  
• Perceptions des femmes sur les 
manifestations du  changement 
climatique et les impacts sur les 
ressources  
• Perception des différents femmes et 
jeunes sur les effets du CC  
• Rôles de la femme dans l ’agriculture et 
les difficultés rencontrées ou inégalité 
de genre  
• Accessibilité aux ressources (sol , eau, 
intrants, main d ’œuvre , accès au 
financement; etc.) par les différents 
groupes socio -culturels  
• Comment les femmes et les couches 
vulnérables vivent les réalités du cc en 
lien avec leurs rôles dans l ’agriculture?  
• CVA: quels sont les cultures les plus 
importantes  au niveau du ménage et 
quelles sont les chaînes de valeurs 
dans lesquelles les femmes ont un 
avantage (prennent assez de valeur 
ajoutée)  ? 
• Qui décide de quoi dans le ménage?


---
*Page 212*
---

62 •Comment ces CVA des femmes sont
affectées par le changement
climatique?
•Que faire pour réduire les chocs et
comment augmenter la capacité des
femmes à y faire face?
•Stratégie locales d ’adaptation au CC
par les femmes
17/07/20 20 GLAZOUE 
(MAGOUMI)  Groupement  ISHELERE  •Idem Présidente OGA 
PIERRETTE  + 10 
membres du 
groupement présents  
17/07/ 2020 GLAZOUE 
(MAGOUMI)  Groupement  KAKPRETCHE  •Idem Président AKORIDJI 
FLORENT  + 6 
membres du 
groupement présents  
__________